                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GUARANTEED INCOME: SSI AND TIlE WELL-BEING
                             OF TIlE ELDERLY POOR


                                          Kathleen McGarry


                                         Working Paper 7574
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7574

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2000




I am grateful to Martin Feldstein, Wei-Yin Hu, Jeffrey Liebman, Bruce Meyer, and Robert Schoeni for
helpful coniments and to the National Bureau of Economic Research for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

  2000 by Kathleen McGarry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
Guaranteed Income: SSI and the Well-Being of the Elderly Poor
Kathleen McGarry
NBER Working Paper No. 7574
March 2000
JELNo. 13

                                                 ABSTRACT

        Discussions of changes in the Social Security program must necessarily consider the impact
of such changes on the well-being of the poor elderly. Under the current system, the financial needs
of this population are met by the Supplement Security Income program (SSI). SSI has done much
to improve situation of the poorest elderly but has the potential to do more. This paper examines that
potential. One of the most surprising aspect of the program is that many of those eligible for benefits are not
enrolled. Here I examine the correlates of participation for a sample of eligible individuals and use the
results to simulate the effect of changes in eligibility criteria on participation and on costs. The largest
expansion considered in the paper, providing an income guarantee for all elderly individuals that is equal to
the poverty line, increases payments directed towards the elderly by 90 percent, to just over 8 billion in 1993
dollars. Although large, this $8 billion is less than half of the expenditures for the SSI disabled population
in that year. Modifications to SSI that increase income disregards, eliminate the asset test, or base income
eligibility solely on Social Security income, would be less costly, but would also provide less relief to the
poor. Importantly, all programs, including the current system, could have substantially greater effects on
poverty if participation rates were increased.



Kathleen McGany
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
mcgarry@ucla.edu
     Social Security has done much to improve the well-being of the elderly and in particular, the
 well-being of the poorest among the old. In 1960 approximately 35 percent of those age 65 and over
 lived in poverty; today that figure is below 11 percent. Much of this decline has been attributed
 to increases in Social Security. Social Security has also improved the lives of our elderly citizens
 by other measures. In 1960, 40 percent of elderly widows lived with their children, but by 1990
 less than 20 percent did so. This shift towards independent living has been viewed as a positive
 outcome of the increased income of the elderly. Labor force participation among older male workers
 has also fallen to roughly in half of its 1960 rate, a phenomenon that has again been attributed, by
 many researchers, to the growth in Social Security.
    Despite these gains, there remains a sizable fraction of the population for whom Social Security
 and other retirement resources do not provide an adequate standard of living. For these individuals
 benefits are available from the Supplemental Security Income
                                                                Program (551). SSI provides a guar-
 anteed income for all those age 65 and over, as well as the blind and the disabled. Conditional on
 sufficiently low assets, there should be no elderly individual with monthly income below $484 (in
 1997 dollars) or married couple with income below $726. In reality, however, many of the poor are
not enrolled in SSI and subsist on incomes below these levels. In order to improve the well-being of
the elderly it is therefore imperative that we first understand how SSI functions and what changes
might be made to improve the financial situation of the eligible population. As the nation considers
changes in Social Security, concurrent changes in SSI might be well-advised. Successful linkage of
the two programs and implementation of any changes requires a clear understanding of the current
system and an investigation of the costs and consequences of such
                                                                    changes. Furthermore, analyses
of the impact of Social Security reforms on the well-being of the poorest among the elderly strongly
depend on the interaction of the two programs.
    In this paper I first describe the SSI program in its current form, focusing exclusively on the
benefits and regulations applicable to the elderly. I use data from the Asset and Health Dynamics
Study to examine the behavior of a population of elderly individuals with respect to the program
guidelines and then hypothesize what modifications to the SSI program might be introduced and
how these changes would alter poverty rates and program costs. I then discuss the relationship
between Social Security and SSI and how the characteristics of the SSI program would alter the
distributional impact of various Social Security reforms.

                                                 1
 1 Description of the SSI program
1.1 Program Overview'
The Social Security Act of 1935 established a mechanism whereby the federal government would
assist states in providing cash assistance to the poor; for the poor elderly this assistance came
from state-run Old Age Assistance (OAA) programs. In 1972 legislation was passed that replaced
these state-run plans with the federal Supplemental Security Income Program, administered by the
Social Security Administration (SSA) •2 In contrast to the state programs which typically assessed
individual need on a case by case basis, the federal SSI program provides a guaranteed income to
all eligible individuals. In 1997 the income guarantees were $484 per month for a single individual
living in his own home, and $726 for a couple. These amounts are reduced by one-third if the
recipient(s) lives in someone else's home, and are adjusted yearly for inflation. For individuals
with no other income the income guarantee is the actual benefit they receive from SSI. For those
with other sources of income, the SSI benefit is the difference between the income guarantee and
their countable income. Countable income is distinct from current income in that the SSI program
disregards some portion of a potential recipient's income. The disregards vary by income source.
The most important of these, as measured on a monthly basis, are the first $20 of unearned income
(most likely Social Security benefits), the first $65 of earned income, and one-halfof other earned
income.3 Because of the disregards, those eligible for SSI can have income somewhat above the
guarantee, but no participant should have income below this legislated amount.
    There is also an asset test required for participation in SSI. To be eligible for benefits individuals
must have collntable assets of less than $2000 and couples must have less than $3000. With respect
to the determination of countable assets, the disregards are substantial. Most importantly, an
owner occupied home regardless of value and a car worth less than $4500 are excluded.4
    In addition to the federal program, states have the option of offering supplemental benefits.
In 1997, 26 states offered supplements to elderly individuals (or couples) living independently
    'The information in this section is drawn primarily from the Social
                                                                         Security Administration (1997, 1999).
    2The 551 program also took the place of the state run assistance programs of Aid to the Blind, and Aid to the
Permanently and Totally Disabled.
    31f there is less than $20 unearned income, additional earned income can be disregarded. Other disregards are
irregularly or infrequently received income of less than $20 per month, home energy assistance payments, the value
of food stamps, tuition benefits, and disaster relief.
    4Other exclusions are life insurance with a face value of less than $1500, burial plots, and household furnishings
of less than $2000.


                                                         2
and a total of 44 states offered at least some form of supplemental benefits, including payments
aimed specifically at the blind or disabled, or at those. with particular medical needs. With these
supplements, the benefits available to individuals can vary substantially across states. For example,
the income guarantee for a couple living in California in 1997 was $1,122.20 ($396.20 above the
federal level), while in New York the income guarantee for a couple was $828.50. If states choose
to follow the same eligibility guidelines as the federal program with respect to such issues as the
determination of countable income and assets, the Social Security Administration will administer
the supplemental program on behalf of the state. If a state is willing to administer its own program it
is free to alter the eligibility requirements as it wishes, including imposing more (or less) stringent
income and asset tests and providing supplemental benefits to only a subset of the population
eligible for SSI (e.g. those with specific medical needs).5
    Those eligible for 551 are also likely to be entitled to benefits from other programs. SSI recipients
are eligible for food stamps in all states except California.6 Also, SSI recipients in most statesare
categorically eligible for Medicaid and need file no other application to receive these benefits.7
Medicaid itself represents a substantial financial transfer and therefore makes participation in the
551 program much more valuable.

    Despite these potential benefits, the majority of SSI recipients remain poor. In 1997 the poverty
lines for elderly singles and couples were $641.5 and $809.33 per month, somewhat above the federal
551 guarantees. Because of the existence of income disregards, particularly the larger disregard for
earned income, some of those receiving SSI will have their incomes increased abovethe poverty line
by the federal benefit. However, for the most part, the federal SSI program will have little effect on
poverty rates. In contrast, the supplemental programs in some states are sufficiently generous that
they do guarantee income above the poverty line. Income guarantees in 1997 were above the poverty
level for singles in 3 states, and for couples in 12 states. In addition, when the income disregards
are taken into account, individuals in many other states may also have their total incomes raised
beyond the poverty line. I examine this issue further in section 2.4.
   51n 1997, 27 state administered their own supplemental programs, 11 states had programs that were administered
by the Social Security Administration, 5 reported both levels of administration and one supplemental program was
administered at the county level (7 states had no optional supplemental program).
    6Califonua incorporates the value of food stamps into itsmonthly benefit.
    TForty states used 551 program guidelines to determine Medicaid eligibility. The remaining states used different
criteria.



                                                        3
1.2 Participation in SSI
One of the more surprising aspects of 551 is that many of those who are entitled to benefits are
not enrolled in the program. Several earlier studies have demonstrated that only slightly more
than one-half of those who appear to be eligible for SSI are actually receiving benefits (Menefee
et al. 1981, McGarry 1996). These participation rates are lower than those found for the former
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program (Fraker and Moffitt, 1988) and roughly
comparable with more recent evidence on participation in the food stamp program (Blank and
Ruggles, 1996).
    Several hypotheses to explain this non-participation have been offered in the literature. (See
Warlick 1979 for a detailed discussion of the various arguments.) It has been proposed that those
who do not participate are not aware of the program or that the process of applying for benefits
is too challenging either physically or intellectually. Alternatively, it has been suggested that the
stigma attached to the receipt of welfare outweighs the value of the benefits (Moffitt, 1983). Below I
briefly investigate the correlates of non-participation for a sample of SSI-eligible individuals.9 When
considering the effectiveness of the SSI program in achieving its goal of a guaranteed minimum
income, one must keep in mind these low participation rates. Similarly, analyses of the effect of
changes in the 551 program on the distribution of income and program costs must account for both
changes in eligibility and changes in participation.

2 Microdata Analysis
2.1 AHEAD Data
I use data from the Asset and Health Dynamics Study (AHEAD) to analyze the distributional
aspects of the SSI program and its potential to affect the well-being of the elderly poor.10 AHEAD
provides a nationally representative sample of the population born in 1923 or earlier and their
spouses. The respondents were first interviewed in 1993 when the age eligible portion of the sample
was approximately 70 years old or over. The entire sample consists of 8222 individuals in 6048
   5Fraker and Moffit estimated much lower food stamp participation rates than did Blank and Ruggles, 38percent
versus approximately 60 percent.
   9Menefee et at (1981), Warlick (1982), Coe (1985) and McGarry (1996) address this issue in detail.
  '°A detailed description of the survey is available in Soldo et at, (1997).




                                                      4
 households.1' The analyses presented here will use a single individual or married couple as the unit
 of analysis and I will refer to each observation as a family unit.12 AHEAD is ideal for this study
 because it contains a large sample of individuals nearly all of whom meet the age requirements
 for 551 eligibility, as well as detailed information on income and assets that allows for accurate
 determination of eligibility based on the income and asset criteria.'3 This project also draws
 on a supplemental restricted use data file that contains geographic identifiers for the AHEAD
 respondents. Because SSI benefits can vary widely across states this information is necessary if
 potential benefits are to be properly imputed. Below I note the difference ineligibility when state
 programs are ignored.

 2.2 Eligibility
I determine eligibility for federal 851 benefits using thespecific rules of the program as they existed
in 1993, including both the income and asset tests (Social Security AdminIstration, 1993). The
federal guarantees in that year were $422 and $633 for singles and couples.'4 I then calculate
the amount of a state supplement to which the family unit (single individual or married couple)
would be entitled based on the state of residence and the guidelines of the 581 program particular
to that state. The calculation of countable income is based on reports of monthly income in
AHEAD, subtracting the appropriate disregards for earned and unearned income. In addition to
the standard disregards, I exclude transfers received from family members or other individuals
because it is unlikely that these transfers are received with sufficient regularity to be reported to
the government and included in countable income.
    With respect to calculating asset eligibility, I am again able to follow the program guidelines
nearly exactly. I exclude the value of the home, up to $1500 in life insurance, and up to $4500 in
    "Included in these numbers are 189 spouses below age 65 who would not themselves be eligible for SSI, regardless
of income. However, because federal law requires that a portion of the incomeof an age-ineligible spouse be deemed
to the SSI applicant, it is important that these individuals be kept in the sample and their incomes known.
         some cases there are other individuals present in the household these could be children, other relatives, or
non-relatives. The SSI program does not count the income of these other individuals when determining the benefit
to which the eligible unit is entitled, but the income guarantees are reduced by one-third if the potentially eligible
unit lives in the household of another. In my calculation of benefits I too impose this one-third reduction. In all
other respects I ignore these other individuals; I do not count their income when considering the poverty status of
the individual or couple, nor do I use their presence to determine the appropriate poverty line.
   13Many earlier studies of participation in welfare programs did not have asset information and imputed asset
eligibility based on income from assets,
   '4A portion of the AHEAD sample was interviewed in 1994. Because the income measures refer to the preceeding
month, I use 1994 551 rules for all those interviewed after January 1994.
                                                                            The federal guarantees in 1994 were $446
and $669 (Social Security Administration, 1994).


                                                         5
vehicle equity (the limit on the value of a car).'5
    Table 1 compares income and asset eligibility. The first panel reports the percent of the sample
that is eligible for either federal or state SSI based on the application of the income and asset
tests alone and jointly. It is apparent from these numbers that the income limits are much more
likely to be binding than are the asset limits. Twenty-nine percent of the sample has countable
assets below the SSI limits, while only 12.8 percent has income that is sufficiently low. Combining
the two criteria, 8.75 percent of family units are eligible for benefits from federal and/or state SSI
programs.
    The characteristics of the 4 percent of the sample who are income eligible but not asset eligible
merit discussion. Seventy-nine percent of these units have incomes below the poverty line (not
shown), and in that sense seem to merit assistance, yet their wealth holdings prevent them from
receiving any benefits. Thus, even if the income guarantees were raised to the poverty line and all
eligible individuals participated in SSI, a fraction of the population would remain poor, at least until
their assets were depleted. The wealth holdings of this group of income eligibles/asset ineligibles are
relatively high: mean wealth is $168,486 ($103,756 if housing wealth is excluded). Only 9 percent
of this subsample have countable assets less than twice the limits set by 551 while 23 percent have
countable assets of over $100,000. Thus the asset test does serve to limit the participation of those
who can finance a some consumption with current wealth.

    The state supplemental programs play a large role in increasing eligibility relative to the federal
guidelines. The second panel of table 1 highlights the effect by reporting the proportion of the
sample eligible for 551 based on federal guarantees alone. Here the fraction income-eligible falls
from 12.8 when state supplements are included to 9.9 percent; and the fraction eligible after both
the income and asset tests falls to 7 percent. The state supplemental programs thus serve to
increase the eligible population by 24 percent.
   15With respect to the exclusion of a car J am unable to identify precisely its actual value. AHEAD obtains the value
of all vehicles (cars, boats, motorcycles, etc.) in a single question, The respondent may therefore own more than one
car, or may own other vehicles which would be included in countable assets, although this is unlikely for those with
little in the way of other assets or income. The survey also does not ask about the value of household furnishingsso
these are presumed to be less than the $2000 limit allowed under SSI and not included as part of countable assets.




                                                          6
2.3 Characteristics of Participants
When examining actual participation for the families in the sample, I find the same low participation
rates observed in other studies. Participation status is unknown for 11 of the 685 eligible units. Of
the remaining 674 units, 392 report that they are receiving benefits. When appropriately weighted
these numbers imply a participation rate of 55.9 percent.'6 Surprisingly this rate is identical to
the 55 percent participation rate found in 1973 and 1974 Survey of Low-Income Aged and Disabled
(Menefee et a!., 1981) and the 56 percent participation rate in the 1984 Survey of Income and
Program Participation (McGarry, 1996).'
    Table 2 presents the means of several variables used in the subsequent analyses. I examine the
characteristics of three distinct groups: those who are ineligible for SSI, those who are eligible and
receiving benefits, and those who are eligible but not collecting these benefits.'8 The ineligible
subsample is obviously better off in virtually every dimension than either of the other two groups,
and their mean values are reported mainly for purposes of comparison. Mean income for this group,
exclusive of SSI, is $1,915 per month and their net worth is $195,142, or $118,952 when housing
wealth is excluded. The average number of years of schooling (using the level of schooling of the
male for couples) is 11.3 and 7 percent are nonwhite.
    While none of those eligible for SSI benefits is well-off, those who are actually receiving benefits
are in substantially worse financial straits than those who are not. The participants have average
monthly pre-SSI income of $288, compared to $429 for those not receiving benefits. This lower
    16AHEAD oversainpled individuals in heavily black and Hispanic neighborhoods so weighting is necessary to achieve
population representative statistics.
   '71t is possible that participation is under represented due to misreporting of the receipt of SSI benefits in the
AHEAD data as has been observed with other welfare programs in different datasets, c.f. Bavier (1999). It is
difficult to assess the extent of misreporting but there are several reasons to believe it does not alterthe conclusion
that a large fraction of eligible individuals fail to enroll. First, enrollment figures are far below those predicted by
the Social Security Administration from its data (Kennedy, 1982). Second, consistent with theresults of survey
data, outreach studies have found large numbers of eligible non-participants but have had littlesuccess in increasing
enrollment (Comptroller General, 1976). And finally, if the total benefits reportedly received in the AHEAD data
are inflated to represent the population age 65 and over, and compared to published figures on total payments to the
elderly, the numbers are similar (see table 6). It is also worth noting that the participation rate found here is nearly
identical to that found with the SIPP (McGany, 1996), a survey that is know to have unusually accurate reporting of
income sources, in particular SSI income (Kalton, et al., 1986). To the extent that 551 benefitsare under-reported,
the participation rate is an underestimate of the true probability of taking-up the program and costs and enrollment
figures will also be biased downward.
   '8Among the ineligible population, 1.3 percent report income from SSI. Some of these individualsare likely mis-
classified due to reporting error, but others may actually be receiving benefits to which they are not entitled. The
Social Security Administration has estimated that 4 percent of those receiving benefits are actually ineligible (Social
Security Administration, 1982).



                                                          7
 income corresponds to a higher expected benefit for the participants than for the eligible non-
 participants, $223 compared to $156. This calculated benefit agrees well with the 551 income
 reported by recipients: The mean value of 551 actually received is $236 and the correlation between
 the calculated and reported amounts is 0.74.19 When reported 551 benefits are added to the income
 of the participants their incomes actually exceed those of the eligible non-participants, with an
 average monthly income that is $88 greater. 551 thus makes a large difference in the economic
well-being of these individuals.

     With respect to asset levels, those who are receiving benefits have substantially lowernet worth
than eligible non-participants, $11,696 versus $28,155, and a lower probability of home ownership.
For both groups, non-housing wealth is nearly non-existent. Mean wealth, excluding housing wealth,
is $341 for participants, while for non-participants it is actually negative (the medians are both
zero).20 These means stand in sharp contrast to mean (non-housing) wealth reported earlier for
those who are income but not asset eligible; the mean for those household units is $103,756.
   The Social Security program is typically viewed as providing nearly universal coverage, and in
fact, 95 percent of the ineligible sample is receiving Social Security benefits. However, many of the
participants are not; only 72 percent of this subsample reported receiving Social Security in the
previous month. One possible explanation for the lack of benefits is the immigrant status of this
population. Whereas 92 percent of the ineligible sample was born in the United States, only 75
percent of the eligible participants and 79 percent of the eligible non-participants were born here.
There is also a substantial difference across groups in the age at arrival for those who did immigrate,
increasing from 24 years old among the ineligibles to 43 years old among the eligible participants.
This late arrival suggests that many of those eligible for SSI may not have a sufficient earnings
history to qualify for Social Security benefits and may have low benefits if they do qualify.21
   19The calculated amount is on average lower than the reported amount because individuals may receive higher
than predicted state benefits due to special needs. For example, in California the guarantee for an individual needing
 "nonmedical out-of-home care" is $116 more per month than someone who does not. In Connecticut, individuals
may receive additional benefits to pay for such items as meals-on-wheels programs ($73.50 per month for one meal
a day) - I account for these extra payments where the data permit me to do so (such as an extra
                                                                                                     payment to those
not having kitchen facilities in California), but in most cases I am unable to assess thesespecial needs and using the
state income guarantees for those living independently, err consistently on the side of lower benefits.
   20The negative mean value is the result of one observation with (non-housing) debt of $100,000. If this observation
is eliminated the mean for this subsample is $694.
   21flifferences in immigration status by group are not due to a correlation between differences in levels of state
supplemental benefits and the regional distribution of immigrants. The same pattern is evident if only federal
eligibility is used.



                                                         8
    There is also a substantial difference across groups in marital status; 16 percent of the par-
ticipants are married compared to 22 percent of the non-participants. The majority of those who
are not married are widowed women. Fifty-seven percent of the participants and 51 percent of the
eligible non-participants are widows.
    Participants are more likely to be nonwhite, have approximately two fewer years of schooling on
average, and are much more likely to report being in poor health, 36 versus 22 percent, than eligible
non-participants. Perhaps surprisingly, living arrangements for the two groups of eligibles are sim-
ilar although participants somewhat more likely to live with others. Bothgroups are substantially
less likely to live independently and more likely to live with children than are those ineligible for
benefits.

2.4 SM and Poverty
As discussed previously, the levels of the federal guarantees relative to the appropriate poverty lines
indicate that the effect of SSI on the poverty rate itself is likely to be small, even if the program
has a large effect on the well-being of the elderly poor. One common measure of the degree of
poverty is the "poverty gap." The poverty gap is defined as the total dollar amount needed to raise
all incomes to the poverty line. As shown in table 3, if SSI is excluded from income the poverty
rate for the entire sample is 17.2 percent22 and the poverty gap, weighted to represent the total for
the relevant U.S. population, is $7.45 billion.23
    The second row of the table considers the effects of the federal program alone. If all those who
are eligible for federal benefits are assigned their expected amount, the fraction with income below
the poverty line falls only slightly but the poverty gap declines by 34 percent. Adding potential
state benefits for all eligible units (row 3) decreases the poverty rate to 15.9 percent, and the poverty
gap falls even further for a total decline of 40 percent. Even with the relatively low level of take-up
   22The poverty rates presented here are somewhat higher than published poverty rates of the elderly for two reasons.
First, for those elderly living with individuals other than a spouse, the income of these other individuals is not include
in my measure of total income (nor is their presence included in the determination of the appropriate poverty line).
I do so in order to measure well-being while abstracting from the decision to co-reside. Obviouslyone of the ways
poverty among the elderly can be reduced is through an increase in the number co-residing with children or others.
It is not clear that the introduction of the depend relationship improves the well-being of the elderly person. The
second reason fbr the high poverty rate is that the sample is representative of thoseage 70 and over. Poverty increases
sharply with age after 65.
   23j remind the reader that the AHEAD sample is representative of the non-institutional population
                                                                                                              age 70 and
over and their spouses. In section 3.2 I discuss one method of inflating these figures to represent the values for the
population age 65 and over.



                                                           9
among eligibles, the reduction in the poverty gap is substantial. As shown in the final row, using
current recipiency patterns (i.e. eligible non-participants receive zero benefits) and actual benefits,
the poverty rate is just 1 percentage point lower than without SST, but the poverty gap is nearly 30
percent smaller than the no-SST value. These figures provide a clear indication of both the ability
and potential of SSI to reach the poor elderly.24
    Figure 1 illustrates graphically the change in the distribution of income for the poor. The
sample used in the figure is the population with income below the poverty line in the absence of
SST. The horizontal axis measures the ratio of income to the poverty line in 10 percent intervals
(0—10, 10—20,.. .90-100) and the vertical axis measures the fraction of the sample in each interval.
The dark bars depict the distribution if SST is excluded from income, while the light bars show the
expected distribution if all eligible units were to enroll in the program. The largest change comes
in the very bottom of the distribution. In the absence of SST 11.5 percent of this poverty sample
would have incomes equal to less than 10 percent of the poverty line. For single individuals this
interval corresponds to monthly incomes of less than $58, indicating that they have virtually no
income other than SST; for couples the interval corresponds to income less than $7325 With 100
percent participation, the fraction with incomes this low decreases to just 1.3 percent.26 There is
also a sharp change in the fraction of the sample with incomes between 70 and 80 percent of the
poverty line. Federal SSI guarantees are equal to 73 percent of the poverty line for singles and
87 percent for couples. Because the majority of those eligible for benefits are single, a substantial
fraction of the population has their income increased to the 70-80 percent interval (although not
to exactly 73 percent of the poverty line because of the income disregards).

2.5 Correlates of non-participation
Given the potential for improvement in their financial status, one might question the decision made
by the eligible non-participants. Certainly the benefits to which the non-participating units are
entitled are lower than those of the participants, ($156 versus S223 on average) but they are still
substantial, equal to 36 percent of average income. The choice is even more puzzling when one
  241t should be noted that if 551 benefits are under-reported than the effect of the current program on poverty is
understated.
  250ne would expect that if SSI were not available, other behaviors would change. Some individuals may save or
work more prior to retirement, some may postpone retirement and some may receive greater transfers from family
and friends. Others however, would have no alternative means of support.
  26A11 12 family units who remain in this lowest decile are ineligible for SSI because of the asset test.


                                                        10
considers the relative stability of the income of the elderly, and the likelihood that eligibility will
remain unchanged for many years. Over a lifetime the foregone benefits could represent a large
sum.
    To understand better the choice of non-participation, and to assess how participation rates
would change in response to changes in benefits, I estimate a probit model for the probability of
enrolling in SSI conditional on eligibility. The underlying theoretical model assumes that eligible
units will enroll in SSI (P = 1) if the gain from the program (Gd) is greater than the associated
costs (G). Thus
                                        P.—1
                                          —  1 ifG—G >0
                                               1¼ 0   otherwise.
C depends in large part on the magnitude of the expected benefit (B), but may vary with char-
acteristics of the individual such as health status. The variables used tomeasure G and C follow
directly from the explanations for non-participation offered previously in the literature as summa-
rized in section 1.2. The coefficient estimates for the reduced form specification are reported in
table 4.
   As was noted in the table of means, participation appears to be based largely on need and this
result is borne out in the regressions. The magnitude of the expected benefit, which is inversely
related to pre-SSI income, has a positive and significant effect on the likelihood of participating.
An increase of $100 in the benefit increases the probability of enrolling in the SSI program by 6.8
percentage points. Home ownership also has a large effect on participation, lowering the probability
by 12.7 percentage points. As demonstrated above, net worth consists primarily of the value of a
home. Its effect in the regression is smaller than that of the variable indicating ownership, but it
significantly reduces the probability of enrolling. Being married is associated with a significantly
lower probability of participation, a surprising result because holding the expected benefit and net
worth constant, married couples have fewer resources per person and ought to be more in need of
assistance.27

   One of the explanations frequently offered for non-participation in welfare programs is that
individuals do not know about the program (Daponte et al., 1999). The results here contradict
this hypothesis. If there were informational barriers one would expect those with more schooling
to be more knowledgeable, as might those living in a urban area. Here both effects are associated
 27SS1 benefits and wealth are measured for the family unit. They are not scaled to be a per person measure.


                                                      11
with significant reductions in participation.28 Furthermore, a primary method for informing people
about 551 is through their receipt of Social Security. Those receiving Social Security are therefore
more likely to have been informed about the program, but there is no effect on participation.
     The effect of poor health is large and significant.29 Those in poor health are 12 percentage
points more likely to be enrolled. This large difference may come about through the interaction of
Medicaid and SSI. As discussed previously, 581 participants are categorically eligible for Medicaid
in most states, increasing the incentive to enroll in SSI for those with medical expenses. The link
between Medicaid and SSI may also make enrollment more likely if those having received medical
treatment for a prior illness were encouraged to enroll in SSI by the healthcare provider, ensuring
that the provider was reimbuised by the accompanying Medicaid benefits.
    The results in table 4 are consistent with earlier studies. While the decision to forego 551
benefits remains a puzzle, there does seem to be strong evidence that enrollment is related to
need, as measured both in terms of the magnitude of the expected benefit and other factors that
proxy financial well-being. This relationship is consistent with the hypothesis that there is a
stigma associated with the receipt of welfare benefits that increases the cost of enrolling (Moffitt,
1983). Only those with benefits larger than this fixed cost choose to enroll. It also indicates that
modifications to the SSI program that increase potential benefits or decrease the stigma associated
with recipiency will increase the probability with which eligible households enroll and therefore
increase the number of participants beyond that projected from a simple increase in eligibility.

3 Possible Changes in SSI
A restructuring of the Social Security system may induce corresponding changes in the parameters
of the SSI program. In this section 1 explore the potential effects of variouschanges in 551 guidelines
on eligibility, costs, and poverty. I look first at the elimination of the asset test, then at the effects
of increasing the income disregards and the income guarantees, and finally at a simplification of
the determination of countable income. In all cases I consider only changes to the federalprogram
and assume that states do not alter their benefit schedules or eligibility criteria in response. The
results of these simulations are reported in tables 5-8.
  25Schooling likely also proxies differences in lifetime income not captured by the income and asset variables.
  29Age was initially controlled for in the regression but it had no effect on participation when income, assets, and
health were included.


                                                        12
    Because actual benefits and participation are not observed with these simulated changes, the
comparisons presented here use the calculated benefits and probabilities of participation imputed
from the estimated coefficients of the probit model. I estimate the total cost of each of the alterna-
tives by weighting each eligible unit's expected benefit by its calculated probability of participating
and summing these weighted amounts.30 This cost is an underestimate of the true cost of the aged
portion of the SSI program for several reasons. Most importantly, the sample in this paper excludes
eligible individuals age 65-69 unless they are married to age eligible persons, and also excludes those
in nursing homes. (The population age 65-69 is approximately 48 percent of that age 70 and over
and approximately 4 percent of the elderly are in nursing homes.) Secondly, as noted in footnote
19, my estimate of the expected benefit is biased downward because I cannot calculate the value of
payments made for special needs. Finally, there are some in the sample whom I determine to be in-
eligible for benefits who are actually receiving payments from the 551 program. These amounts are
not included in the calculations based on predicted benefits and participation. For similar reasons
the number of eligible and participating family units is not representative of all those who would
be eligible in the U.S. population. Because of these limitations I first report changes in eligibility,
participation, and costs in percentage terms (table 5) and then adjust the baseline estimates for
these biases and present estimated costs and participation levels for the population age 65 and over
(table 6).

3.1 The effects on eligibility and participation
The first row of table 5 reports benefits and participation under the current system. For the eligible
population the empirical model predicts a participation rate of 56.7 percent, nearly identical to the
observed (weighted) rate of 55.9 percent.31 The average calculated benefit for all 685 ellgible units
is $195 (the average of $223 and $156 in table 2).


Eliminating the asset test: In redesigning eligibility guidelines one change that might be considered
is an elimination of the asset test. It is often argued that such tests discourage savings, whereas
an important goal of retirement policy is likely to be the encouragement of individual savings as
  30This figure is calculated as        x Benefit) where P1 is the probability an eligible unit participates and Benefit
is the benefit to which it is entitled.
  31The mean of the dependent variable in table 4 differs from 55.9 because it is not weighted by sampling probabilities.



                                                          13
a means of old age support. Furthermore, the asset test represents an additional administrative
burden and given the strict income limits and low participation rate may not actually result in
large changes in the participating population. Using the AHEAD data it is possible to simulate the
effect of this change on program participation and costs. It is a relatively straightforward exercise
to calculate the increase in eligibility—the number of families whose countable income is below
the guarantees but who have assets above the limit.32 However, one also needs to determine what
fraction of the newly eligible would choose to enroll in the program. I do so using the estimated
effects from table 4 and the observable characteristics of each family unit.
    With the elimination of the asset test those eligible for SSI under the current program experience
no change in eligibility or benefits and therefore no change in participation. The total number of
eligible family units however increases by 32.5 percent. Because income and asset holding are
positively correlated the newly eligible have higher incomes and therefore lower expected benefits
than those eligible initially, $177 compared to $195. Given the positiverelationship between benefits
are participation, and the negative relationship between net worth and enrollment, the newly eligible
also have a substantially lower probability of enrolling in SST than do those eligible under current
rules. The probability of participating in SSI for the newly eligible is just 24.6 percent compared to
56.7 for the initial sample. Based on the weighted sum of probabilities (EP) the expected increase
in the participating population is 14.1 percent.
    Using the expected benefits and the estimated probability of participation for each newly eligible
unit to predict the additional cost associated with the expansion, I find that payments (exclusive
of administrative expenses) increase by 11.7 percent.33


Increasing unearned income disregard: The federal income guarantees are indexed for inflation,
and have increased every year since the program's inception. The asset limits have also grown
   32Here I consider eliminating the asset test for the federal program only. I assume that states maintain their current
restrictions. The change in eligibility predicted here thus differs from that in table 1 where the asset test is eliminated
at both levels.
   33These calcuiations (and those that follow) assume that the decision making process does not change with the
program expansions (i.e. that the estimated effects in table 4 remain valid). If the elimination of the asset test alters
the desirability of enrollment, there will be changes in participation beyond those forecasted here. Forexample,
individuals may falsely believe that they are ineligible for SSI because they own a home. Eliminating the asset test
might well reduce the prevalence of this misconception, changing the effect of home ownership on the participation
decision. Similarly, some may view the asset test as an unpleasant requirement and refuse to apply for benefits if
they need to provide such informatiort Again in this case, elimination of the asset test would increase enrollment
beyond those who are newly eligible.


                                                           14
over time. However, the income disregards have never been increased and remain at their initial
levels—the first $65 of earned income and half of the remainder, and the first $20 ofunearned
income. One change in SSI that has been mentioned among policy makers is an increase in the
$20 disregard for unearned income. The figure that has been discussed is a disregard of $75 per
month.34

    In the case of eliminating the asset test, the effects are felt only among the newly eligible. Here,
however, there is both an increase in benefits among those previously eligible and an increase in
the number eligible. Overall, the average benefit for the initially eligible subsample increases from
$195 to $221: those who were already participating initially see their average benefits increase
from $223 to $249 and those who were eligible but not participating see an increase in their average

benefits from $156 to $183 (break-down by subgroup not shown). This increase in potential benefits
will induce some of the eligible non-participants to enroll in SST and the average probability of
participating for the entire eligible population increases slightly from 56.7 to 58.0 percent. The
increase in benefits and participation leads to an increase of 13 percent in costs for this group
alone.

    In addition to these changes, there is an increase of 14.2 percent in the number of eligible
units. However, the expected benefit for the group of newly eligibles is small, averaging just $29
per month. Because of this low benefit, their average probability of participating is 49.1 percent,
and the cost arising from the increase in eligiblity is equal to just 1.6 percent of initial spending.
Combining the additional costs for each group, the total increase in costs for this expansion is 14.5
percent over the initial amount.


Raising guarantees to the poverty line: Several states offer supplements to 551 which effectively
raise the incomes of the participating population to slightly above the poverty line. In considering
plans to reduce or eliminate poverty among the elderly, one obvious solution is to raise the federal
income guarantee to this level. This proposal has been discussed several times in the past (Zedlewski
and Meyer, 1989) and continues to be mentioned by policy makers. For those who live in states
with guarantees above the poverty lines, the increase in federal benefits results in no change in their
incomes—a greater fraction of their benefit will be paid for by the federal government, and a smaller
 34j thaük Robert Schoeni for bringing this discussion to my attention.



                                                       15
 fraction by the state, but there will be no increase in the total received. In contrast, those in less
 generous states could see a sizable increase in their monthly benefits, and some of those initially
 eligible but not enrolling at current levels may now find participation to be a more appealingoption.
 At the same time, increasing the federal guarantees will also make more individuals eligible for the
 program and will increase participation along that avenue.
     Increasing the federal guarantees to the poverty line—$577.50 per month for a single individual
 and $728.33 for a couple in 199335—with no change in state programs, results in a sharp increase
 the average benefits for those who were initially eligible, from $195 to $288, and the probability of
participating in 881 increases to 61 percent. The cost of this change is great, equal to 52
                                                                                                       percent
of initial expenditures.

   Increasing benefits also has a large effect on the number of eligible units, increasing the eligible
population by 36 percent. However, as was the case when increasing the disregard, the expected
benefit for the newly eligible is small, equal to $71, and their predicted participation rate is 47.3
percent. Given the relatively low benefits to which they are entitled, the expected additional
outlay of 881 benefits for this group of newly eligible is just 10 percent of initial spending. The
total increase in costs for this expansion is therefore equal to 62 percent of initial expenditures with
the vast majority of the increase accruing to those who were initially eligible.
    This simulation assumed that the asset test remained in effect. The fifth row of table 5 reports
the results of the same increase in income guarantees accompanied by an elimination of the asset
test. This combination ensures that virtually all elderly will have the opportunity to increase their
incomes above the poverty line. 36
    Those who were intially eligible for 881 are unaffected by the additional elimination
                                                                                                  of the asset
test and the increases in benefits and costs for this group are the same as in the previous example
(row 4). However, eliminating the asset test dramatically increases the eligible population, more
than doubling its size. Following this change in eligibility, the participating population increases
by 72 percent, 34 percentage points above the increase with no change in the asset test. Corre-
sponding to the large increases in benefits and participation there is a sharp increase in costs. In
  $592.33 and $747.25 in 1994.
  361t is possible that those who live with others and who have the guarantees reduced accordingly could remain
poor.




                                                      16
this expansion expected payments increase by 92 percent.37


Using Social Security income: The final alternative I investigate is basing eligibility and benefits on
Social Security income alone, eliminating income disregards and conferring eligibility on those with
Social Security income, rather than countable income, below the guarantee levels. This procedure
would likely reduce administrative effort for both the Social Security Administration (SSA) and
the applicants because Social Security benefits are readily observable by SSA and need not be
reported or verified.38 The drawback is that individuals with low Social Security benefits, but with
substantial other income, could qualify for SSI, although with the asset test in place this group
would be expected to be small.
    The cost of this change would obviously depend on the level of Social Security that is chosen to
be the cut-off for eligibility. In the AHEAD sample, the maximum Social Security benefits received
by singles and couples eligible for federal SSI benefits under current rules are $441 and $644.
Because many family units are likely to have some income from sources other than Social Security,
a reasonable choice of income limits might be the 90th percentiles— $418 for singles and $620 for
couples.4° Using these amounts as income guarantees, with no income disregards, results in a net
increase in the eligible population of 9.6 percent, with a small number of those initially eligible
for benefits becoming ineligible due to the elimination of income disregards and theslightly lower
guarantee level.4' Expected participation increases by the somewhat smaller amount of 6.2 percent.
The total cost of this method is similar to the current program, with an increase in expenditures
of 5 percent.
    As noted earlier, these simulations are based on the assumption that the participation decision
does not change when benefit formulas change. In this case in particular, the assumption may not
  37These figures reflect the percentage increases in the combined payments of the federal and state programs, Because
the simulations assume that state programs are unchanged, in many cases the increase in the federal benefits will
simply replace state spending. The percentage increase in federal costs is therefore larger than the overall increase.
When gurarantees are raised to the poverty line and the asset test remains in place, my calculations predict an
increase in federal spending of 95 percent. If the asset test is eliminated, federal spending increases by 133 percent.
  35Adnijmtat expenses for the 55! program are actually larger than for the OASDI program (Social Security
Administration, 2000). However, much of these costs are likely due to the disabled portion of the 551 program not
from the benefits going to the eligible elderly.
  39Because some states (notably California) have guarantees that are significantly higher than the federallevels, the
maximum Social Security benefits among all eligibles (state and federal) are much higher at $897 and $1180.
  401n this simulation guarantees for 1994 are set by increasing the 1993 amounts to account for inflation.
  41Ninety-one percent of the initially eligible remain eligible under the new rules.



                                                         17
be valid. One might imagine that if benefits were tied directly to low Social Security rather than
to generally low income, the program might be viewed less as a welfare program and more as a
supplement to Social Security itself, and participation rates could increase across the board.42

3.2 Costs of changes

The increases in expected payments and the increases in the number of participating family units
associated with each of these changes have thus far been expressed as percentage increases relative
to the current program. Of particular relevance to policy makers and researchers is the cost of
the SSI program for the entire elderly population. As noted above, the AHEAD sample does not
provide such an estimate. By making some assumptions, however, it is possible to inflate the
baseline amounts calculated from the AHEAD data to approximate the values for the population
age 65 and over. I make these adjustments in the first row of table 6 and then apply the estimated
percentage increases for each hypothesized change (from table 5) to estimate the effects of the
program expansions.
    In the first row of table 6 I present the costs and the number of participating units for the
current program using three different measures. In the first set of columns I use the population
weighted sums of observed benefits and participants for the AHEAD sample, $2.78 billion and
1.04 million participating units.43 These figures are the totals relevant for the non-institutional
population age 70 and over and their spouses. The numbers do not include the population age
65-69 which is approximately 48 percent as large as that age 70 and over, nor do they include the
approximately 4 percent of elderly who live in nursing homes. In column 2 I incorporate these
omitted segments of the elderly population by simply multiplying the numbers in the first set of
columns by 1.54 (1.48 x 1.04). This procedure yields a total cost of $4.28 billion in 1993 dollars
and a total enrolled population of 1.6 million family units.45 As an alternative estimate (column
3), I use published figures from the Social Security Administration (SSA) for SSI benefits to aged
   42The role of stigma, and indeed non-participation itself, could be eliminated in its entirety if the level of Social
Security income were the only earnings test, the asset test were eliminated, and no application for 551 was required.
     Using reported benefits and recipiency corrects for any biases in my estimates based on calculated benefits and
predicted probabilities.
   44ff SST benefits are under-reported then this figure is a downward biased estimate of the true cost of theprogram.
Similarly, calculations of the increase in enrollment and costs are also likely to be incorrect.
   45lnfiating the AHEAD numbers by 48 percent "over-corrects" for the omitted population because spouses of age
eligible respondents who are 65-69 are already included in the sample. The 65+ estimates axe further biased upward
if one assumes that the younger elderly are better off than older cohorts due to differences in lifetime wealth and the
predictions of the lifecycle hypothesis, and therefore less likely to be in need of SSI or to be receiving benefits.

                                                          18
   individuals in 1993 (Social Security
                                       Administration, 1999). The reported values, 84.25 billion and
   1.46 million, compare well with the inflated AHEAD numbers.46
     The subsequent rows in the table provide cost and participant projections for
                                                                                      each of the
  changes discussed in the previous section. As is evident from the percentage increases
                                                                                         reported
  earlier, neither the elimination of the asset test nor the increase in the income disregard result in
                                                                                                                                a
  substantial increase in costs or in the number enrolled. The 12-15 percent increases in
                                                                                                               costs shown
  in table 5 correspond to $500 to $600 million dollars when inflated to
                                                                       represent the population age
  65 and over, while the increases in the participating population are approximately
                                                                                                             200,000 units
  (rows 2 and 3 of table 6).
      The dramatic 92 percent cost increase associated with the poverty line
                                                                              guarantee and no asset
  test increases costs by approximately $4 billlon and increases the number.
                                                                              of enrolled families by
  just over 1 million. Even with this large expansion, the total cost of the
                                                                             program remains below
  $9 billion.47 This cost is best interpreted relative to other
                                                                government programs: In 1993 total
  payments to the disabled segment of the SSI
                                                population were nearly $20 billion, payments to
 families in the Aid to Families with
                                   Dependent Children Program (AFDC) were nearly $23 billion,
 and payments to food stamp beneficiaries were $22 billion.48

 3.3 The effects on poverty
 How much do these expansions
                                 actually benefit the elderly poor? Table 3 reported the potential for
 the current SSI program to reduce the
                                        poverty rate and the poverty gap. While the reduction in the
 poverty rate due to 551 was small, the reduction in the
                                                         poverty gap was large, equal to a 30 percent
 decrease with current recipiency patterns. Table 7 shows the effects of the
                                                                             hypothesized changes to
 the 581 program on these measures. Using calculated benefits and
                                                                      predicted participation for the
current program, the poverty rate is 16.7
                                                     percent and the poverty gap is $5.34 billion.49
   45The SSA estimate does not include
                                            those elderly who originally received benefits as blind or disabled persons
 and who remain classified as such. Also,
                                             although benefits are reported as the average per family unit, the number
of recipients is listed as the number of
                                          individuals receiving benefits not the number of units. I calculate the latter
by dividing total benefits (measured yearly) by
   4tThe 4.25 billion in costs reported in columnaverage     monthly benefits received (multiplied by 12).
                                                     3 of table 6 represents federal
1.15 billion. Applying the 95 and 133 percentage increases in federal spending (see  costs of 3.1 billion and state costs of
                                                                                         footnote
expenditures yields total federal costs for the two                                                xx) to the $3.1 billion in
                                                      poverty line expansions of $6.04 billion and $7.2 billion.
  481t should be noted, however, that the increases in costs described here are limited
the SSI program. Because SSI receipients                                                  to the direct cost of benefits from
the true increase in costs may be much larger.are likely to be categorically eligible for both food stamps and Medicaid,
  49For comparison with the simulations, this calculation uses the calculated
                                                                                     benefits (rather than reported) and
predicted participation probabilities. The values reported in table 6 therefore differ      slightly from those calculated

                                                            19
    Neither eliminating the asset test nor raising the disregard have a measurable effect on the
poverty rate and the reductions in the poverty gap associated with these changes are approximately
5—6   percent.
    Of all the changes to 551 that have been discussed here, only the changes that raise benefits to
the poverty line have a noticeable effects on the poverty rate, and even these effects are small due
to the low participation rates. If federal guarantees are raised to the poverty line the poverty rate
(row 4) falls from 16.7 to 16.4 percent. With a concurrent elimination of the asset test, poverty
falls by only an additional 0.1 percentage points. In each of these cases, however, there is a large
decline in the poverty gap. When the asset test is left in place, the poverty gap falls by 25 percent,
and it falls by 37 percent with the additional elimination of the asset test.
    As shown in the final row, there is no change in the poverty rate with eligibility based on Social
Security, but the poverty gap actually increases. This increase is because some 551 benefits in this
regime accrue to those with incomes above the poverty line and therefore have no effect on the
poverty gap, while some individuals with incomes below the poverty line lose their benefits. It is
important to note that these declines are measured relative to the current program which in and
of itself provides a 30 percent reduction relative to situation without 551. (As shown in table 3, the
poverty rate with no 551 is 17.2 percent and the poverty gap is $7.45 billion.)

3.4 Characteristics of the newly eligible

The preceding tables report the changes in participation, costs, and poverty associated with various
changes in the parameters of the SSI program. Each of these changes will benefit a somewhat
different subset of individuals. Table 8 presents the means of the regression variables for the newly
eligible units under each of these scenarios. For comparison, the means of those initially eligible
are reported in the first column.
    By definition, those who become eligible when the asset test is eliminated have substantially
higher levels of assets than those who are initially eligible. In this case the mean value of wealth
(including housing wealth) for the newly eligible is $185,278, nearly ten times that of the initial
sample. This high wealth level is responsible for the low predicted probability of participating in
based on observed benefits and participation shown in the final row of table 3 ($5.3 billion). Note also that these
numbers are not inflated to account for the age restrictions on the AHEAD sample. The reader can scale these
numbers by 1.54 if such an estimate is desired.



                                                       20
551 (24.6 percent) seen in table 5. The newly eligible are also twice as likely to own a home and to
be married, and have over three more years of schooling on average.
   In contrast, when the unearned income disregard is raised (scenario 2), those who become
eligible must still meet the asset test and mean assets are not changed noticeably. In fact, the
population of newly eligibles is quite similar to those initially eligible. The largest differences are
in the probability of receiving Social Security and of reporting positive earnings. Because nearly
all those without Social Security are likely to be eligible for 551 benefits with the initial (lower)
disregard, and because increases in the unearned income disregard act to increase the amount
of Social Security that is excluded from countable income, virtually all of the newly eligible, 99
percent, are receiving Social Security.
   Raising the benefit guarantees to the poverty line will again have little effect on asset levels,
but will allow those with greater incomes to qualify for benefits. Thus, as shown in the column
for scenario 3, while the newly eligible population is again nearly certain to have Social Security
benefits, and has a much higher level of earnings, assets are only slightly above those for theinitially
eligible subsample.
   Eliminating the asset test along with the increase in the benefit guarantees again results in a
newly eligible population with substantial net worth. The mean value of assets for this group is
$100,010. The newly eligible are substantially more likely to own a home, have more schooling, and
are less likely to be nonwhite or in poor health. They are also more likely to have Social Security
income and income from earnings.

   Finally, if Social Security income alone is used in determining eligibility, many of those with
substantial labor earnings will be entitled to benefits. Because individuals can have unlimited
labor earnings and still qualify for benefits there is also a very large difference in the fraction with
earnings, 2 versus 15 percent, and in mean earnings (over positive values) which increase from $179
to $597 per month.


4 Relationship between SSI and Social Security
As plans to reform Social Security are discussed, and their effects on the well-being of the population

analyzed, it is important to keep in mind the potential interactions with SSI. One feature of the
SSI program that has important consequences for the role of Social Security in affecting the welfare

                                                  21
of the elderly poor is the implicit tax on benefits. Because the benefit from 551 is equal to the
difference between the income guarantee and countable income, any increase in unearned income
(above the $20 disregard) reduces the 551 benefit dollar-for-dollar. Thus, for 551 participants, an
additional dollar of Social Security income serves only to reduce the 551 benefit by one dollar with
no change in the total income of the recipient. Social Security payroll taxes paid by those eventually
collecting SSI are therefore in some sense "wasted" because they realize no real benefits from the
Social Security program itself.
   One implication of this 100 percent tax is that those who expect to receive SSI should begin
collecting Social Security at the earliest age of eligibility. There is no advantage to postponing
retirement from age 62 to age 65 (or greater) since the higher benefit associated with later retirement
does not result in an increase in income. With such a postponement, the individual simply loses the
stream of benefits from age 62 to age 65 with no offsetting increase in income after age 65. Because
of this effect, changes in the normal retirement age for Social Security that leave unchanged the age
for early retirement will have no effect on the decision by future SSI recipients of when to collect
benefits. Furthermore, changes in Social Security benefit levels, with no changes in the structure
of SSI, will have no effect on the incomes of the majority of SSI recipients.
   A popular proposal for reforming Social Security is a move to a system of individual retirement
accounts. (See Feldstein and Samwick, 1998 for a discussion of such a plan, and Feldstein and
Liebman, this volume, for estimates of its distributional effects.) Such a system would replace (at
least part of) Social Security payroll taxes with contributions invested in private sector financial
instruments to be used to finance a worker's retirement. There are several avenues along which
SSI would affect the operation and the redistributional aspects of such a system, depending on the
requirements to annuitize account balances, the type of annuities available, and the provisions for
leaving bequests.
   First, as in the current system, those who expect to have balances low enough to qualify for SSI,
regardless of the annuity type chosen, have little incentive to save because their total income will be
determined exclusively by the SSI guarantees. Since savings rates are likely to be mandatory, this
effect will show up as a work disincentive, similar to in the current program. Along the same lines,
if investments in individual retirement accounts are self-directed, those who expect to be eligible
for SSI have an incentive to take inordinate risks with their portfolios because they will be unlikely

                                                  22
  to realize any benefit from savings with moderate returns and will be unaffected by losses.
     There is also the question of the treatment of account balances. If individuals were permitted
 to retain the balance in an account after age 65, in lieu of immediate mandatory annuitization,
 some provision for these balances would be necessary in the 551 asset test. One would not wish
 to disqualify from 551 all those with more than $2000 in such an account, since such
                                                                                           sums are
 small relative to the stream of Social
                                        Security benefits permitted under the current system. The
 accotmting of these balances would be especially important for
                                                                  the disabled who may qualify for
 benefits from 551 long before age 65, but might be disqualified if balances in retirement
                                                                                           accounts
 were included in countable assets.

     A system of mandatory annuitization would raise different concerns, with implications
                                                                                                  for the
 choice of annuity types and death benefits. Brown (1999) shows that under a
                                                                                   single life annuity
 with no bequests, there is a sizable redistribution of wealth from those with short life
                                                                                            expectancies
 (the poor) to those with long life expectancies (the rich). The magnitude of this redistribution
 is lessened if annuities have
                             survivorship benefits. For those who will be eligible for 551, the 100
 percent tax on 551 benefits associated with an increase in annuity income means that differences
between joint and single life annuities will be unimportant in most cases. If both the
                                                                                              couple and
the surviving spouse will be eligible for 551, then changes in the magnitude of the
                                                                                    annuity payment,
arising from changes in the survivorship option, will alter the fractions of income coming from SSI
and Social Security annuities, but will have no effect on total income. Regardless of the
                                                                                                 annuity
policy, total income will be equal to the 551 guarantee.
    A similar result follows for the choice of period certain annuities. Period certain annuities
guarantee payment for a certain number of years even if the annuitant dies before the end of that
time. If the annuitant does die before all
                                          guaranteed payments are paid, the remaining benefits are
paid to his heirs. To finance this potential
                                             payout, payments during life from these period certain
annuities are reduced relative to what they would be with a straight life annuity. Brown
                                                                                          shows that
these period certain annuities reduce the redistribution of resources from short—lived to
                                                                                              long—lived
individuals because they effectively increase the number of years of benefits for those with
                                                                                                    high
mortality rates. Including SSI in such a calculation reinforces this effect. If the annuitant is eligible
for 551, the reduction in annuity payments needed to finance the period certain
                                                                                   option will not
reduce his income. And, should he die before the end of the period, he will leave wealth to heirs
                                                                                                      at

                                                  23
no cost to himself.

   In addition to the choice of single or joint life, and straight life or period certain annuities,
individuals may be able to choose an annuity with a bequest option. This type of annuity would
have the same effect on the redistribution of resources as a period certain annuity. Ifgiven the
option, an annuitant eligible for 551 who cares at least somewhat about his heirs will accept a
reduction in the current flow of payments in order to guarantee a bequest, because he will not
experience a corresponding reduction in actual income, SSI payments making up the difference.
    As this discussion illustrates, the distributional effects of alternative Social Security reforms
can depend heavily on the interactions with 551, and the details of any reform proposals need to
consider the potential spill-over effects.

5 Discussion and Conclusions
The proposed privatization of Social Security raises a host ofconcerns over the best way to imple-
ment such a change. Chief among these concerns is how to provide for those elderly who reach old
age with insufficient resources. When considering the needs of the elderly poor and possible meth-
ods to alleviate their poverty, it is instructive to examine the features of the existing SSI program
and its success in improving the well-being of its target population. This paper has addressed these
issues.

   In its current state, the SSI program has done much to improve the lot of the poorest elderly.
While not eliminating poverty among the elderly, it has succeeded in raising the incomes of many
of the poorest by a substantial amount. Under the current system, the poverty gap for the elderly
(the amount of money needed to increase the incomes of all poor individuals to the poverty line)
is 30 percent lower than it would be in the absence of SSI. FUrthermore, for those enrolledin the
program, SSI provides 42 percent of total monthly income, on average. However, the potential for
SSI to assist the elderly poor is even greater. Only 56 percent of those whoappear to be eligible
for benefits are actually enrolled in the program. If the participation rate of the current program
were increased to 100 percent, the poverty gap could be reduced by an additional 11 percentage
points.

   The paper explores the effects of several possible changes to the current SSI program. In simu-
lating the changes in participation and costs, I control for the probability that eligible individuals

                                                 24
may not enroll in the program. These simulations indicate that guaranteeing all elderly an income
equal to the poverty line is potentially costly, increasing the current benefit outlays to the elderly
by 62 percent with an asset test in effect, and by over 90 percent with the concurrent elimination
of the asset test. Based on 1993 figures, this change results in an additional expenditure of 2.7
to 4 billion dollars for the entire age eligible population. However, because SSI payments to the
elderly are dwarfed by those to the disabled, these changes are equal to increases of just 11 to
16 percent relative to the total payments in the SSI program. Other changes that are examined
here have smaller cost increases, and correspondingly smaller improvements in the well-being of
the elderly poor. Furthermore, because participation rates typically hover around 60 percent, the
greatest costs and the greatest improvements in financial well-being will come from programs that
also encourage higher rates of participation.




                                                 25
References
[1] Bavier, Richard, 1999. "An Early Look at the Effects of Welfare Reform," mimeo, Office of
  Management and Budget, March.

[2] Blank, Rebecca and Patricia Ruggles, 1996. 'When Do Women Use Aid to Families with De-
  pendent Children and Food Stamps?" Journal of Human Resources, 31 (1) : 57-89.

[3] Brown, Jeffery, 1999. "Differential Mortality and the Value of Individual Account Retirement
  Annuities," paper presented the NBER conference on The Distributional Effects of Social Security

  Reform, Woodstock, VT.

[4] Coe, Richard, 1985. "Nonparticipation in the SSI Program by the Eligible Elderly," Southern
  Economic Journal, 51(3): 891-897.

[5] Comptroller General of the United States, 1976. "Efforts Made to Locate and Enroll Potential
  Recipients of the Supplemental Security Income Program for the Aged, Blind, and Disabled."
  U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. HRD-76-105.

[6] Daponte, Beth Osborn, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor, 1999. "Why Do Low Income House-
  holds Not Use Foodstamps?" The Journal of Human Resources, 34 (3) :612-628.

[7] Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick, 1998. "Thr Ttansition Path in Privatizing Social Se-
  curity," in Privatizing Social Security, Martin Feldstein (ed.) Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press.

[8] Fraker, Thomas and Robert Moffitt, 1988. "The Effect of Food Stamps on Labor Supply: A
  Bivariate Selection Model," Journal of Public Economics, 35(2): 25-56.

[9] Kalton, Graham, David B. McMillen, and Daniel Kasprzyk, 1986. "Nonsampling Error Issues
  in the Survey of Income and Program Participation," SIPP Working Paper Series no. 8602.
  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

[10] Kennedy, henna, 1982. "SSI: Trends and Changes, 1974-1980," Social Security Bulletin, 45
  (7): 3-12.



                                               26
[11] McOarry, Kathleen, 1996. "Participation of the Elderly in 551," The Journal of Human Re-
  sources, 31(2): 331-358.

[12] Menefee, John, Bea Edwards, and Sylvester J. Schieber, 1981. "Analysis of Nonparticipation
  in the SSI Program" Social Security Bulletin, 44(6): 3-21.

[13] Moffitt, Robert, 1983. "An Econometric Model of Welfare Stigma," The American Economic
  Review, 73(5): 1023-1035.

[14] Social Security Administration, 1982. "Low Income Eligibility and Participation in SSI." Social
  Security Bulletin 45( 5): 28-35.

[15] Social Security Administration, 1993. The Supplemental Security Income Program for the Aged,
  Blind, and Disabled Selected Characteristics of State Supplementation Programs as of January
  1993, Office of Supplemental Security Income, Social Security Administration.

[16] Social Security Administration, 1994. The Supplemental Security Income Program for the Aged,
  Blind, and Disabled Selected Characteristics of State Supplementation Programs as of January
  1994, Office of Supplemental Security Income, Social Security Administration.

[17] Social Security Administration, 1997. The Supplemental Security Income Program for the Aged,
  Blind, and Disabled Selected Characteristics of State Supplementation Programs as of January
  1997, Office of Supplemental Security Income, Social Security Administration.

[18] Social Security Administration, 1999.. Social Security Bulletin Annual Statistical Supplement,
  1998, Social Security Administration.

[19] Social Security Administration, 2000. Audited Financial Statements and Notes, Supplemental
  Schedule to Principal Financial Statement, 1997. www.ssa.gov.

[20] Soldo, Beth J., Michael D. Hurd, Willard L. Rodgers, and Robert B. Wallace, 1997. "Asset
  and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old: An Overview of the AHEAD Study," Journal of
  Gerontology, 52B: 1-20.




                                                27
[211 Warlick, Jennifer L., 1979. "An Empirical Analysis of Participation in the Supplemental Secu-
  rity Income Program Among Aged Eligible Persons," unpublished Ph.D dissertation, Department
  of Economics, University of Wisconsin.

[22] Warlick, Jennifer L., 1982. "Participation of the Aged in SSI," Journal of Human Resources,
  17(2): 236-260.

[23] Zedlewski,   Sheila R. and Jack A. Meyer, 1989. Toward Ending Poverty Among the Elderly and
  Disabled Through 881 Reform, Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.




                                                28
                    Table 1
           Income and Asset Eligibility
                Percent of Total
             (number of family units)

                              Asset Test
Income Test          Inelig    Elig      Total

  Eligibility using federal and state criteria
Ineligible         66.75    20.47        87.23
                     (3709)   (1416)       (5125)
Eligible              4.02     8.75         12.77
                     (238)    (685)        (923)
Total                70.78    29.22          100
                     (3947) (2101)         (6048)

             Using federal criteria only
Ineligible           67.93    22.18         90.11
                     (3769) (1520)         (5289)
Eligible              2.85     7.04         9.89
                     (178)    (581)        (759)
Total                70.78    29.22          100
                     (3947) (2101)         (6048)

Percentages are weighted figures.
Numbers of family units are unweighted.




                        29
                                             Table 2
                              Means of Variables used in the Analyses

                                               Not Eligible                   Eligible
                                                                  Participating     Not Participating
                                              Mean Std Err Mean Std Err Mean                  Std Err
Income variables:
  Pre-SSI income (monthly)                     1915      41.0      288      11.1      429        19.6
  Calculated 551 benefit                        0.0       0.0      223       9.6       156        9.9
  Reported 551 income                          2.91       0.5      236       9.9       0.0        0.0
 Total income md. 551                          1918      41.0      517       9.5       429       19.6
 Has Social Security income                    0.95     0.003     0.72     0.023      0.83      0.022
 Has labor earnings                            0.11     0.004    0.010     0.005     0.044      0.012

Asset variables:
 Net worth                                  195,142      5620 11,696        1285 28,155         2896
 Net worth excluding housing                118,952      4741      341         70    6O6t        667
 Own home (0/1)                                0.74     0.006     0.32       0.02     0.50       0.03
 Value of home (positive)                   102,877      2457 35,315        3016 57,709         4226

Demographic variables: (for male in couples)
 Born in the U.S.                             0.92      0.004     0.75       0.02     0.79       0.02
 Age at immigration (if not native born)      24.3       0.83     43.3       2.30     36.6       3.26
 Age                                         77.44       0.08    78.88       0.35    78.67       0.44
 Schooling                                    11.3       0.05      6.4       0.21      8.2       0.25
 Nonwhite                                     0.07      0.004     0.38       0.03     0.28       0.03
 Poor health (head or spouse)                 0.14      0.005     0.36       0.02     0.22       0.02
 Married (0/1)                                0.41      0.007     0.16       0.02     0.22       0.03
 Widowed (female)                             0.39      0.007     0.57       0.03     0.51       0.03

Living Arrangements:
 Lives alone (or w/ spouse)                    0.78     0.006     0.65       0.03     0.66       0.03
 Live with kids                                0.16     0.005     0.26       0.02     0.28       0.03
 Live with others                              0.07     0.004     0.11       0.02     0.08       0.02

  Number of observations                          5363*              392*                 282*
  Negative mean wealth is due to one outlier (see text).
* Numbers of observations differs for some variables due to missing values. Participation status is
missing for 11 eligible households and they are excluded from the table.




                                               30
                                         Table 3
                              Poverty with and without SST


                                                                     Poverty Gap
                                            Poverty          Poverty Gap*     Percent
Income measure                                  Rate          (in billions)  Reduction

No SSI                                          17.2             7.45           —



All potential federal benefits paid             17.0             4.91          34.1

All potential benefits paid                     15.9             4.43          40.5

Current recipiency patterns and benefits        16.2             5.30          2S.9

The poverty gap is the total amount needed to increase all incomes to the poverty
line. Figures are weighted to represent national yearly totals for the AHEAD sample.




                                           31
                            Table 4
   Probit Estimates of the Probability of Participating in 551
        conditional on being eligible for federal benefits


                                      Coeff Std Err          Deny

Potential benefit (100s)             0.146      0.043        0.068
Net worth (10,000s)                 -0.068      0.022       -0.032
Own home (0/1)                      -0.271      0.156       -0.127
Married (0/1)                       -0.435      0.156       -0.203
Years of schooling (male in couple) -0.047      0.013       -0.022
Nonwhite (male in couple)            0.054      0.106        0.025
Poor health (either spouse)          0.251      0.117        0.117
Receives Social Security (0/1)      -0.061      0.190       -0.028
Earnings (lOOs)                      -0.081     0.219       -0.038
Number of children                    0.051     0.018        0.024
Urban resident (0/1)                 -0.283     0.112       -0.132
Number of observations                            674
Mean of Dependent Variable                       0.582
Regression includes indicators for missing values of some variables
and a constant term.
Observations with missing values of the dependent variable are
excluded.




                                32
                                                                     Table 5
                          Impact of Alternative Eligibility Guidelines for 551: Mean Benefits and Participation Rates

                                            Initially Eligible                       Newly Eligible                 Percent Increase in
                                      Avg        Prob of       % Inc        Avg         Prob of       % inc
 Plan                                                                                                           Elig Participating Total
                                     Benefit Participating Costst          Benefit   Participating    Costs     Units     Units       Costs
 Current Program                       195                      —      —     —             —           —
                                                   56.7                                                           —                       —


 No Asset test                        195         56.7         0.0          177          24.6         11.7       32.5        14.1        11.7
Unearned disregard equals $75         221         58.0         13.0          29          49.1          1.6       14.2       14.6         14.5
Guarantee raised to Poverty line      288         61.2         52.4         71           47.3         10.0      36.1
 with asset test                                                                                                            38.2        62.4

Guarantee raised to Poverty line      288         61.2        52.4          144          35.2         39.8
 no asset test                                                                                                  103.8       72.4        92.1

Social Security based eligibility     201          57.8         -5.8          140        42.4         10.9       9.6          6.2        5.0
Benefits are determined by state and federal program parameters
                                                                     using reported values of income and assets.
Participation probabilities are calculated using estimates in table 4 and observed characteristics.
Increases in costs are calculated as the expected additional benefits
                                                                        paid to each group under each expansion relative to total payments
under current rules.
                                                              Table 6
         Impact of Alternative Eligibility Guidelines for       551: Estimates of Total Cost and Participation
                        (costs   in billions   of 1993 dollars, participation in million of units)

                                                        (1)                    (2)                      (3)
                                                AHEAD Age 70+           AHEAD Age 65+               SSA Age 65+
                                                Total Num of            Total Num of           Total      Num of
                                                Costs  Units            Costs  Units           Costs         Units

Current Program                                  2.78         1.04      4.28         1.60       4.25         1.46

No Asset test                                    3.11         1.19      4.79         1.83       4.75         1.67

Unearned disregard equals $75                    3.18         1.19      4.90         1.83       4.87         1.67

Guarantee raised to poverty line
 with asset test                                4.51          1.44      6.95         2.21       6.90         2.02

Guarantee raised to poverty line
 no asset test                                  5.34          1.79      8.22         2.76       8.16         2.52

Social Security based eligibility            2.92      1.10         4.49      1.70          4.46          1.55
(1) Estimates from reported 881 benefits in AHEAD correspond to the non-institutional population born
in 1923 or earlier (and their spouses)
(2) Estimates from previous column multiplied by 1.54 to include costs for those age 65-69 and in nursing homes.
(3) Costs based on published figures for total SSI benefits paid to the elderly in 1993. Participating population
determined by dividing yearly costs by average benefits. SSA figures do not include expenses for the elderly
orginally classified as disabled or blind, and remaining so.
                                   Table 7
             Impact of Alternative Eligibility Guidelines for 551
                            on the Poverty Gap

                                                            Poverty Gap
                                          Poverty    Poverty Gap Percent
                                            Rate     (in billions) Reduction

Current Program                             16.7         5.34            —



No Asset test                               16.7         5.09           4.7

Increase unearned disregard to $75          16.7         5.03           5.8

Guarantee raised to the Poverty line
 asset test remains                         16.4         4.02           24.7

Guarantee raised to the Poverty line
 no asset test                              16.3         3.37           36.9

Social Security based eligibility
 guarantee equal 90 % of maximum SS          16.6        5.45           -2.1
All calculations use calculated benefits and predicted participation rates.




                                               35
                                         Table 8
                     Means of Regression Variables for Newly Eligible
                      Under Alternative Changes in the 551 program



                                                                  Scenario
                                      Initally
                                      Eligible    (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)

Potential benefit                         195       177      21         71     144      140
Net worth                              19,028 185,278 16,346 24,043 100,010           31,342
Own home (0/1)                           0.40      0.82    0.42      0.55     0.68      0.61
Married (0/1)                            0.19      0.43    0.13      0.11     0.22      0.26
Years of schooling (male in couple)      7.17     10.43    7.23      8.03     9.43      9.42
Nonwhite (male in couple)                0.33      0.14    0.25      0.27     0.16      0.23
Poor health (either spouse)              0.30      0.17    0.29      0.28     0.20      0.17
Receives Social Security (0/1)           0.80      0.90    0.99      0.99     0.96      0.90
Number with earnings                     0.02      0.04    0.09      0.07     0.05      0.15
Earnings (if positive)                    179        62      30       188      222       597
Number of children                        3.3       2.6     2.8       3.0       2.6      3.0
Urban resident (0/1)                     0.70      0.61    0.66      0.67     0.66      0.67

Number of observations                  685       178       96     246       607       125
Scenario (1) corresponds to the elimination of the asset test.
Scenario (2) corresponds to raising the disregard for unearned income to $75.
Scenario (3) corresponds to raising guarantees to the poverty line with an asset test.
Scenario (4) corresponds to raising guarantees to the poverty line with no asset test.
Scenario (5) corresponds to using only SS income to determine eligibility.




                                             36
      -—                       -÷
                                0
      Cl)
                                   (N


      fl
      (Ogg
o     0=                       -

                               -
                                   6°
                                   or
                                   r
C)
C

                                   co
—                                        0
'I-                            -
o
C                              -
                                   0I


•0
 —
—
nI-
•—                                 6o
                                   (0N-
                                        >0

Cl)
a•.
                                         C)
0
1                                       C
                                        —

                                   6°
                   ___H
             0 LU 0 LI) C U) 0
             CO (N (N rr
               aid weg JO Pd
                               r
                   _____________ V
