NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES GROWING INEQUALITY REDUCE TAX PROGRESSIVITY?
SHOULD IT?
Joel Slemrod
Jon Bakija
Working Paper 7576
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7576
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

Prepared for the American Enterprise Institute conference on "The Role of Inequality in Tax Policy," January
21-2, 1999, Washington, D.C. We are grateful for helpful comments from Jim Poterba, Bill Gale, and other
participants in the AEI conference and at a presentation of the paper at the Georgetown Law Center. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Joel Slemrod and Jon Bakija. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Does Growing Inequality Reduce Tax Progressivity?
Should It?
Joel Slemrod and Jon Bakija
NBER Working Paper No. 7576
March 2000
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the links between two phenomena of the past two decades: striking
increase in the inequality of pre-tax incomes, and the failure of tax-and-transfer progressivity to
increase. We emphasize the causal links going from inequality to progressivity, noting that optimal
taxation theory predicts that growing inequality should increase progressivity. We discuss public
choice alternatives to the optimal progressivity framework. The paper also addresses the opposite
causal direction: that it is changes in taxation that have caused an apparent increase in inequality.
Finally, we discuss the “non-event-study” offered by the large changes in the distribution of income-with no major tax changes-- since 1995, and discuss its implications for the link between
progressivity and inequality.

Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street, Room A2120
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

Jon Bakija
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267

Does Growing Inequality Reduce Tax Progressivity? Should It?
Joel Slemrod and Jon Bakija

1.

Introduction
Over at least the past two decades the average real income of the bottom four

deciles has stagnated, while the real income of those at the top of the income distribution
has grown sharply. Income inequality has sharply increased.
During the same period, the progressivity of the tax-and-transfer system has not
increased, and has arguably declined. In the decade of the 1980’s the progressivity of the
federal tax system first declined, and then increased, so that in 1990 it was not
substantially different from what it was in 1980.1 Arguably, the top rate increases of
1990 and 1993 increased progressivity, but the expansion of capital gains tax preferences
in 1997 and, possibly after, offset the higher top rates. The generosity of transfers to the
poor has declined, too.
This paper explores the links between these two phenomena. We emphasize the
causal link going from inequality to progressivity, noting that optimal taxation theory
predicts the opposite of what has occurred -- that growing inequality should increase

1

The Congressional Budget Office has calculated a consistent series of tax distribution for about two
decades. This series uses a definition of income somewhat broader than adjusted gross income, includes all
federal taxes, and assumes that the burden of the corporate income tax falls on capital income generally.
Under these assumptions, the average tax rate on the top 1 percent of income earners fell from 34.9 percent
to 26.2 percent between 1980 and 1985, rose to 36.5 percent by 1995, and then fell slightly to 34.4. percent
by 1999. Average tax rates were changed very little between 1980 and 1999 for most of the rest of the
income distribution. The average rate on the second lowest quintile fell slightly from 15.0 percent to 13.7
percent between 1980 and 1999. In the middle quintile, the average rate edged down from 19.1 percent to
18.9 percent. In the second highest quintile, the average rate was 22.2 percent in both 1980 and 1999. The
rate for the top quintile went from 28.2 percent to 29.1 percent. The bottom quintile did experience a
substantial decline in average federal tax rates, from 7.7 percent to 4.6 percent, largely due to an increased
personal exemption and standard deduction after 1986, and expansion of the earned income tax credit.
However, this does not take into account reductions in transfers such as food stamps and welfare payments.
The combined tax and transfer system is thus probably not much different in its progressivity in 1999 than
it was in 1980. Source: Kasten, Sammartino, and Toder (1994), and Congressional Budget Office (1998c).
1

progressivity. We discuss public choice alternatives to the optimal progressivity
framework. The paper also addresses the opposite causal direction -- that it is changes in
taxation that have caused the (apparent) increase in inequality -- and also the possibility
that the two phenomena are causally unrelated, but caused by a common set of exogenous
factors.
In Section 6, we make two empirical contributions to this debate. First, we argue
that standard measures of income distribution ignore the implications of the large recent
run-up in stock prices, and attempt a crude calculation of what this impact might be. We
calculate the distribution of income taking account of the stock market runup, and
compare it to more standard measures that ignore it. In addition, the effective tax rate on
these gains is arguably quite low, reducing the progressivity of the tax system much
below what standard measures suggest. Finally, we investigate the “non-event study”
offered by the large changes in the distribution of income beginning in 1996, and discuss
its implications for the issues addressed by this paper.

2.

Should Increased Inequality Reduce Tax Progressivity?

2.1

Optimal Progressivity Theory
The modern theory of optimal progressivity accepts, for the sake of argument, the

right of government to redistribute income through the tax system (and other means),
sidesteps the ethical arguments about the value of a more equal distribution of economic
outcomes, and instead investigates the implications of various value judgments and
parameters of the economic system for the design of the tax system. Front and center
comes the fact that greater redistribution of income requires higher marginal tax rates,
which may provide disincentives to work, save, take risks, and invest in human and
2

physical capital. The essential problem, then, is to describe the inherent tradeoffs
between the distribution of income and economic performance.
Mirrlees (1971) initiated the modern literature formalizing this tradeoff. In his
formulation, the government must choose an income tax schedule to raise a given amount
of total revenue, with the goal of maximizing a utilitarian social welfare function. This
function implicitly trades off the welfare of individuals at different income levels, but
assumes that social welfare increases when any member of society (including the richest)
is better off, holding others’ welfare constant. It therefore precludes envy as the basis of
tax policy.2 Mirrlees first investigated what characterizes the optimal income tax3 for any
set of assumptions about the social welfare function, the distribution of endowments, and
the behavioral response (utility) functions. He concluded that in this general case only
very weak conditions characterize the optimal tax structure, conditions that offer little
concrete guidance in the construction of a tax schedule.
In the absence of general results, the approach has been to make specific
assumptions about the key elements of the model, and then to calculate the parameters of
the optimal income tax system. This approach is meant to suggest the characteristics of
the optimal income tax under reasonable assumptions and to investigate how these
characteristics depend on the elements of the model. Mirrlees also pioneered this
approach in his 1971 article, and concluded that the optimal tax structure is
approximately linear (that is, it has a constant marginal tax rate and an exemption level
below which tax liability is negative) and has marginal tax rates which were quite low by
then current standards, usually between 20 and 30 percent and almost always less than 40

2

Feldstein (1976) offers an excellent review of these issues.
Because a tax schedule may feature rebates rather than taxes at some levels of income, it is really the
optimal tax-and-transfer system that is at issue in the optimal progressivity literature.

3

3

percent.4 This was a stunning and unexpected result even, it seems, to Mirrlees himself,
and especially in an era where top rates of 70 percent or more were the norm.
Subsequent work investigated the sensitivity of the optimal income tax to the
parametric assumptions. Of particular interest to the topic at hand, Mirrlees presented an
example in which widening the distribution of skills, assumed equal to wage rates,
increased the optimal marginal tax rates, though he considered the dispersion of skills
necessary to imply much higher rates to be unrealistic. In his baseline numerical
simulation he set the value of σ (the standard deviation of the associated normal
distribution) in the assumed logarithmal distribution of skills to be equal to 0.39, derived
from Lydall’s (1968) figures for the distribution of income from employment for various
countries. When Mirrlees repeats the simulation with σ=1.0, a much wider dispersion of
ability, he reports (p. 207) that the optimal tax schedule
is in almost all respects very different. Tax rates are very high: a large
proportion of the population is allowed to abstain from productive labour.
The results seem to say that, in an economy with more intrinsic inequality
in economic skill, the income tax is a more important weapon of public
control than it is in an economy where the dispersion of innate skills is less.
The reason is, presumably, that the labour-discouraging effects of the tax
are more important, relative to the redistributive benefits, in the latter case.
Stern (1976), examining only flat-rate tax systems, corroborates Mirrlees finding. For his
base case featuring an elasticity of substitution between goods and leisure of 0.4, when
σ=0.39, the optimal marginal tax rate is 0.225, but it rises to 0.623 when σ=1. Cooter
and Helpman (1974) perform a variety of numerical simulations, and find that for all of

4

Note that, although the marginal tax rate is approximately constant, the average tax rate (tax liability
divided by income) increases with income due to the presence of the positive exemption level. Mirrlees
assumed that the government needed to raise 20% of national income in taxes.
4

them the optimal marginal tax rate increased as the constant-mean ability distribution
spreads out.5
The dispersion of skills is not the only determining parameter. Atkinson (1973)
explored the effect of increasing the egalitarianism of the social welfare function. Even
in the extreme case of Rawls’ (1971) “maximin” social welfare function, where social
welfare is judged solely on the basis of how well off the worst-off class of people is, the
model generated optimal tax rates not much higher than 50 percent. Stern (1976) argued
that Mirrlees' assumption about the degree of labor supply responsiveness was excessive,
and thereby overstated the costs of increasing tax progressivity. This is true because the
larger the responsiveness, the larger will be the social waste (in this case, people whose
labor productivity exceeds their valuation of leisure, but do not work) per dollar of
revenue raised. Stern showed that when what he considered to be a more reasonable
estimate of labor supply responsiveness is used (an elasticity of substitution of 0.4,
instead of 1.0), the value of the optimal tax rate exceeds 50%, approximately twice as
high as what Mirrlees found.
In sum, simple models of optimal income taxation do not necessarily point to
sharply progressive tax structures, even if the objective function puts relatively large
weight on the welfare of less well-off individuals. This conclusion does, though, depend
critically on the sensitivity of labor supply to the after-tax wage rate and the subject of
this paper, the distribution of endowments.

5

Helpman and Sadka (1978) claim that this result is not general, but offer only a trivial counter-example,
with a Rawlsian (maximim) social welfare function and a fixed lowest ability level of zero. They argue
that there should be counter-examples with more general social welfare functions, but admit they were
unable to identify such an example.
5

The last point suggests an apparent inconsistency between the theory of optimal
income taxation and actual U.S. income tax-and-transfer policy of the past two decades:
the degree of progressivity has hardly budged, may have decreased, and certainly has not
increased substantially in the face of apparently massive increases in the degree of pretax income inequality. There are many, not mutually exclusive, ways to reconcile this
inconsistency. It could be that the optimal progressivity models are not rich enough to
give accurate predictions about appropriate tax-and-transfer policy. It could be that other
changes in the U.S. economy, either unrelated to the increasing inequality or structurally
related but distinct from it, can explain the policy response. Finally, it could be that the
political system produces outcomes in a way that is unrelated, or even opposite, from
what would be predicted by the artificial construct of constrained social welfare
maximization. In what follows we consider further each of these possible explanations of
the inconsistency between the theory and practice of income tax progressivity. We begin
by looking more closely at the models of optimal progressivity.

2.2

“Richer” Models of Optimal Tax Progressivity
In the standard formulation of the optimal progressivity problem, the rich are

different from the poor in only one way: they are endowed with the ability to command a
higher market wage rate, which is presumed to reflect a higher real productivity of their
labor effort. In fact there is a variety of other reasons why some people end up affluent
and others do not, with vastly different policy implications.
The rich may have been lucky. The influential study of Jencks et al (1972)
concluded that, in addition to on-the-job competence, economic success depended

6

primarily on luck,6 but that “those who are lucky tend, of course, to impute their success
to skill, while those who are inept believe that they are merely unlucky.”7 (p. 227)
If there is income uncertainty which is uncorrelated across individuals and for
which private insurance markets do not exist, then taxation becomes a form of social
insurance; a more progressive system, by narrowing the dispersion in after-tax income,
provides more social insurance than a less progressive tax system. The optimally
progressive tax system then balances the gains from social insurance (and perhaps also
redistribution) against the incentive costs. Varian (1980) argued that, in the presence of
substantial uncertainty/luck, the optimal marginal tax rate should in all likelihood be
high, because high realized income is probably due to a good draw of the random
component of income, and taxing an event probably largely due to luck will have
minimal disincentive effects.
The rich may have different tastes, either for goods compared to leisure (working
harder), or for future consumption. In the former case, even with homogenous wage
rates, some people will have higher incomes by virtue of working more, but the higher
income is offset by less leisure time. In this case a progressive tax system is not
necessarily redistributing from the better off to the worse off, but capriciously according
to tastes. Sandmo (1993) investigates the model with heterogeneous tastes, but offers no
unambiguous conclusions about optimal progressivity.
The rich may have inherited more, either in terms of financial resources or in
terms of human capital. If inherited endowment is the principal source of inequality (so
that, inter alia, people do not differ in what they make of their endowments), from a one-

6

The authors of this study admit, though, that their conclusions do not apply to the “very rich,” defined as
those with assets exceeding $10 million (of 1972 dollars).
7
Thurow (1975) offers a similar view.
7

generation perspective there is little potential economic cost from a tax system that
redistributes the fruits of this endowment. A longer horizon is required, however,
because the incentive of parents to leave an endowment would arguably be affected by
such taxation, and so could affect the incentive of potential bequeathors to work and to
save.
The rich may have different skills than everyone else, rather than more of the
same kind of skills. This characterization certainly rings true, as the affluent tend to
supply “skilled” rather than “unskilled” labor, i.e., entrepreneurs, professionals, or
“symbolic analysts” in Reich’s (1991) terminology.
Why does this matter for optimal progressivity? For one thing, as Feldstein
(1973) first investigated, when there are two distinct types of labor the relative wage rate
will depend on the relative supply to the market of the two kinds of labor, which in turn
depends on the tax system chosen. Thus, the tax system redistributes income directly
through differential tax liabilities, but also indirectly by altering the wage structure.
Although Feldstein argued that this did not substantially alter optimal progressivity, Allen
(1982) disagreed, arguing that it could be important enough that an increase in the
statutory progressivity of an income tax system could actually make members of the
lower-ability, lower-income group worse off, because it reduces their before-tax wage
rate.
But what if the affluent offer to the economy a particularly essential ingredient?
Gilder (1990, p. 245) certainly thinks so, arguing that “a successful economy depends on
the proliferation of the rich, on creating a large class of risk-taking men [sic] who are
willing to shun the easy channels of a comfortable life in order to create new
enterprise…” If entrepreneurial talent is priced appropriately by the market, then the
8

standard optimal progressivity framework still applies: the extent that taxes discourage
its supply is a social cost. But there may be more to it than this if there are important
spillovers of information from entrepreneurial activity whose social value cannot be
captured by the entrepreneurs themselves. In economics jargon, there are positive
externalities of innovation. These kinds of externalities are the building blocks of many
“new growth” theories, propounded by Romer (1990) among others, who argue that
policy can have persistent effects on economic growth rates, not just on the level of
economic performance. Gilder appears to believe this, asserting that “most successful
entrepreneurs contribute far more to society than they ever recover, and most of them win
no riches at all” (p. 245).
To the extent that the activities of the affluent have positive externalities because
of their entrepreneurial nature, this argues for lower taxation at the top than otherwise.
But the argument is not crystal clear. Although it is true that, compared to the overall
population, a larger fraction of the rich classify themselves as professional or managerial
(48.5% versus 27% in 1982, according to Slemrod, 1994), it is also true that a larger than
average fraction (12% versus 1%) are lawyers and accountants, professions that some
have argued are detrimental to economic growth, because they are concerned with rentseeking rather than income creation. Magee, Brock, and Young (1989) present evidence
that countries with more lawyers grow more slowly.

2.4

The Reason Behind Increased Inequality and Why it Matters for Optimal
Progressivity
This discussion suggests that the cause of the increased inequality matters in

determining the appropriate policy response. Alas, no one knows for sure why the
dispersion of pre-tax incomes has surged. Changing inheritance patterns or tastes are
9

unlikely to be important and, as we discuss in Section 4, the weight of the evidence
suggests that labor supply changes are not a major factor, either.
That leaves a change in the relative return to skills and luck as the two relevant
factors to consider. The two are not necessarily mutually exclusive factors. After all, the
widening dispersion of the return to skills -- often summarized as the return to education
-- was not completely anticipated, and so to some extent the extraordinary recent earnings
of those endowed with the right skill type is just a good draw. If so, the taxation of these
earnings will have a relatively small efficiency effect. Of course, looking forward any
such tax will have an (inefficient) impact on skill acquisition decisions. In any event, a
progressive tax system does provide some degree of social insurance against uncertainty
in the distribution of the return to skill, whether caused by unpredictable technological
advances or developments in the global economy. We return to this issue in Section 5,
when we discuss the implications of globalization.

3.

Does Increased Inequality Reduce Progressivity? The Public Choice Perspective
Up to this point we have addressed the appropriate, or optimal, degree of

progressivity, given a specified social objective function and a characterization of how
the economy works. In this section we put aside this normative question and focus on a
public choice question: given the political institutions and social choice mechanisms in
the U.S., does an increase in inequality trigger the kinds of policy changes that would
increase progressivity?
According to the standard theory of optimal progressivity, a more disperse wage
distribution should increase the amount of redistribution because it increases the weight
placed on the equity gain from redistribution relative to the efficiency losses. This is also
10

the prediction of the "rational" (public choice) theory of the size of government proposed
by Meltzer and Richard (1981), in which increased inequality increases mean income
relative to the income of the decisive voter, and thus makes redistribution more attractive
to him or her. Persson and Tabellini (1994) and Alesina and Rodrik (1994) incorporate
versions of this result in constructing models of why greater pre-tax-and-transfer
inequality is bad for economic growth.
Peltzman (1980), stimulated by his observation that in practice greater inequality
seemed to lead to less redistribution, constructed a model in which the total support for
redistribution increases if income differences among beneficiaries narrow. Because
inequality tends to increase both within-group and between-group inequality, its net
effect on redistribution is indeterminate. Kristov, Lindert, McClelland (1992) develop a
pressure-group model of individuals with "social affinity" (i.e., in which people care
more about the well-being of people like themselves), which predicts that progressive
redistribution is fostered by greater proximity and inter-mobility between the middle and
poorest income ranks, and reduced by greater proximity and inter-mobility between the
middle and top income ranks. They also suggest that economic growth affects the
political will to provide income support for the poorest: depressions awake sympathy for
persons with low income and reinforce the return that poverty arises because of bad luck.
Lindert (1996) explains this “Robin Hood paradox” as occurring because greater
inequality between lower and middle-income classes means less commonality of identity,
weakening the inclination of middle-class voters to redistribute toward lower-income
families.
In sum, models of public choice do not speak with one voice as to how policy will
actually respond to an increased dispersion of earnings. Empirical investigation has not
11

yet succeeded in identifying which set of conceptual models best captures the key
features of the U.S. political system with regard to fiscal progressivity.

4.

Did Tax Changes Cause the Increased Inequality?
Maybe it works the other way around. Maybe it is changes in the tax system

which have driven the increase in inequality. The reduced tax rates on high-income
families may have induced them to expend more effort, which increases measured
incomes (as opposed to income net of the value of foregone leisure). The reduced tax
rates may also have caused a whole host of other behavioral responses, ranging from
substitution away from tax-preferred activities such as charitable contributions,
investment in tax-exempt bonds, and receiving compensation as fringe benefits to less
investment in tax avoidance strategies, to less tax evasion. The labor supply response to
increased progressivity would show up as increased inequality of labor income, and all of
the responses would show up as increased inequality of taxable incomes.
There is now a sizable empirical literature trying to measure the magnitude of
these responses. With some exceptions, the profession has settled on a value for the
compensated labor supply elasticity close to zero for prime-age males, although for
married women the responsiveness of labor force participation appears to be significant.
Overall, though, the compensated elasticity of labor appears to be fairly small. In models
with only a labor-leisure choice, this implies that the efficiency cost of income taxation is
bound to be low, as well.
There is intriguing evidence that the response to taxes of total reported income
may not be small, at least for high-income families. Lindsey (1987) was one of the first
to point out that the 1981 top rate cut in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, or
12

ERTA, from 70% to 50% coincided with a very large increase in the share of income
reported to the IRS by the top 1% of the income distribution. He argues that the tax cut
was a principal cause of this increase, as it reduced the penalty for receiving (or, to be
precise, reporting) taxable income, and estimates the elasticity of taxable income with
respect to the net-of-tax share to be between 1.6 and 1.8.
Feenberg and Poterba (1993) use tax return data to calculate a time series of
inequality measures that focuses on high-income households. Using interpolations of
published SOI aggregated data, they calculate the share of adjusted gross income (AGI)
and several components of AGI that were received by the top 0.5% of households
arranged by income. After being approximately flat at about 6.0% from 1970 to 1981, it
begins in 1982 to increase continuously to 7.7% in 1985, then jumps sharply in 1986 to
9.2%. There is a slight increase in 1987 to 9.5%, then another sharp increase in 1988 to
12.1%.
Feenberg and Poterba argue that this pattern is consistent with a behavioral
response to the reductions over this period in the tax rate on high-income families. They
also report that among the top income earners, the largest increase in share could be
attributed to the top one-fifth of one percent. This fact, they assert, “casts doubt on the
view that the factors responsible for the increase in reported incomes among high-income
taxpayers, especially in the 1986-1988 period, are the same factors that were responsible
for the widening of the wage distribution over a longer time period.” (p. 161) Rather,
they argue, “it reflect[s] other factors including a tax-induced change in the incentives
that high-income households face for reporting taxable income.” (p. 170).
It is well known that there are serious problems with comparing cross-sectional
slices of income distributions, because it entails comparing different groups of
13

households across years. The potential hazards of inferring behavioral response from
comparing the behavior of two distinct groups of taxpayers can be mitigated by analyzing
longitudinal, or panel, data on an unchanging set of taxpayers. Thus, analysis of panel
data characterized the next wave of investigations of the taxable income elasticity.
Feldstein (1995a) investigates the high-income response to the Tax Reform Act of
1986 (TRA86) using tax return panel data that follows the same set of taxpayers from
1979 to 1988. Feldstein analyzes married couples for whom both 1985 and 1988 tax
returns were available. He groups taxpayers by their 1985 marginal tax rate, calculates
group means for taxable income and the net-of-tax rate for each group, and then
calculates the percentage change in the mean between the years, using the difference in
the difference of these percentages to obtain elasticities. After making several
adjustments to the data, he concludes that the 1985-1988 percentage increase in various
measures of income (particularly taxable income excluding capital gains) was much
higher, compared with the rest of the population, for those high-income groups whose
marginal tax rate was reduced the most. Based on this finding, he estimates that the
elasticity of taxable income with respect to the net-of-tax rate is very high, between 1 and
3 in alternative specifications. To put this into perspective, an elasticity greater than
(1 − t )
, where t is the tax rate, will produce a Laffer-type inverse revenue response; thus,
t
the upper-end range of Feldstein’s estimates suggests the possibility that tax increases
would decrease revenue collected.
Unfortunately, Feldstein’s data set contained only a very small number of highincome observations; for example, the top income class on which Feldstein focuses most
of his attention (non-elderly couples in the 49 to 50 percent tax brackets in 1985) contains
only 57 observations. Because of the wide variation among this group in financial
14

situation and in income changes over time, generalizing from such a small sample is
problematic.
Auten and Carroll (1998) make use of a much larger longitudinal data set,
consisting of 14,102 tax returns for the same set of taxpayers for 1985 and 1989. The
sample observations are stratified, so that high-income taxpayers are over-sampled,
resulting in 4,387 taxpayers in the 49% or 50% tax rate bracket in 1985. Rather than rely
on group means, they employ a multivariate regression approach, regressing the change
in AGI between 1985 and 1989 against the change in marginal tax rate and a set of
demographic variables. The regression approach allows them to control for occupation
as a proxy for demand-side, non-tax factors that affected the change in compensation
over this period. They conclude that changes in tax rates appear to be an important
determinant of the income growth of the late 1980’s, although the results are somewhat
sensitive to the choice of sample and weighting. Their central estimate of the net-of-tax
price elasticity is 0.6.
Moffitt and Wilhelm (1998) also investigate behavioral response to TRA86, but
they make use of panel data from the 1983 and 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances.
Because of data limitations, they study an income concept closer to AGI than to taxable
income. They replicate the sizable tax elasticities for AGI found by Feldstein, and
conclude that the elasticities arise from the behavior of the extreme upper tail of the
income distribution.
All of the studies discussed so far focused on the effect of ERTA or TRA86 on
taxpayer behavior. For reasons elaborated on below, study of tax changes which
increased tax rates would be especially helpful. Carroll (1998a) uses a panel of taxpayers
spanning the tax increases of the 1990 and 1993 Acts to consider to what extent taxpayers
15

change their reported incomes in response to changes in tax rates. The tax rate response
is identified by comparing the change of higher income taxpayers to those of moderate
income taxpayers in the face of the change in the relative taxation of these two groups,
controlling for many non-tax factors such as the taxpayer’s age, occupation, and industry.
Carroll concludes that the taxable income price elasticity is approximately 0.4, smaller
than the earlier studies of the tax reductions in the 1980’s, but nevertheless a response
that is positive and significantly different from zero.
There are a number of methodological problems with measuring and interpreting
taxable income elasticities, which are discussed at length in Slemrod (1998a). A key
issue is the difficulty of controlling for underlying trends in income inequality that are
unrelated to the tax changes. In both ERTA and TRA86 the largest rate cuts applied to
the highest tax brackets, so that a positive taxable income elasticity implied larger
increases in reported taxable income among affluent Americans, and thus an increase in
the apparent inequality of income. One obvious methodological problem is to separate
out the influence of the tax changes from non-tax factors affecting the steadily increasing
dispersion of (taxable) income. A voluminous literature (much of it summarized in Levy
and Murnane (1992)) has documented an increase in inequality in the U.S.. Karoly
(1994) presents Census Bureau data showing that inequality among families, after
reaching a post-war low in 1967-68, began to increase during the 1970s and continued to
rise through the 1980s. Although the trend toward greater inequality began in the late
1960s, about two-thirds of the increase in the Gini coefficient between 1968 and 1989
occurred between 1980 and 1989. Although these basic facts are now widely
acknowledged, the origin of the increase in inequality remains highly controversial. The
two leading explanations, which are not mutually exclusive, are technological change that
16

increased the relative return to skilled labor, and increased globalization of the U.S.
economy, which increased the effective relative supply of unskilled labor and thereby
lowered its relative return.
For the most part, what we know about this phenomenon comes from data sets
that are either top-coded or include few of the highest-income families, so that the
evidence is generally about the growing percentage differential in the earnings of people
at, say, the tenth percentile compared to the ninetieth percentile. However, tax return
data is neither top-coded and in fact oversamples high-income people, and it suggests a
similar trend since 1970. As discussed earlier, Feenberg and Poterba (1993) document
that the share of income reported by the top 0.5% of the population increased slowly but
steadily beginning in 1970, accelerated around 1980, and shot up in 1986. They contend
that this trend is consistent with the pattern of declining effective tax rates on affluent
Americans that began in 1970 and picked up steam with the rate cuts of 1981 and 1986.
Indeed, the top individual marginal tax rate has been monotonically declining since the
early 1960s, so there is an a priori case that tax changes are a factor in the growing
inequality.
Slemrod (1996) attempts to separate out the tax and non-tax causes of inequality
by performing some time-series regression analyses of the Feenberg and Poterba highincome shares for 1954 to 1990, with the data for the post-1986 years adjusted to
correspond to a pre-TRA86 definition. (This adjustment reduces the measured increase
in the shares after 1986, but the increase remains substantial.) Included as explanatory
variables are the contemporaneous, lagged, and leading tax rate measures, a measure of
th

th

earning inequality between the 90 and 10 percentiles, and some macroeconomic
variables that might differentially influence incomes at different percentiles. Based on
17

the evidence up to 1985, the “demand-side,” earnings inequality variable is the dominant
explanation. However, the regression using data up to 1990 assigns almost all the
increase in the high-income share of AGI to be associated with the decline in the top tax
rate on wage income. These findings imply one of two things: (i) that in the mid-1980s
there was a break in the relationship between the non-tax factors affected the top 0.5% of
the population and the factors affecting earnings dispersion more generally, or (ii) that the
increase in the taxable income of the high-income families was primarily tax-driven. I
suspect that the second explanation applies, although Fullerton (1996) argues that,
because TRA86 involved extensive tax definition as well as rate changes, it is difficult to
confidently conclude that the change in rates was the critical factor.
Another post-TRA86 empirical strategy was to pray for tax increases on the rich,
in the hope that whatever biases were creeping into estimates of the taxable income
elasticity based on the 1981 and 1986 tax cut experience would be offset in analyses of
tax increases. Of course, these prayers were answered in the tax increases of 1990 and
1993, and Carroll (1998a) has emphasized the possibility that his lower estimates of the
taxable income elasticity are at least partly due to this offsetting bias.
Another empirical strategy used by both Auten and Carroll (1998) and Carroll
(1998a) is to include variables that measure the non-tax factors that might have
differentially affected income growth over the period spanning the tax change. Dummy
variables for Census regions are an uncontroversial example. More problematic is the
use of dummy variables for occupation. The idea is that a differing occupational mix
may explain why a given income group may have experienced a different percentage
change in taxable income. As Auten and Carroll discuss, this is a sensible strategy to the
extent that the dummy variables account for relative increases in labor productivity due to
18

technological advances or higher demand due to more global integration. However, to
the extent that they reflect differences in the flexibility to alter work schedules or
compensation arrangements in response to tax rate changes (i.e., different elasticities),
inclusion of these variables may bias downward the estimated elasticity. This problem
could be avoided by replacing the occupational dummies with independent estimates of
wage rate growth for the taxpayer’s occupational category; this would restrict the
explanatory power of occupation to demand-side factors.
Goolsbee (1998) notes that the analyses of both the 1981 and 1986 tax cuts look
across samples where the stock market increased dramatically, corporate profits rose and
GDP growth increased, and that these factors are associated with relative increases in the
compensation of top executives, holding tax influences constant.
In sum, there is now a considerable body of evidence which supports the notion
that the changes in the pattern of marginal tax rates did induce behavioral responses
which would make the distribution of reported taxable incomes more unequal. To the
extent that this is true, the increased inequality of taxable incomes overstates the growth
in inequality of welfare, because much of it is a substitution away from untaxed and
generally unmeasured welfare-producing activities by those who formerly had much
higher marginal tax rates. However, the extent of these induced behavioral responses
remains controversial. Especially in light of new developments discussed in Section 6.2,
it is highly unlikely that tax changes are responsible for all or most of the observed
increased inequality of income.

19

5. Changing Third Factors
The correlation between changing inequality and progressivity might, of course,
be purely coincidental.8 That assertion is unproveable. A more interesting (and
falsifiable) possibility is that both trends are caused by the same third factor. An
intriguing candidate for this factor is the increasing globalization of national economies.
That globalization is an important cause of the increased inequality in the U.S. and other
industrialized countries is taken quite seriously, although it is highly controversial; we
have nothing to add to this debate. Instead, we are interested in its implications. Suppose
that globalization is at least partly responsible for the growth in inequality: can it also
explain the flight from progressivity?
For this question, the prediction of optimal taxation models is fairly clear: absent
the ability of national or supernational governments to tax individuals on a worldwide
basis, openness increases the cost of government and of progressivity, because it
increases the elasticity of taxed activities. In particular, capital has more alternatives than
to locate within a country's own borders, people have more opportunities to purchase
goods outside their country of residence, and some firms and groups of people have
increasing flexibility about what their country of residence is. The higher the elasticity of
taxed activities, the greater is the social cost per dollar raised.
If countries react to the increasing cost of government that globalization causes,
then the size of government and the extent of progressivity should be shrinking. Thus, in
principle, globalization could explain both the trend increase in inequality and the decline

8

For example, the declining progressivity might simply be due to declining aversion to inequality, at least
as expressed through the political system.
20

in progressivity. The problem is that this line of reasoning flies in the face of empirical
studies that claim that, across countries and across time within countries, greater
openness has led to larger, not smaller, governments. This relationship was first
discovered by Cameron (1978), who found that openness, measured as exports and
imports of goods and services as a percent of GDP in 1960, was the best single predictor
of the growth of public revenues relative to output from 1960 to 1970 for 18 OECD
nations. Rodrik (1997) has updated this finding, with a 100-plus country sample,
establishing a strong and robust association between an economy’s exposure to trade and
the size of its government in both cross-sectional and longitudinal settings.9 This had
been predicted by Myrdal (1960, p. 702), who argued that “all states have felt compelled
to undertake new radical intervention” in response to more chaotic economic relations
following openness, and Lindbeck (1995, p. 56), who observed that overt social insurance
and tax systems represent built-in stabilizers that maintain full employment in spite of the
uncertainties of demand inherent in an open economy.
Thus, it may be that globalization increases both the cost and the benefits of (at
least some kinds of) government: both the supply and demand curves shift upwards.
Interpreting progressivity as one aspect of government, this implies that the change in
progressivity is indeterminate, but the price of progressivity certainly increases. Some of
this cost increase will occur because tax revenues are more difficult to raise in a world of
mobile tax bases, but some of it will be because citizens are more willing to tolerate a
costly social insurance in a world that is vulnerable to economic forces generating
uncertainty and inequality. The consequence for progressivity is thus not entirely clear.

9

Although note that Lindert (1996) argues that openness fails to explain patterns of social spending for
OECD countries from 1960 to 1981.
21

The leading alternative to globalization as an explanation for growing inequality
is skill-biased technological change. What is its impact on taxation? On the tax
collection side, it has facilitated computer checks of tax returns against information
reports provided to the IRS by employers, banks, and other financial institutions,
lowering the cost of collecting revenue in an equitable way. On the other hand, the
growth of electronic commerce and diffusion of sophisticated financial instruments has
also undoubtedly facilitated certain kinds of tax avoidance. In principle, technological
change could be a third factor affecting both inequality and progressivity, but we are a
long way from having any quantitative understanding of this relationship.

6.

Two Recent Developments
Two recent developments shed some fascinating new light on the growth in

inequality and its relationship to the tax system.

6.1

The Impact of the Stock Market Runup on Inequality and Progressivity
Between January 1, 1995 and December 31, 1997, broad-based indices of the

stock market more than doubled. Accounting for this phenomenon certainly increases the
measured inequality of income, in particular the share of total income received by the top,
say, 1% of families ranked by income. Depending on the incidence assumptions one
makes, it can also sharply decrease the measured degree of tax progressivity.
The impact of this extraordinary burst of accrued income is illustrated in Table 1,
which shows the results of three alternative methodologies for computing the distribution
of income. All three are based on the 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances, which
includes detailed income and wealth information for 4,299 households. The sample is
22

stratified, with a heavy over-sampling of high-income and high-wealth households. A
non-response-adjusted weight provided by the SCF is used to make the results nationally
representative.10
Three different definitions of income are used to illustrate the distribution of
income in the U.S, each corresponding to an alternative assumption about the income
derived from the ownership of corporate equities. The first definition, what we call "selfreported income," is the answer to: "how much was the total income you received in
1994 from all sources, before taxes and other deductions were made?" This is generally
equal to the sum of answers to questions about the various components of income, which
treat capital income on a nominal, realization basis. For instance, the survey asks about
capital gains from sales of assets such as stocks and real estate, but does not ask about
accrued capital gains on assets that were not sold during the year.
We also construct two other income definitions to approximate an accrual-based
measure of income, under two different assumptions about the rate of return to corporate
equity. For each definition we replace reported realized nominal capital income (except
for closely-held business income) with imputed accrued capital income. The capital
income imputations are derived by applying uniform real rates of return to publiclytraded corporate equities and non-business net worth. All other income items are
included as reported. These include wages and salaries; income from a closely-held
professional practice, business, or farm; pension income; social security income;
unemployment insurance benefits; public assistance such as AFDC, food stamps, and
SSI; and other miscellaneous forms of income such as gains from gambling. Reported

10

In the case of missing or incomplete answers to certain questions, SCF imputes answers based on other
information in the survey. Several different "replicates" of the data are included in the SCF, each
representing a different set of imputations. We use the first replicate.
23

dividends, realized capital gains, interest income, and rent, trust, royalty income are all
excluded from income, and replaced with imputed measures of capital income. No
attempt is made to replace reported income from closely-held businesses with an imputed
measure based on accrued capital income, because closely-held business income cannot
be reliably divided into returns to labor and capital in the data. The real rate of return to
non-business net worth is assumed to be 3 percent, which is the rate used by the Treasury
Department's Office of Tax Analysis for interest-bearing assets and debts in its
distributional tables (Cilke et al,1994, pp. 3-26).
For our first alternative definition, the real rate of return to publicly-traded
corporate equities is assumed to be 6.4 percent, which is intended to approximate the rate
of return implied by corporate earnings in 1995. The 6.4% figure was calculated by
dividing the National Income and Product Accounts measure of corporate profits after
inventory valuation, capital consumption adjustment, and profits taxes for 1995, $371.8
billion (August 1998 Survey of Current Business Table 1.16), by total corporate equity
holdings in the 1995 SCF, $5.85 trillion. The $5.85 trillion denominator includes all Cand S-corporation equity held either directly or through IRA, Keogh, or defined
contribution pension accounts. For the second alternative definition, we use a rate of
return to publicly-traded corporate equities of 28 percent. This is the annualized total real
rate of return on the S&P 500 index between December 1994 and December 1997, with
monthly reinvestment of dividends (Economic Report of the President, 1996, 1997, and
1998). The CPI-U is used to deflate the total S&P 500 return to a real rate of return. Our
measure of publicly-traded corporate equities includes both equities held directly, and

24

those held in IRA, Keogh, and defined-contribution pension accounts (such as 401(k)s).11
Table A-1 in the appendix shows the distribution of net worth and equity holdings, by the
alternative definitions of income.
Table 1 shows the results of this exercise. Comparing the columns labeled "selfreported income" with those labeled "income definition (1)" reveals that replacing
realized corporate-source income with a constant 6.4 percent accrual rate of return does
not materially affect the estimated distribution of income. Also shown for comparison
purposes is the income distribution under the Treasury Department's "family economic
income" concept, which follows a similar approach to our "income definition (1)," but
makes more detailed imputations using a variety data sources, including tax return data.
The distribution of income in the Treasury calculations is also quite similar to that found
in the SCF under either "self-reported" income or "income definition (1)." However, as
the columns labeled "income definition (2)" indicate, using the actual 1995-7 rate of
return to publicly-traded equities of 28 percent causes dramatic changes. Relative to
"income definition (1)", the share of income received by the top 1% of the weighted
sample goes from 14.3% to 17.8%, an increase of almost one-fourth; the share of the 9599th percentile group increases by about one-sixth, from 14.6% to 17.0%. Conversely,
when the actual accrual rate of return is imputed to be 28%, the share of the bottom

11

For the retirement accounts, the SCF does not provide exact information on the share of the account held
in each type of asset, but does ask what combinations of assets are held in the accounts. Respondents who
reported investing their IRA and Keogh accounts “mostly in stocks or mutual funds” are assumed to keep
100% of their IRA or Keogh assets in corporate equities. Those who report investing their IRA or Keoghs
in a combination of stocks and bonds, a combination of stocks and interest-bearing accounts, or in a
brokerage or cash management account, are assumed to keep 50% of their IRA or Keogh assets in equities.
Those who report a combination of stocks, bonds, and interest-bearing accounts are assumed to keep 33%
of their IRA or Keogh assets in equities. For defined contribution accounts, respondents who report that
the account is “mostly or all stock” are assumed to have 100% of their defined contribution pension assets
in equities. Those who report keeping a “split between stock and interest earning assets” are assumed to
have 50% of their defined contribution assets in equities. Only very limited information on defined benefit
pension plans is available in the 1995 SCF, so these plans are excluded from all measures of net worth and
equity holdings.
25

quintile falls from 2.7% to 2.2%, and that of the second lowest quintile declines from
7.9% to 6.7%.
We do not mean to imply that the rate of accrued capital gain during this period is
likely to persist, making the more dispersed income distribution a steady state. But
neither should it be ignored, as it represents a very large amount of income that is, in
spite of the recent diffusion of stock ownership, highly skewed. Ranked by income
definition (2), households in the top percentile of the income distribution owned $1.5
million in publicly-traded corporate equities, on average, in 1995. At an annual real rate
of return of 28 percent, these households received an extra $1.2 million in income, on
average, over the course of three years due to the stock market boom.12
Depending on what tax burden one attributes to the income accrued by
shareholders from 1995 to 1997, the runup also may have had a substantial impact on the
progressivity of the tax system. If one attributes to this income only an accrualequivalent capital gains tax, arguably only about 5% once one accounts for the benefit of
deferral and the carryover of basis at death, the effective progressivity is much lower than
official estimates would suggest.
If, though, the stock market runup is due to an increased expected present value of
corporate earnings, then this would normally be accompanied by a concomitant increase
in corporate tax payments, so that the effective tax rate on this income is the average
corporate tax rate plus any additional tax due at the individual level on dividends and
capital gains. If one attributes this tax in proportion to either the owners of corporate

12

Appendix Table A.1 shows equity holdings and net worth by income class. The $1.2 million figure is
calculated as ((1 + (.28 - .064))3 x (1.5 million)) - 1.5 million.
26

equity or, as is standard in incidence analysis, to the owners of all wealth, then the
estimated progressivity would not be substantially altered.
6.2

The "Taxpayer Didn't Notice" Act of 1995, and the 1996 and 1997 Surge in
Inequality: A Non-Event Study
Most of the recent evidence concerning how taxes affect taxpayer choices as

reflected in reported taxable income comes from analyses of the 1981, 1986, 1990, and
1993 tax changes. The first two lowered the top marginal tax rate, and the latter two
increased it. Because one of the most difficult empirical tasks is to separate out the effect
of the tax changes from non-tax-related trends in income inequality, the fact that the latter
two tax changes increased rather than decreased rates is helpful.
It is also insightful to analyze trends in income inequality over periods when there
is no important tax change. One fascinating period began in 1996, immediately after the
passage of an exceptionally uneventful tax bill of 1995, which among things, did not
change the tax rate structure. This non-event was soon followed by some striking
developments.
The first sign that something extraordinary was happening was the unexpected
surge in federal individual income tax revenues. Individual income tax receipts for fiscal
year 1997 turned out to be $61 billion, or about 9%, higher than the Congressional
Budget Office had estimated in January of 1997.13 About half of this increase was due to
capital gains realizations. Roughly $20 billion was due to an unexpectedly high level of
capital gains reported on returns for tax year 1996. Another $14 billion represented
unexpectedly high estimated tax payments for 1997, much of which also probably was
due to capital gains. Total capital gains realizations increased by 45% between 1995 and

13

This episode is described in Congressional Budget Office (1998a).
27

1996, and preliminary estimates suggested another 45% increase in 1997.
Although the higher 1997 estimated tax payments may have partly reflected a response to
the capital gains rate cut implemented on May 7, 1997, the 1996 realizations would have
been expected to be lower due to anticipation of the following year's rate cut. Another
factor was the increasing share of income reported by higher-income, and therefore
higher marginal tax rate, individuals. The CBO calculates that the effective income tax
rate (total income taxes paid divided by total adjusted gross income) increased from
13.7% to 14.0% from 1994 to 1995, and to 14.6% in 1996. Taxpayers with income of
$200,000 or more (in 1996 dollars) accounted for 17% of total AGI in 1996, up from
16% in 1995 and 14% in 1994. In a July, 1998 report, the CBO (1998b) discusses that
actual revenues for 1998 were also running higher than anticipated, but did not yet have
enough information to discuss what its sources were.
In its January, 1998 report the CBO speculated that another component of the
surge of incomes at the top is bonuses and stock options. Rapid growth in both stock
prices and grants of employee stock options have caused the taxable value of exercised
options to increase dramatically. The CBO refers to data which suggest that the taxable
value of exercised options doubled in 1995, doubled again in 1996, and continued to
grow rapidly in 1997.
Carroll (1998b) documents that the share of total income reported by taxpayers
with over $200,000 (in 1989 dollars) in total income jumped from 14.0% in 1995 to
16.0% in 1996. Even more strikingly, the share received by those with over $1 million
jumped from 5.1% to 6.4%, or by more than one quarter.
Table 2 gives a seven-year perspective on the recent surge in incomes at the top.
In this table the income figures are based on a concept of modified adjusted income,
28

which excludes realized capital gains. It shows that the share of total income received by
those returns with over $200,00 (1991 dollars) of income increased from 11.47% to
14.32%, or over one-fourth, between 1994 and 1997. Even more striking, the share
received by those with income over $1 million increased from 3.37% to 4.92%, or nearly
50%! Some of this increase is certainly due to a larger number of returns in this category,
but certainly not all.
The increase between 1994 and 1997 in the share of income received by highincome taxpayers is of at least the same order of magnitude as the increase between 1985
and 1988 which convinced nearly all observers, including Slemrod (1996), that, because
this surge could not be explained by non-tax factors, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 must
have been a major influence. It is less convincing to ascribe such a role for the Taxpayer
Didn't Notice Act of 1995, or any tax change passed in 1994.
The sources of income growth between 1995 and 1996 are explored in greater
detail in Table 3 (detailed data on 1997 is not yet publicly available). Here, taxpayers are
ranked by Adjusted Gross Income (AGI), which includes capital gains. In just one year,
the number of returns with incomes over $1 million increased by 27.5 percent, while AGI
going to millionaires increased by 38.1 percent. Although in this case, capital gains was
the fastest-growing source of income (71.2 percent) for this group, there was also
tremendous one-year growth in all other forms of income, such as a 29.9 percent increase
in wages and salaries. By contrast, there was only a 1.6 percent increase in the total
number of returns for people at all income levels, and a 5.1 percent increase in overall
AGI.
Detail on higher slices of the income distribution is not yet available for the U.S.
for these years, but some fascinating information from state income tax returns is
29

obtainable. Table 4 comes from 1995 and 1996 New Jersey income tax returns. While
overall growth in New Jersey gross income was 7.6%, it was double-digit for all annual
income classes over $250,000, and was nearly 50% for those families fortunate enough to
have over $3 million in gross income! To be sure, much of the growth in the income of
the highest class can be traced to the fact that the number of tax returns increased by over
40%, from 689 to 987, but the increase in the size of this group itself is a remarkable
phenomenon.14
The source of the large gains at the top of the income distribution is also of
interest. The total gross income increase of returns over $250,000 was $5.93 billion. Of
that, almost none was in the form of interest and dividends. A total of 46.0% was
employee compensation, 24.9% was capital gain, 9.5% was in partnership income, and
11.1% was in S corporation income.
7.

Conclusions
"There's something happenin' here.
What it is ain't exactly clear."
Stephen Stills
Our analysis of Section 6 suggests an extraordinary increase in the income, both

realized and unrealized, of the already affluent beginning around 1996. What new light
does this development shed on the chicken-and-egg ruminations of the first part of this
essay?
First of all, it casts some doubt on the hypothesis that the top tax rate cuts of 1981
and 1986 were the key factor in generating the increases in measured inequality of the

14

The income groups are defined in nominal dollars, but there was little inflation in this period.
30

last two decades. A decade passed between 1986 and 1996, with two top tax rate
increase episodes in between, so it is difficult to link the recent surge in incomes at the
top to tax policy. If the 1996 surge is not tax-related, it makes more plausible the case
that the surge of 1986, of a similarly large magnitude, was not primarily tax-driven.
More importantly, the recent evidence suggests that the increase in inequality that
began in the 1980's has not abated. If anything, the rate of increase dramatically
accelerated in the mid-1990s. Standard models suggest that the appropriate response to
this development is an increase in the progressivity of the tax-and-transfer system.
Models of public choice suggest that this may not happen.
In closing we note that during the preparation of this paper there were times in
1998 when we worried that our analysis of the stock market runup would seem
anachronistic, or even quaint, by the time of this conference. As of this writing (in early
January, 1999), this worry has proven unfounded. But the uncertainty in the economic
situation, and in particular the severe recessions in several Asian countries, remind us that
the demand for progressivity as social insurance has not abated, and may be increasing.

31

Table 1
The Distribution of Income Under Alternative Definitions of Income
Mean income (in $thousands)
SCF,
SCF,
SCF,
SelfIncome
Income
reported definition definition
income
(1)
(2)

Treasury
Family
Economic
Income

Share of total income (%)
SCF,
SCF,
SCF,
SelfIncome
Income
reported definition definition
income
(1)
(2)

Income rank
Top 1 %
95-99th %
90-94%
80-89%

627.7
159.7
93.3
68.2

695.3
196.6
107.3
75.5

1013.8
242.5
127.3
83.4

14.3
13.9
10.7
16.0

14.3
14.6
10.7
15.6

14.2
16.0
10.9
15.4

17.8
17.0
11.2
14.7

Top quintile
60-79%
40-60%
20-39%
Bottom quintile

120.8
45.4
29.6
17.2
5.9

138.7
50.1
31.4
18.6
6.2

172.7
53.2
32.7
19.2
6.4

54.9
21.5
13.3
7.8
2.9

55.2
20.7
13.5
7.9
2.7

56.5
20.4
12.8
7.6
2.5

60.7
18.7
11.5
6.7
2.2

43.8

49.1

56.9

100

100

100

100

Overall

Source: 1995 Survey of Consumer Finances, unpublished distributional tables provided
by the Treasury Department's Office of Tax Analysis for 1996, and authors' calculations.
Notes:
Households are re-sorted for each income definition.
Income definitions:
"Family economic income" is the income concept used by the Treasury Department in
its distributional tables. It is based on the Haig-Simons definition of income, and
imputes accrued capital income to tax return and Census data using a variety of data
sources.
"Self-reported income" is the response to the SCF question on income,
which counts income on a realization basis.
(1) Replaces reported capital income with a 6.4% real return to publicly-traded
corporate equities, and a 3% real return to net worth other than business equity,
but includes closely-held business income as reported.
(2) is the same as (1) but assumes a 28% real return to publicly-traded corporate
equities.

Table 2
Distribution of Modified Adjusted Gross Income, 1991-1997
Totals
Modified AGI
($000)
<0
0-5
5-10
10-20
20-30
30-50
50-75
75-100
100-200
200-300
300-500
500-1,000
Over 1,000
Total
Over 200

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-61,597
40,560
114,245
373,865
442,024
815,366
669,210
301,365
324,790
99,534
87,334
73,656
103,138

-60,698
40,444
117,865
382,839
445,290
837,520
686,697
314,214
341,398
102,240
100,210
85,497
139,973

-62,524
42,171
124,042
400,343
463,651
853,684
702,786
316,007
353,776
109.707
95,461
80,640
121,234

-63,942
44.462
125,589
418,819
481,937
886,855
732,854
340,703
374,579
118,529
103,851
83,565
127,086

-65,906
46,898
130,826
444,590
494,658
928,310
757,710
365,098
420,201
129,673
118,588
97,934
153,162

-65,446
49,748
134,879
460,068
520,349
960,354
793,323
390,341
463,083
145,659
131,768
111,271
183,772

-49,630
50,345
140,298
478,709
551,227
1,012,945
840,676
427,707
506,622
160,638
144,908
128,571
227,327

3,383,490

3,533,489

3,600,978

3,774,887

4,021,742

4,279,169

4,620,343

363,662

427,920

407,042

433,031

499,357

572,470

661,444

Table 2 (continued)
Shares
Modified AGI
($000)

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

-1.82%
1.20%
3.38%
11.05%
13.06%
24.10%
19.78%
8.91%
9.60%
2.94%
2.58%
2.18%
3.05%

-1.72%
1.14%
3.34%
10.83%
12.60%
23.70%
19.43%
8.89%
9.66%
2.89%
2.84%
2.42%
3.96%

-1.74%
1.17%
3.44%
11.12%
12.88%
23.71%
19.52%
8.78%
9.82%
3.05%
2.65%
2.24%
3.37%

-1.69%
1.18%
3.33%
11.09%
12.77%
23.49%
19.41%
9.03%
9.92%
3.14%
2.75%
2.21%
3.37%

-1.64%
1.17%
3.25%
11.05%
12.30%
23.08%
18.84%
9.08%
10.45%
3.22%
2.95%
2.44%
3.81%

-1.53%
1.16%
3.15%
10.75%
12.16%
22.44%
18.54%
9.12%
10.82%
3.40%
3.08%
2.60%
4.29%

-1.07%
1.09%
3.04%
10.36%
11.93%
21.92%
18.20%
9.26%
10.97%
3.48%
3.14%
2.78%
4.92%

Total

100.00%

100.00%

100.00%

100.00%

100.00%

100.00%

100.00%

Over 200

10.75%

12.11%

11.30%

11.47%

12.42%

13.38%

14.32%

<0
0-5
5-10
10-20
20-30
30-50
50-75
75-100
100-200
200-300
300-500
500-1,000
Over 1,000

Source: Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Treasury Department. We are grateful to Bob Carroll for providing us with this information.
Notes:
Income classifier is Modified AGI in 1991 dollars. All totals are expressed in nominal dollars (in $millions).
Modified AGI defined as AGI minus capital gains in AGI and Social Security in AGI, plus tax-exempt interest income.
Data for 1997 are preliminary, and are particularly subject to error at the bottom (modified AGI<0) and the top of the income distribution.

Table 3
Changes in Adjusted Gross Income and Income Sources, by Income Group, U.S., 1995-6
(in $ billions, except for number of returns column)
Size of Adjusted
Gross Income
($000)

Tax Year

No. of
Returns

Adjusted
Gross
Income

Salaries and
Wages

Interest and
Dividends

Capital Gains

Partnership
and S-Corp.
Income

Under $200

1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth

116,954,819
118,827,802
1.6
1,007,136
1,198,671
19.0
178,374
213,823
19.9
86,998
110,912
27.5
118,218,327
120,351,208
1.8

3,549.30
3,729.36
5.1
292.12
347.40
18.9
120.35
144.81
20.3
227.58
314.40
38.1
4,189.35
4,535.97
8.3

2,896.05
3,009.93
3.9
174.56
204.71
17.3
60.21
70.48
17.1
70.64
91.75
29.9
3,201.46
3,376.87
5.5

213.29
221.13
3.7
31.75
35.97
13.3
15.99
17.78
11.2
36.86
43.26
17.4
297.89
318.14
6.8

64.79
81.52
25.8
24.93
35.72
43.3
15.99
23.78
48.7
64.71
110.80
71.2
170.42
251.82
47.8

24.53
26.37
7.5
32.18
36.66
13.9
20.34
23.79
17.0
48.70
59.96
23.1
125.75
146.78
16.7

$200 - 500
$500 - 1,000
More than $1,000
Total

Source: IRS Statistics of Income Bulletin, Fall 1998, and Individual Income Tax Returns 1995.
Interest and dividends includes both taxable interest, taxable dividends, and tax-exempt interest. Capital gains is defined here as
taxable net gain less taxable net loss on Schedule D, plus capital gain distributions reported on Form 1040. Partnership and SCorporation income is net income less net loss.

Table 4
Changes in Gross Income and Income Sources, by Income Group in New Jersey, 1995-6
(in $ billions, except for number of returns column)
Size of Gross
Income
($000)

Tax Year

No. of
Returns

Gross
Income

Employee
Compensation

Interest and
Dividends

Capital Gains

Partnership
Income

S-Corp.
Income

Under $250

1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth
1995
1996
% Growth

3,326,133
3,337,510
0.3
31,260
36,085
15.4
9,737
11,083
13.8
3,615
4,394
21.5
689
987
43.3
3,371,434
3,390,059
0.6

130.38
136.36
4.6
10.54
12.17
15.5
6.55
7.45
13.7
5.58
6.74
20.8
4.50
6.74
49.8
157.55
169.46
7.6

109.21
113.37
3.8
6.92
7.91
14.3
3.88
4.37
12.6
2.81
3.32
18.1
1.30
2.04
56.9
124.12
131.01
5.6

6.663
6.812
2.2
0.651
0.703
8.0
0.488
0.497
1.8
0.503
0.514
2.2
0.505
0.504
-0.2
8.81
9.03
2.5

2.230
2.895
29.8
0.634
0.894
41.0
0.569
0.780
37.0
0.765
1.087
42.1
1.112
1.794
61.3
5.31
7.45
40.3

1.075
1.103
2.6
0.657
0.716
9.0
0.479
0.556
16.1
0.370
0.485
31.1
0.349
0.660
89.1
2.93
3.52
20.1

0.623
0.765
12.3
0.355
0.434
22.2
0.446
0.486
9.0
0.693
0.827
19.3
1.013
1.348
33.1
3.13
3.86
23.3

$250 - 500
$500 - 1,000
$1,000-3,000
More than $3,000
Total

Source: Statistics of Income, State of New Jersey, Department of the Treasury, Summer 1997 and Fall 1998.

Appendix
Table A-1
Equity and Net Worth of Households, Ranked by Alternative Definitions of Income
Mean equities (in thousands)

Net worth (in thousands)

SelfIncome
Income
SelfIncome
Income
reported definition definition reported definition definition
income
(1)
(2)
income
(1)
(2)

Equities as a share of net worth
SelfIncome
Income
reported definition definition
income
(1)
(2)

Income rank
Top 1 %
95-99th %
90-94%
80-89%

992.9
204.3
85.0
53.4

1273.0
214.2
91.0
39.4

1569.2
230.3
79.3
33.8

5078.2
1021.2
452.5
297.7

5430.4
1146.6
504.4
266.6

5581.9
1200.7
573.3
248.8

0.196
0.200
0.188
0.179

0.234
0.187
0.180
0.148

0.281
0.192
0.138
0.136

Top quintile
Next highest quintile
Middle quintile
Next lowest quintile
Bottom quintile

138.5
22.8
9.8
8.8
1.7

148.9
19.4
8.2
3.7
0.9

161.3
13.5
4.3
1.7
0.3

720.1
173.4
105.9
83.6
51.3

760.3
151.4
104.0
77.7
39.2

787.0
142.0
95.2
70.9
37.8

0.192
0.131
0.093
0.105
0.034

0.196
0.128
0.079
0.048
0.023

0.205
0.095
0.045
0.025
0.009

36.3

36.3

36.3

227.0

227.0

227.0

0.160

0.160

0.160

Overall

Source: Survey of Consumer Finances, 1995, and authors' calculations discussed in text.

References
Alesina, Albert and Dani Rodrik (1994), "Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 465-90.
Allen, Franklin (1982), "Optimal Linear Income Taxation with General Equilibrium
Effects on Wages," Journal of Public Economics, 17, 135-43.
Atkinson, Anthony B. (1973), "How Progressive Should Income Tax Be?" in M. Parkin
and A. R. Nobay (eds.), Essays in Modern Economics, (London: Longman), 90109.
Auten, Gerald and Robert Carroll (1998), “The Effect of Income Taxes on Household
Behavior,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Cameron, D. (1978), "The Expansion of the Public Economy: A Comparative Analysis,"
American Political Science Review, 72, 1243-61.
Carroll, Robert (1998a), “Do Taxpayers Really Respond to Changes in Tax Rates,"
mimeo, U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis Working Paper
No. 78, August.
Carroll, Robert (1998b), “Tax Rates, Taxpayer Behavior, and the 1993 Tax Act,” paper
presented at the 91st Annual Conference of the National Tax Association, Austin,
TX, November.
Cilke, James, with Bob Gillette, C. Eric Larson, and Roy A. Wyscarver (1994), "The
Treasury Individual Income Tax Simulation Model," mimeo, U.S. Department of
the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis.
Congressional Budget Office (1998a), The Economic and Budget Outlook: Fiscal Years
1999-2008, January.
Congressional Budget Office (1998b), The Economic and Budget Outlook for Fiscal
Years 1999-2008: A Preliminary Update, July 15.
Congressional Budget Office (1998c), Estimates of Federal Tax Liabilities For
Individuals and Families by Income Category and Family Type for 1995 and
1999. Memorandum, May.
Cooter, Robert and Elhanan Helpman (1974), "Optimal Income Taxation for Transfer
Payments Under Different Social Welfare Criteria," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 88, 656-70.
Feenberg, Daniel and James M. Poterba (1993), “Income Inequality and the Incomes of
Very High-Income Taxpayers: Evidence from Tax Returns,” in James Poterba
(ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, 7 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 145-77.
32

Feldstein, Martin (1973), "On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income Tax," Journal of
Public Economics, 2, 357-76.
Feldstein, Martin (1976), “On the Theory of Tax Reform," Journal of Public Economics,
6, 77-104.
Feldstein, Martin (1995), “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income,”
Journal of Political Economy, 103, 351-72.
Fullerton, Don (1996), “Comment on 'High-Income Families and the Tax Changes of the
1980’s: The Academy of Behavioral Response',” in Martin Feldstein and James
Poterba (eds.), Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, (Chicago:
University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research), 189-92.
Gilder, George (1990), Wealth and Poverty (New York: Basic Books).
Goolsbee, Austan (1998), “It’s Not About the Money: Why Natural Experiments Don’t
Work on the Rich,” Office of Tax Policy Research Working Paper No. 98-7, Ann
Arbor, MI.
Gramlich, Edward M., Richard Kasten and Frank Sammartino (1993), "Growing
Inequality in the 1980's: The Role of Federal Taxes and Cash Transfers," in
Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk (eds.), Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality
in America, (New York: Russell Sage Foundation).
Helpman, Elhanan and Efraim Sadka (1978), "The Optimum Income Tax: Some
Comparative Static Results," Journal of Public Economics, 9, 383-93.
Jencks, Christopher, with Marshall Smith, Henry Avlands, Mary Jo Bane, David Cohen,
Herbert Gintis, Barbara Heyns, and Stephan Michelson (1972), Inequality: A
Reassessment of the Effect of Family and Schooling in America, (New York:
Basic Books).
Karoly, Lynn (1994), “Trends in Income Inequality: The Impact and Implications for
Tax Policy,” in Joel Slemrod (ed.), Tax Progressivity and Income Inequality,
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Kasten, Richard, Frank Sammartino, and Eric Toder (1994), "Trends in Federal Tax
Progressivity, 1980-93." in Joel Slemrod, ed. Tax Progressivity and Income
Inequality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kristov, Lorenzo, Peter Lindert and Robert McClelland (1992), "Pressure Groups and
Redistribution," Journal of Public Economics, 48, 135-63.
Levy, Frank and Richard Murnane (1992), “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings
Inequality: A Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 30, 1333-8.
33

Lindbeck, Assar (1995), "Hazardous Welfare State Dynamics," American Economic
Review, 82, 53-68.
Lindert, Peter (1996), "What Limits Social Spending?" Explorations in Economics
History, 33, 1-44.
Lindsey, Lawrence (1987), “Estimating the Behavioral Responses of Taxpayers to
Change in Tax Rates: 1982-1984. With Implications for the RevenueMaximizing Tax Rate,” Journal of Public Economics, 33, 173-206.
Lydall, H. F. (1968). The Structure of Earnings (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Magee, Stephen P., William Brock, and Leslie Young (1989), Black Hole Tariffs and the
Endogenous Policy Theory, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard (1981), "A Rational Theory of the Size of
Government," Journal of Political Economy, 89, 914-27.
Mirrlees, James A. (1971), “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income
Taxation,” Review of Economic Studies, 175-208.
Mirrlees, James A. (1976), "Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis," Journal of Public
Economics, 327-58.
Moffitt, Robert and Mark Wilhelm (1998), “Taxation and the Labor Supply Decisions of
the Affluent,” Office of Tax Policy Research Working Paper No. 98-8, Ann
Arbor.
Myrdal, Gunnar (1960), Beyond the Welfare State, (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, "Is Inequality Harmful for Growth? Theory and
Evidence," American Economic Review, 48, 600-21.
Peltzman, Sam (1980), "The Growth of Government," Journal of Law and Economics,
23, 209-87.
Rawls, John (1971), A Theory of Justice, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Reich, Robert B. (1991), The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st Century
Capitalism, (New York: Alfred A. Knopf).
Rodrik, Dani (1997), "Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?,"
mimeo, Harvard University.
Romer, Paul (1990), "Capital, Labor and Productivity," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Special Issue, 337-420.
34

Sandmo, Agnar (1973), "Optimal Redistribution When Tastes Differ," Finanzarchiv, 50,
149-63.
Slemrod, Joel (1994), "On the High-Income Laffer Curve," in Joel Slemrod (ed.), Tax
Progressivity and Income Inequality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Slemrod, Joel (1996), “High-Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980’s: The
Anatomy of Behavioral Response,” in Martin Feldstein and James Poterba (eds.),
Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation (Chicago: University of Chicago
and National Bureau of Economic Research), 169-88.
Slemrod, Joel (1998a), “Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable
Income Elasticities,” National Tax Journal, 51, 773 - 88.
Slemrod, Joel (1998b), "How Costly is a Large, Redistributive Public Sector?" Swedish
Economic Policy Review, Spring, 89-105.
Stern, Nicholas H. (1976), “On the Specification of Models of Optimum Income
Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics, 6, 123-62.
Thurow, Lester (1975), Generating Inequality, (New York: Basic Books).
Varian, Hal (1980), "Redistributive Taxation as Social Insurance," Journal of Public
Economics, 14, 49-68.

35

