                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF SOCIAL INTERACTIONS


                                           Charles F. Manski


                                          Working Paper 7580
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7580

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




This research was supported in part by NSF grant SBR-9722846. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Analysis of Social Interactions
Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 7580
March 2000


                                           ABSTRACT

       Economists have long been ambivalent about whether the discipline should focus on the
analysis of markets or should be concerned with social interactions more generally. Recently the
discipline has sought to broaden its scope while maintaining the rigor of modern economic analysis.
Major theoretical developments in game theory, the economics of the family, and endogenous
growth theory have taken place. Economists have also performed new empirical research on social
interactions, but the empirical literature does not show progress comparable to that achieved in
economic theory. This paper examines why and discusses how economists might make sustained
contributions to the empirical analysis of social interactions.


Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan University
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@nwu.edu
1. Introduction



       Economists have long been ambivalent about what social interactions constitute the proper

domain of the discipline. The narrower view has been that economics is primarily the study of

markets, a circumscribed class of institutions in which persons interact through an anonymous

process of price formation. The broader view has been that economics is defined fundamentally by

its concern with the allocation of resources and by its emphasis on the idea that persons respond to

incentives. In this view, economists may properly study how incentives shape all social interactions

that affect the allocation of resources.

       Throughout much of the 20th century, mainstream economics traded breadth for rigor. In the

first half of the century institutional economics, which thought broadly but loosely about social

interactions, gradually gave way to the neoclassical theory of general competitive equilibrium, which

formalized the analysis of idealized competitive markets (e.g., Arrow and Hahn,1971). From the

perspective of general equilibrium theory, non-market interactions were not phenomena of intrinsic

interest. Instead they were problems of incomplete markets that may prevent the economy from

achieving a social optimum. Welfare economics prescribed that the externalities created by non-

market interactions should, if possible, be eliminated by setting property rights that would permit

trade to take place (e.g., Coase, 1960).

       From the vantage of today, it is clear that the narrowing of economics ended by the 1970s.

Since then a new phase has been underway, in which the discipline seeks to broaden its scope while

maintaining the rigor that has become emblematic of economic analysis. Major theoretical

developments in microeconomics, labor economics, and macroeconomics have played important
                                                2

roles in launching this new phase. 1

       In microeconomics, perhaps the defining event of the late 20th century was the adoption of

non-cooperative game theory as a language and set of tools for the study of market and other

interactions. The concepts of dynamic game theory developed in the 1970s and 1980s enabled

economists to describe and analyze a broad range of market structures, and so gave new life to the

field of industrial organization. A more radical consequence of the game theory revolution was that

it broke down the sharp distinction that economists had maintained between markets and other social

interactions. Game theory encouraged economists to see all interactions as games, markets being

special cases. As a result, economic theorists have in recent years studied phenomena as far from

traditional economic concerns as the evolution of social norms (e.g., Akerlof, 1980; Jones, 1984;

Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite, 1992; Kandori, 1992; Young, 1996).

       A second pivotal development was the transformation of labor economics from a field

narrowly concerned with work for pay into one broadly concerned with the production and

distributional decisions of families and households (e.g., Becker, 1991). Modern labor economists

study a wide range of family and household behaviors that earlier economists thought peripheral to

or outside the domain of the discipline; marriage and fertility, education and health care, drug

addiction and criminal activity, inter vivos transfers and bequests. Much of the research of labor

economists on these subjects has viewed the family or household as a single utility maximizing

entity, thus abstracting from the complex interactions that may occur among the members of this

entity. A considerable body of work, however, uses non-cooperative game theory to model families


       1
         See Lazear (1999) and Myerson (1999) for two recent perspectives on the broadening of
economic theory. These authors differ substantially in their emphases but agree that the broadening
is well underway.
                                                  3

and households as groups whose members may have differing objectives (e.g., Becker, 1974;

Bergstrom, 1989).

       A third important development was the emergence in macroeconomics of endogenous growth

theory. Whereas classical growth theory assumed that the production technology available to an

economy is exogenous, endogenous growth theory supposes that today’s technology may depend on

earlier investments in human capital or R&D, which themselves may have been influenced by the

past output of the economy (e.g., Lucas, 1988; Romer, 1990). Endogenous growth theory has also

generated study of cross-sectional and dynamic spillovers in the production of human capital:

children may learn more when they share school classes with high achievers or when they have well-

educated parents (e.g., Benabou, 1996a, 1996b).2 Many of the interactions in R & D and human

capital formation emphasized in endogenous growth theory occur in non-market environments.

Hence new research on macroeconomic growth shows a concern for externalities that was absent

from classical growth theory.

       The broadening of economic theory has coincided with the performance by economists of

new empirical research on social interactions. Unfortunately, the empirical literature does not show

much progress. Empirical studies that seek to maintain a tight connection with economic theory

typically impose auxiliary assumptions that severely diminish the credibility of the reported findings.

Other studies maintain little or no connection to theory. Many recent empirical investigations seek



       2
           Social interactions in schooling is also a major concern of microeconomic research on
schooling. For example, research on the effect of class size on learning is concerned with the
congestion problem that may arise because a classroom of students share a common resource, the
teacher (e.g., Hanushek, 1998; Lazear, 1999a). Research on vouchers has been concerned with the
effect of these subsidies on class composition, which may affect efficiency of learning (e.g., Manski,
1992; Epple and Romano, 1998).
                                                  4

only to determine whether statistical associations among the experiences of different persons indicate

the presence of some loosely specified form of interaction amongst them.

       The weak state of empirical research on social interactions should be a matter of strong

concern to economists who want the discipline to contribute effectively to the formation of public

policy. For years economists and others have speculated about the role of non-market interactions

in determining such matters of public interest as schooling outcomes, employment patterns,

participation in welfare programs, crime rates, and residential segregation. To inform policy, we

need to replace speculation with empirical analysis that is both relevant and credible.

       The weak state of empirical research should also be disturbing to economists performing

theoretical analyses of social interactions. The canonical theoretical study hypothesizes some class

of interaction processes and seeks to characterize their implied outcomes. There are countless

logically distinct interaction processes that a theorist might entertain. To the extent that theorists

want their research to be useful to economic practice, they need to know what classes of processes

are prevalent in the real world. In the absence of a connection to reality, economic theory risks

reduction to a self-contained exercise in mathematical logic.

       Why is it that empirical analysis of social interactions has achieved so little? I believe that

two difficulties have combined to produce the status quo. One part of the problem is an unfortunate

dearth of clear thinking in the empirical literature. Borrowing jargon from sociology and social

psychology, empirical economists may write that they are studying “peer influences,” “neighborhood

effects,” “social capital,” or some other form of social interaction. Yet empirical analyses commonly

fail to define these concepts with any precision, and they often explain only obliquely how the

reported findings shed light on the interactions being studied.
                                                 5

        The other part of the problem is the inherent difficulty of inference using the forms of data

that economists commonly bring to bear to study social interactions. The prevailing practice has

been to try to infer the presence of interactions from observations of the outcomes experienced in

a population of interest. However, inference on interactions from observed outcomes is a rather

subtle problem. In usual empirical settings, the observed outcomes of the population can plausibly

be generated by many different interaction processes or, perhaps, by processes acting on individuals

in isolation.

        How might economists progress in the empirical analysis of social interactions? Empirical

researchers will need to become much more specific about the questions they address. Clear

thinking, however, will not suffice. I also see a compelling need to enrich the data that researchers

bring to bear. Empirical analysis would particularly benefit from performance of well-designed

experiments in controlled environments and from careful elicitation of persons’ subjective

perceptions of the interactions in which they participate.

        In what follows, I flesh out the story begun here. In Section 2, I exposit the economic

perspective on social interactions and compare it with that of sociology. In Section 3, I describe

empirical practices and elaborate on the two difficulties preventing progress. This discussion leads

in Section 4 to a discussion of new data collection that would, I think, improve prospects for

economics to make sustained contributions to the empirical analysis of social interactions. Section

5 gives conclusions.
                                                  6

2. Perspectives on Social Interactions



       Coherent study of social interactions requires a clear conceptualization of interaction

processes. What are the units that interact with one another? How do they interact?

       The various disciplines that refer to themselves as social sciences have yet to form a common

set of answers to these basic questions. There does, however, seem to be a consensus that the

perspective of economics is so distinct as to separate economics from the other social sciences. 3

Section 2.1 describes what I see as the main elements of economic thinking on social interactions.

Section 2.2 compares the economic perspective with that of sociology.



2.1. Social Interactions in Economics



       The particularity of economics begin with its conceptualization of agents as decision makers

endowed with preferences, forming expectations, and facing constraints. Preferences are given

formal expression through utility functions, expectations through subjective probability distributions,

and constraints through choice sets. Economists usually go on to assume that agents maximize

expected utility, but we shall not require this degree of specificity for the present discussion.

       In economic terms, agents are the units who interact with one another. The notion of an

agent embraces persons, firms, and other entities such as non-profit organizations and governments.

The essential characteristic of an economic agent is not its physical form but rather its status as a


       3
         Indeed, the distinctiveness of economics is institutionalized in the name of the major unit
of the National Science Foundation that houses the NSF Economics Program – the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences.
                                                  7

decision maker.

       The concept of an agent as a decision maker carries within it a straightforward answer to the

question: How do agents interact? Agents interact through their chosen actions; an action chosen

by one agent may affect the constraints, expectations, and/or preferences of other agents.



Constraint Interactions

       Markets form the classical economic illustration of constraint interactions. The decisions of

agents to purchase certain commodity bundles collectively determine prices, which in turn determine

the bundles that are feasible for agents to purchase.

       Another familiar form of constraint interaction is congestion, which may occur when multiple

agents share a common resource. Whereas market analysis imagines agents endowed with money

budgets who purchase commodities having money prices, congestion analysis often imagines agents

endowed with time budgets who choose activities that consume time. The time cost of some

activities depends on the number of agents choosing them; road travel, web surfing, and restaurant

dining are examples. The decisions of agents to engage in these activities collectively determine

their time costs, which in turn determine the activity bundles that are feasible for agents to choose.

       Markets and congestion exemplify negative constraint interactions; the more that some agents

choose a commodity or activity, the less available it is to others. In contrast, decisions by agents to

engage in research and development may generate positive constraint interactions. R & D enlarges

the production set of the agent performing it. To the extent that findings are public knowledge, R

& D by one agent enlarges the production sets of other agents as well.
                                                  8

Expectations Interactions

       Economic analysis supposes that an agent facing a decision problem will form expectations

of the outcomes that would follow from choosing different actions. An agent forming expectations

may seek to draw lessons from observation of the actions chosen and outcomes experienced by

others.4 Such observational learning generates expectations interactions.

       Expectations interactions pervade the modern economics of information. A central concern

is to understand the interactions of agents who possess private information; that is, knowledge not

directly available to one another. A recurring theme is that observation of chosen actions may reveal

private information; for example, health insurance purchases may reveal consumers’ health status

and acceptance of job offers may reveal workers’ skills (e.g., Akerlof, 1970). This theme takes

particularly strong form in the theory of efficient markets, where observation of prices suffices to

reveal all relevant private information.

       Statistical discrimination is an information interaction (e.g., Arrow, 1973; Cain, 1986). An

employer who observes the job performance of current employees with certain demographic

attributes may use this information to forecast the performance of new job applicants with similar

attributes. A provider of insurance may likewise use data on the claims paid to current current policy

holders with certain covariates to forecast the claims that would be payable to new applicants with

these covariates.

       It should be said that economists have not been unanimous in the view that expectations

interactions form an important subject for study. A very large part of modern economic analysis


       4
         Some studies assumes that only actions are observable while others assume that actions and
subsequent outcomes are observable. In general, economists have assumed that agents do not
directly observe the expectations of other agents.
                                                   9

presumes that agents have rational expectations, wherein agents’ subjective beliefs about future

events are the best predictions possible given the available information. Studies assuming rational

expectations typically do not attempt to explain how agents may come to form such optimal

forecasts. This fundamental question is addressed only in a relatively small literature seeking to

characterize when observational learning processes will or will not generate rational expectations

(e.g., Cyert and DeGroot, 1974; Kalai and Lehrer, 1993).



Preference Interactions

          Preference interactions occur when an agent’s preference ordering over the alternatives in

his choice set depends on the actions chosen by other agents. Such everyday ideas as conformism,

jealousy, and paternalism suggest forms of preference interaction. Neoclassical consumer theory

long rejected these ideas in favor of a presumption that agents care only about their own

consumption, or perhaps only about the consumption of their families. Yet there is nothing in the

logic of economic thought that mandates this narrow view of preferences (see Pollak, 1976).

          Preference interactions are at the heart of non-cooperative game theory. The standard setup

considers a set of agents who simultaneously choose actions, each from his own choice set. The

utility that each agent receives depends on the actions chosen by the other agents. Hence an agent’s

preference ordering on the alternatives in his choice set depends on the actions chosen by the other

agents.

          A simple example is the Schelling (1971, 1978) model of residential segregation. Here the

choice set is a set of alternative neighborhoods in which one might reside. Schelling supposed that

the utility a person associates with each neighborhood may depend on the racial distribution of the
                                                   10

persons who choose to reside there. Another simple example is the formation of driving conventions

in the absence of road laws, as discussed by Young (1996). Each driver chooses between driving

on the right or the left side of the road. The utility of driving on one side or the other clearly depends

on the choices made by other drivers sharing the same road.



Equilibrium

        If economics were content to describe how agents may interact, an extended version of the

above verbal discussion might suffice. The discipline has, however, set for itself a much more

ambitious objective. Economists want to characterize the outcomes of interactions processes.

Words do not suffice for this purpose. Mathematical formalization seems essential. So economists

commonly pose formal models of agent behavior and explicit specifications of the manner in which

chosen actions may affect constraints, expectations, and preferences. This done, analysis of the

outcomes of interaction processes may begin.

        The discipline has long focused attention on equilibrium outcomes; that is, outcomes that

occur when agents’ actions are mutually consistent. Much of the theoretical literature has been

concerned with basic qualitative questions that can be addressed in considerable generality: Do

equilibria exist? If so, is equilibrium unique? Of course, economists want to go further and

characterize as fully as possible the nature of such equilibria as may exist. Pursuing this objective,

researchers have reported illuminating algebraic or graphical analyses of some simple interaction

processes. At the same time it has become clear that many processes of substantive interest are too

complex to be analyzed abstractly. Hence researchers have increasingly used numerical methods to

characterize the equilibria of specific processes, as well as to study their dynamics (e.g., Arthur et
                                                11

al., 1997).



More General Processes

        I have briefly described here a wide variety of social interactions that may be studied with

standard economic tools. Much more is possible. I have restricted attention to processes in which

agents affect each other through their actions. A more general class of interactions permits the

preferences, expectations, and constraints of one agent to affect the preferences, expectations, and

constraints of another agent in ways that are not mediated through actions.

        Consider preference interactions. It is one thing to say that my preferences depend on your

actions, and another to say that my preferences depend on your preferences.            Or consider

expectations interactions. The processes that we have discussed suppose that agents extract

information from observation of the actions chosen and outcomes experienced of others. Agents

may also obtain information directly from one another. After all, humans do communicate about all

sorts of things.

        Going beyond the question of how agents interact, our discussion has been incomplete in the

more basic sense that we have not considered how agents come to be. Economics has given much

attention to the entry and exit of firms in markets, and some to the formation and evolution of

families. The discipline has done less, however, to explain the creation and dissolution of

governments, non-profit organizations, and other decision making entities.
                                                12

2.2. Social Interactions in Sociology



        An enhanced sense of the particularity of economic thinking emerges when one compares

economics with sociology.5 The sociologist Charles Camic has written engagingly on how the

discipline of sociology emerged out of economics (Camic, 1987). According to Camic, separate

university departments of sociology came into being as a consequence of the triumph of neoclassical

economics over institutional economics in the 1920s and 1930s. As neoclassical economists sought

to formalize analysis of market interactions, they disparaged the broad but loose study of social

interactions characteristic of institutional economics. Sociology departments emerged to study the

range of non-market interactions that neoclassical economists judged to be outside the proper domain

of the discipline.

        Sociology has had a substantial period of time within which to develop as a separate

discipline, so one might expect a coherent sociological analysis of social interactions to have

developed by now. Not so. Examination of recent sociological research does not reveal a shared,

discipline-wide perspective. Some sociologists describe interactions in language that suggests

economic thinking. Others give prominence to concepts that play little or no role in modern

economics: class, community, culture, influence, status, gender roles, and so on. Indeed, an

economist reading sociological research is struck by the sheer number of concepts that sociologists

employ. Economics has sufficed with a remarkably small set of basic concepts (preferences,



        5
          A different sense of the particularity of economics comes from comparing the discipline
with psychology, which does not begin from the premise that humans have well-defined preferences
and expectations. Comparison of economics with psychology is enlightening, but is not as germane
to the topic of this article as is comparison with sociology.
                                                 13

expectations, constraints, equilibrium). Why does sociology require so many more concepts?

       I believe that the abundance of concepts in sociology is connected closely to the dearth of

formal analysis in the discipline. Whereas the typical research article in economic theory uses

mathematical language to define concepts and then goes on to state and prove propositions, most

articles in sociological theory begin and remain verbal throughout. 6 Verbal reasoning may be more

evocative than mathematical argument, but it is also less precise. The ambiguity of words permits

a proliferation of concepts. Readers of verbal sociological research can never be certain that they

understand a concept in the way that an author intends, nor the relationship among concepts. Hence

they cannot readily distinguish between concepts that are truly basic and ones that are derivative or,

worse, ill-defined.

       An apt illustration is the term “social capital,” which came into vogue in the 1990s. There

is some uncertainty about the origin of the term. Many associate it with Coleman (1988) and Putnam

(1993), but Durlauf (1999) credits it to Loury (1977) and Glaeser et al. (1999) date it back to Jacobs

(1961). The origin of “social capital” should be a resolvable matter, but the meaning of the term may

not be. So many authors have sought to define the term in so many ways that I shall make no attempt

to provide a definition here; the interested reader may want to see Bowles (1999), Durlauf (1999),


       6
         There was a period in the 1960s and 1970s when sociology seemed to be on the verge of
a methodological transformation that might yield a rigorous discipline akin to economics. Social
network analysts developed a formal, graph-theoretical language to represent the myriad informal
bonds that connect humans to one another (e.g., Holland and Leinhardt, 1970). James Coleman
sought to lay the foundations for a mathematical representation of sociological theory in Coleman
(1964). The Journal of Mathematical Sociology began publication in 1971. The sociological
methodologist Otis Dudley Duncan worked with the econometrician Arthur Goldberger to develop
a common empirical approach to analysis of market and non-market interactions (Goldberger and
Duncan, 1973). For whatever reason, the transformation did not take hold. Indeed, sociology today
appears no more rigorous a discipline than thirty years ago.
                                                  14

Glaeser et al. (1999), and Portes (1998) for varying perspectives.

       The only salient question, as I see it, is whether this vague term conveys an idea that is

missing in modern economic thought; an idea that cannot be expressed using the core concepts of

preferences, expectations, constraints, and equilibrium. If so, the ongoing efforts to interpret “social

capital” may be productive. If not, social scientists should use “social capital” only as a lesson in

the ambiguity of words.




3. Empirical Analysis of Observed Outcomes



       Throughout the modern development of economics, empirical analysis of social interactions

has lagged far behind theory, with distressing consequences. Even the most ambitious economic

theory does not aim to give a complete description of reality. Each leaves the magnitudes of critical

quantities – demand elasticities, returns to scale in production, time discount rates, risk preferences,

and so on – to be determined empirically. Alternative theories put forward different visions of

reality. Empirical analysis is essential to determine which theories should be taken seriously as

descriptions of the world as it is, rather than as it might hypothetically be.

        The practice in empirical economics has been to infer the nature of an interaction process

from observations of its outcomes. This presents a rather subtle problem of identification. In usual

empirical settings, the observed outcomes can plausibly be generated by many alternative interaction

processes acting on constraints, expectations, or preferences. Or the observed outcomes may be the

result of processes acting on agents separately. Outcome data typically have only limited power to
                                                15

distinguish among the alternative plausible hypotheses.

       Most every student in economics receives instruction on one instance of the problem of

identification of social interactions, this being inference on supply and demand from observations

of prices and quantities in competitive markets in equilibrium. I begin with this familiar case and

then move on to inference on other interaction processes.



3.1. Econometric Analysis of Markets



       The theory of equilibrium in markets with price-taking consumers and price-taking (or

quantity-taking) firms was well under development over a century ago, but the corresponding

problem of empirical inference on demand and supply was only dimly understood until the 1940s.

At that time, econometric analysis of the simultaneity problem developed under the maintained

assumption that the quantity of product demanded by consumers varies linearly with price, and

similarly that supply functions are linear. Of course economic theory gives no reason to think that

demand and supply functions are generally linear. Nevertheless, it was reasonable for early

econometricians to begin with the study of linear models if only because they are relatively easy to

analyze.

       The central finding of early structural econometrics was that observation of equilibrium

prices and quantities does not suffice to untangle the market interaction of consumers and firms,

even if one somehow knows a priori that demand and supply functions are linear.7 Some further


       7
          The reason is simple. Observation of an equilibrium (price, quantity) reveals only that
demand and supply intersect at this point. There are innumerable pairs of linear functions that
intersect at any given point.
                                                  16

prior information is necessary if one is to distinguish demand and supply from one another. This

further information can take various forms, but the essential requirement is expressed well in the

familiar idea of exclusion restrictions; a priori knowledge that some factor, an instrumental variable,

affects supply but not demand, while some other factor affects demand but not supply. Economists

have become well aware that credible exclusion restrictions or other identifying assumptions are

elusive in practice. Thus, the early econometrics literature on identification of linear simultaneous

equations has made economists appreciate the subtlety of inference on social interactions.

       It has now been a half-century since the codification of econometric analysis of linear

simultaneous equations in the work of the Cowles Commission (see Hood and Koopmans, 1953).

How has structural econometric analysis of market interactions progressed since then? The answer

has two parts, presently in much tension with one another.

       Part of the answer is that the scope of econometric analysis of markets has enlarged

substantially over time, as a result of the development of econometric methods for estimation of

nonlinear models of consumer and firm behavior. Econometric research on discrete choice analysis

has enabled empirical researchers to analyze the demand for consumer durables, schooling, and other

differentiated products typically purchased in discrete units (e.g., Dubin and McFadden, 1984;

Manski and Wise, 1983). Discrete choice analysis, research on maximum likelihood estimation of

limited dependent variable models, and work on method of moments estimation has combined to

enable empirical analysis of firm pricing behavior in oligopolistic markets (e.g., Green and Porter,

1984; Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995). Thus, the early restriction of empirical analysis to market

settings that can reasonably be represented by linear simultaneous equations has been overcome.

       The other part of the answer is that structural analysis of markets remains as subtle an
                                                  17

inferential problem as it was fifty years ago. Modern developments in econometric method do not,

indeed cannot, resolve the basic identification problem that economists have long appreciated. The

fact remains that observation of market transactions reveals only so much about the behavior of

consumers and firms. Today, as fifty years ago, structural econometric research interprets data on

transactions with the assistance of exclusion restrictions and through the lens of tightly specified

models of consumer and firm behavior, chosen in large part for their tractability. Today, as fifty

years ago, empirical findings are only as credible as the particular exclusion restrictions and

modeling assumptions imposed. 8

       Juxtaposition of the two parts of the answer indicates that modern empirical researchers can

analyze a wide range of interesting market interactions if they are willing to maintain strong

assumptions that may be difficult to motivate. This appears to pose a stark choice: report findings

that may lack credibility, or retreat from the objective of econometric analysis of market interactions.

The result has been much controversy in empirical economics, with researchers segmenting into

camps that advocate one or the other of these unpleasant alternatives. In macroeconomics, the

controversy has taken the form of a debate about calibration; see the recent Journal of Economic

Perspectives symposium with contributions by Kydland and Prescott (1996), Hansen and Heckman



       8
          The empirical literature shows a curious asymmetry in the concern researchers show about
the realism of different assumptions. The realism of exclusion restrictions is a recurrent theme, with
much criticism befalling the researcher who uses an “invalid” instrumental variable. Yet researchers
often regard functional form and distributional assumptions in models of consumer and firm
behavior as convenient approximations that do not materially affect inference. In fact, exclusion
restrictions, functional form, and distributional assumptions all play essential roles in prevailing
approaches to structural econometric analysis. This can be seen by unbundling the various
assumptions and determining their identifying power in isolation from one another (e.g., Manski
1995, 1997a).
                                                  18

(1996), and Sims (1996). In labor economics, empirical researchers using data on observed

outcomes to perform structural econometric analysis have become estranged from ones who hold

that empirical research should be based as closely as possible on the paradigm of randomized

experimentation; for example, compare the analysis of the returns to schooling in Willis and Rosen

(1979) with that of Angrist and Krueger (1990).

       I do not want the reader of this article to have the impression that I have been a disinterested

observer, regarding the various camps from a distance. I have for more than a decade advocated a

mode of empirical research that explicitly recognizes the tension between strength of assumptions

and credibility of findings. As described in Manski (1995), one begins with a conservative analysis

that imposes only assumptions enjoying considerable consensus. Such assumptions typically imply

bounds on parameters of interest, not point identification. 9 One then invokes further assumptions

that yield stronger findings at the cost of diminished credibility.




       9
         For example, Manski (1997a) examines the simultaneity problem under the sole assumption
that demand functions slope downward. Manski and Pepper (2000) examines the inferences that are
possible when the classical notion of an instrumental variable is replaced with a weaker but more
credible notion of a monotone instrumental variable.
                                                19

3.2. Econometric Analysis of Games



       A wide spectrum of social interactions, from divorce proceedings to union-management

negotiations, can usefully be thought of as non-cooperative games, each player choosing an action

from some set of feasible alternatives. It is common to assume that the players have reaction

functions specifying the action that each would choose as a function of the action chosen by the

others. An equilibrium of the game is a set of mutually consistent actions.

       The problem of inference on players’ reaction functions from observation of game equilibria

has much the same structure as the problem of inference on supply and demand from observations

of market equilibria. Hence econometric research on the analysis of markets has found considerable

application in the analysis of non-market games as well. Consider, for example, labor economists

studying interactions within the family. McElroy (1990) has interpreted data on the labor supply of

husbands and wives as the equilibrium of a game in which the hours worked by each spouse varies

with the hours worked of the other spouse. Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1994) has applied game theory

to interpret data on intra-family monetary transfers. Flinn and Del Boca (1994) has interpreted data

on child custody outcomes in divorce proceedings as the equilibrium outcome of a game in which

the separating spouses and the government are the players.

       The fundamental identification problem that shadows econometric analysis of competitive

markets persists in econometric analysis of non-market games. Hence empirical research on games

generates the same tension between assumptions and credibility. Indeed, many games are much

more complex than competitive markets. Players may be uncertain of each other’s strategies,

equilibria may not exist or may not be unique, and so on. These complexities, when taken seriously,
                                                 20

intensify the inferential problem considerably. 10



Crime and Punishment

       An illuminating illustration of the difficulty of empirical inference on games arises in the

economics of crime, which has long sought to learn the deterrent effect of sanctions on criminal

behavior. In the early 1970s, it became common for economists to analyze observed crime rates and

sanction levels as equilibrium outcomes of two-person games in which criminals (player 1) choose

a crime rate and society (player 2) chooses sanctions. Linear reaction functions were used to specify

the crime rate that criminals would choose given specified sanctions, and the sanctions that society

would choose given a specified crime rate.

       The simultaneity problem in inference on deterrence became a concern beyond the academic

community when the Solicitor General of the United States argued to the Supreme Court that a study

by Isaac Ehrlich provided empirical evidence on the deterrent effect of capital punishment. Ehrlich

(1975) used annual data on murders and sanctions in the United States to estimate a "murder supply"

function specifying the murder rate that would occur as a function of sanctions levels, including the

risk of capital punishment faced by a convicted murderer. He concluded (Ehrlich, 1975, p. 398): “In

fact, the empirical analysis suggests that on the average the tradeoff between the execution of an

offender and the lives of potential victims it might have saved was of the order of 1 for 8 for the

period 1933-1967 in the United States.”

       This finding, and its citation before the Supreme Court as evidence in support of capital



       10
         See Jovanovic (1989) and Tamer (1999) for analysis of the problem of inference on games
with multiple equilibria.
                                                21

punishment, generated considerable controversy. A constructive outcome was the establishment by

the National Research Council (NRC) of a panel to investigate in depth the problem of inference on

deterrence (Blumstein, Cohen, and Nagin, 1978). The NRC Panel on Research on Deterrent and

Incapacitative Effects focused much of its attention on the simultaneity problem and stressed the

difficulty of finding plausible exclusion restrictions to identify deterrent effects. Regarding the

deterrent effect of capital punishment, the Panel concluded (p. 62) "The current evidence on the

deterrent effect of capital punishment is inadequate for drawing any substantive conclusion."

       Understanding the deterrent effects of sanctions remains an important unresolved problem

today. An account of the evolution of Ehrlich’s thinking on the subject has appeared recently in

Ehrlich (1996).



3.3. Experimental Research



       Econometric analysis of markets and other games has generally sought to analyze data on

outcomes generated as the world turns. A distinct tradition of experimental research analyzes data

on outcomes generated through purposeful interventions.

       As long as fifty years ago, social psychologists reported provocative experimental findings

on interactions in small groups (Asch, 1952).11 The 1980s and 1990s saw a blossoming of

experimental research in economics, the primary objective being to ascertain the realism of

equilibrium concepts developed in game theory (see Kagel and Roth, 1995). Recently, economists

have begun to perform experiments seeking to shed light on the expectations interactions commonly


       11
            Jones (1984) provides an economic perspective on experimental social psychology.
                                                    22

called “trust” (Fershtman and Gneezy, 1998; Glaeser et al., 1999).

        Experimental research clearly has limitations. Only some kinds of interactions are amenable

to experimental manipulation and, even then, only in somewhat artificial settings. A longstanding

criticism of the experiments conducted by psychologists, and more recently by experimental

economists, is that the groups whose interactions are observed are formed artificially for the sake of

the experiment. This raises obvious questions about the credibility of extrapolating findings from

experimental settings to populations of interest.

        It is often suggested that experimental research would be more credible if the experiments

were performed on randomly selected subjects. This is difficult to achieve. The unit of analysis for

a study of social interactions is the group that interacts, not the individuals that comprise the group.

Harris (1985) and Garfinkel et al. (1992) discuss issues that arise in randomization of groups and

offer some suggestions for practice. 12

        The limitations of experimental research should not dissuade researchers from judicious use

of experiments to complement observation of naturally occurring outcomes. I expect that economists

will make increasing use of experimental data in the years ahead.




        12
           Occasionally, one can learn something about social interactions from “natural
experiments;” that is, naturally occurring outcomes that can credibly be viewed as arising from
randomized experiments. For example, Angrist and Lavy (1999) uses random variation in school
class sizes, induced by institutional rules, to examine how class size may affect educational
outcomes.
                                                23

3.4. Why do Persons in the Same Group Tend to Behave Similarly?



       Whatever their difficulties, econometric and experimental analysis of markets and games at

least aim to analyze well-defined forms of social interactions. Much recent empirical research

conceptualizes interaction processes only in broad terms that lack the clarity of markets and games.

A common objective has been to learn whether some form of interaction may explain the often

reported descriptive finding that persons belonging to the same group tend to behave similarly.

       Many social scientists have hypothesized that this empirical regularity is due to interactions

in which the propensity of a person to behave in some way varies positively with the prevalence of

this behavior in the group. Such interactions may be called “social norms,” “peer influences,”

“neighborhood effects,” “conformity,” “imitation,” “contagion,” “epidemics,” “bandwagons,” or

“herd behavior.” See, for example, Hyman (1942), Merton (1957), and Granovetter (1979). Some,

however, have hypothesized that similarity in behavior is due to processes operating entirely at the

level of the individual (see, for example, the Friedman 1957, criticism of Duesenberry 1949.) Jencks

and Mayer (1989) describe the long running debate about the nature of neighborhood effects.

       Stripped to its basics, empirical research has sought to distinguish among three hypotheses:



endogenous interactions, wherein the propensity of a person to behave in some way varies with the

behavior of the group.



contextual interactions, wherein the propensity of a person to behave in some way varies with

exogenous characteristics of the group members.
                                                  24

correlated effects, wherein persons in the same group tend to behave similarly because they have

similar individual characteristics or face similar institutional environments.



Endogenous and contextual interactions express distinct ways that persons might be influenced by

their social environments, while correlated effects express a nonsocial phenomenon. Consider, for

example, the high school achievement of a teenage youth. There is an endogenous interaction if, all

else equal, individual achievement tends to vary with the average achievement of the students in the

youth's high school, ethnic group, or other reference group. There is a contextual interaction if

achievement tends to vary with, say, the socioeconomic composition of the group. There are

correlated effects if youth in the same school tend to achieve similarly because they are taught by the

same teachers, or because they have similar family backgrounds. 13

       Distinguishing among endogenous interactions, contextual interactions, and correlated effects

has been thought important because these hypotheses imply different predictions for the impact of

public policy. Consider, for example, an educational intervention providing tutoring to some of the

students in a school but not to the others. If individual achievement increases with the average

achievement of the students in the school, then an effective tutoring program not only directly helps

the tutored students but, as their achievement rises, indirectly helps all students in the school, with

a feedback to further achievement gains by the tutored students. Contextual interactions and

correlated effects imply no such feedbacks. 14


       13
         Tiebout (1956) made economists sensitive to the idea that residential location decision
processes will tend to produce communities made up of families with similar attributes.
       14
         Juxtaposition of endogenous and contextual interactions reveals a disciplinary contrast
between economics and sociology. A central objective of economists has been to understand the
                                                 25

The Reflection Problem

       Unfortunately, outcome data do not readily differentiate among endogenous interactions,

contextual interactions, and correlated effects. In Manski (1993a; 1995, Chapter 7) I examined a

familiar linear-in-means regression model in which individual behavior is permitted to vary linearly

with mean behavior in the group (expressing endogenous interactions), with the mean values of

exogenous attributes of group members (expressing contextual interactions), and with personal

characteristics that may be similar across group members (expressing correlated effects). In this

setting, I found that data on equilibrium outcomes cannot distinguish endogenous interactions from

contextual interactions. The researcher may be able to distinguish these two forms of interactions

from correlated effects, but even this limited form of inference is possible only in some situations;

the exogenous attributes of individuals must vary within and across groups in certain ways.

       This identification problem arises because mean behavior in the group is itself determined

by the behavior of group members. Hence data on outcomes do not reveal whether group behavior

actually affects individual behavior, or group behavior is simply the aggregation of individual

behaviors. This reflection problem is similar to the problem of interpreting the almost simultaneous

movements of a person and his reflection in a mirror. Does the mirror image cause the person's

movements or reflect them?

       Brock and Durlauf (2000), Manski (1993a, 1997b), and Moffitt (1999) investigate



feedbacks generated by endogenous interactions. Some sociologists share this objective but modern
sociological research has emphasized contextual interactions, which lack feedbacks. Contextual
interactions became an important concern of sociologists in the 1960s, when substantial efforts were
made to learn the effects on youth of school and neighborhood environment (e.g. Coleman et al.,
1966; Sewell and Armer, 1966). The recent resurgence of interest in spatial concepts of the
underclass has spawned new empirical studies (e.g. Crane, 1991; Mayer, 1991).
                                                  26

alternatives to the linear-in-means model that open other possibilities for identification, in principle

if not in practice. One alternative supposes that individual behavior varies with lagged rather than

contemporaneous values of group mean behavior. This resolves the identification problem if one

a priori knows the appropriate lag length. Another alternative supposes that individual behavior

varies in a specified nonlinear manner with group mean behavior. This resolves the identification

problem if one a priori knows the correct nonlinear function. A third alternative supposes that

individual behavior varies with some feature of group behavior other than the mean; the median say.

This resolves the identification problem if one a priori knows the relevant feature of group behavior.

These and other alternative models may sensibly be applied in some settings but here, as in

econometric analysis of market interactions, empirical findings are only as credible as the identifying

assumptions imposed.

       The discussion thus far assumes that the researcher a priori knows the group, or groups, with

whom a person may interact. Outcome data do not reveal group composition, so researchers must

somehow obtain this information in other ways.15 Lacking empirical evidence, economists have

typically made assumptions about group composition and then proceeded with analysis.16 For

example, the Borjas (1991) analysis of “ethnic capital” presumes that persons interact with members

of their own ethnic group. The Glaeser et al. (1996) study of social interactions in crime applies an

abstract spatial model of neighbors on a lattice to precinct and city-level data, the Case (1991) study


       15
        The need for prior information on group composition also arises in studies of markets and
games. In market analyses, the researcher must a priori specify the relevant consumers and firms.
Games are not well-defined until the players are specified.
       16
           Empirical evidence on group composition may be elicited from group members. This
practice has a long history in sociology (e.g., Coleman et al., 1957; Marsden, 1990), but economists
typically do not collect or use such data. A recent exception is Woittez and Kapteyn (1998).
                                                27

of demand interactions measures strength of the interaction by distance, and the Case and Katz

(1991) study of inner-city youth defines neighborhoods as units one or two square blocks in size.

Often, however, it is not obvious what the relevant groups should be. Consider, for example, the

definition of “neighborhood” in studies of neighborhood effects. Considering the geography of

residences, should the neighborhood be assumed to be an apartment house, a block, a census track,

or a city? Or might the relevant geography be that of schools, workplaces, or church parishes? And

what of telecommunications that may diminish the importance of physical geography entirely?

       However severe the reflection problem may be when group composition is known, the

problem becomes insurmountable when group composition is unknown. Mean group behavior is,

by definition, the average of the individual behaviors in the group. It follows that, given any

specification of group composition, the regression of individual behavior on group mean behavior

is linear with coefficient one.17 Hence, when observed outcomes constitute the only empirical

evidence available, a researcher who conjectures the presence of endogenous interactions within any

hypothesized group cannot be proved wrong.




4. Inside Endogenous Interactions



       Suppose that an empirical researcher is able to find credible evidence indicating the presence


       17
           This is easy to show. Let the hypothesized group be all persons with attributes x. Let y
denote the behavior or other outcome of interest. Let E(y*x) be the mean of y in group x. Suppose
that a researcher hypothesizes the linear regression model y = a + bE(y*x) + u, with E(u*x) = 0.
Taking expectations of both sides yields E(y*x) = a + b E(y*x). Hence the linear model holds
tautologically with a = 0 and b = 1.
                                                 28

of endogenous interactions. How much does this accomplish? From the perspective of economics

or policy, not very much.

       The concept of endogenous interactions is too broad to be very useful. This concept

aggregates all three of the basic economic processes described in Section 2.1 – preference,

expectations, and constraint interactions. Each of these processes describes a distinct channel

through which group behavior may affect individual behavior; hence each is endogenous. If

empirical analysis is to be useful, it needs to do more than show the presence of endogenous

interactions writ large.

       To make the point concretely, consider the public concern about high rates of drug use among

youth in areas of concentrated poverty. Suppose that credible empirical evidence for endogenous

interactions should emerge. Such evidence would leave open basic questions about the processes

at work. Does the stigma associated with drug use fall as the prevalence of use rises (a preference

interaction)? Or do youth learn about the attractiveness of drug use by observing it in their environs

(an expectations interaction)?

       Understanding interactions at a deeper level seems essential to evaluate the effectiveness of

anti-drug initiatives providing information on the deleterious effects of drug addiction. Consider the

crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980s, which appears to have subsided during the 1990s. A plausible

explanation of the course of the epidemic begins with positive expectations interactions as youth of

the ‘80s may have observed some of their peers initiate crack usage and apparently enjoy it. There

also may have been positive preference interactions of the stigma-reducing type. Eventually,

however, youth of the ‘90s may have observed the devastating long-term outcomes experienced by

addicts of the ‘80s, and subsequently may have chosen not to initiate crack use themselves. If this
                                                 29

story of observational learning is correct, then an information campaign warning of the devastating

effects of crack addiction might have been effective in the early stages of the epidemic but

superfluous later on.

       Abstracting from the case of drug use, it is important in general to distinguish preference

interactions from the expectations interactions generated by observational learning.             The

phenomenon of interest may be epidemics in drug use or queuing for tables at well-regarded

restaurants or herd behavior in stock trading. In these and many other situations, one person may

“imitate” another because the former person prefers to act like the latter, or because he believes the

latter person to have superior information.18 These explanations are distinct and have differing

implications for policy. Interventions that provide new information may alter the nature of

expectations interactions or even cause them to disappear, but should have no effect on preference

interactions.



Subjective Data for Subjective Concepts

       Preferences and expectations are the core subjective concepts of economics. Having devoted

much of my own research to revealed preference analysis of discrete choice behavior, I have become

keenly aware that observation of the action that a person chooses places only mild restrictions on the




       18
          Explanation of imitation as an expectations interaction has been a recurring theme in
theoretical research on observational learning. See, for example, Conlisk (1980), Bannerjee (1992),
Bickchandani et al. (1992), and Manski (1993b). However, Bernheim (1994) models imitation as
a preference interaction. Among empirical researchers, Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), Munshi
(1999) and Munshi and Myaux (1999) have been careful to separate imitation based on preference
and expectations interactions.
                                                 30

person’s preferences and expectations.19 Rather than try to infer preferences and expectations from

observations of chosen actions, why not elicit them directly?

       Pose this question to an economist, and chances are that one will receive an instant hostile

response. Economists tend to be deeply skeptical of subjective statements. Early in their careers,

they are taught to believe only what people do, not what they say. Economists often assert that

respondents to surveys have no incentive to answer questions about their preferences or expectations

carefully or honestly; hence, there is no reason to believe that subjective responses reliably reflect

respondents’ thinking.20 As a result, the profession has enforced something of a prohibition on the

collection of subjective data.

       In the absence of data on preferences and expectations, economists have compensated by

imposing assumptions. The profession has shown a striking asymmetry in its attitude toward

preference and expectations assumptions.         Economists tend to show discomfort imposing

assumptions on preferences. Yet researchers easily impose severe assumptions on expectations,



       19
           The theory of reveal preference analysis pioneered by Samuelson in the 1940s posed a
thought experiment in which a person with perfect foresight chooses an action from each of many
distinct choice sets. A researcher observing the set of chosen actions can then infer the person’s
preferences. The Savage (1954) theory of subjective expected utility posed such a thought
experiment in a setting where the person does not know the state of nature. Savage found that, if
the set of chosen actions adheres to certain axioms, the observer can infer the person’s preferences
and expectations.
        Empirical applications of revealed preference analysis do not have the extensive data
presumed available in the Samuelson and Savage thought experiments. The empirical researcher
usually observes a sample of heterogeneous persons, each of whom makes a single choice from a
single choice set. Observation of a single choice from a single choice set reveals something, but not
much, about a persons’s preferences and expectations.
       20
         Interestingly, economists do not apply this reasoning to self-reports of “objective” data.
Empirical researchers routinely accept as fact survey respondents’ reports of their socioeconomic and
demographic characteristics, choices, and experiences.
                                                 31

often without comment. It has become especially commonplace to impose rational expectations

assumptions.

       My experience in econometrics has led me to conclude that there is only limited scope for

productive theorizing about preferences and expectations alike. Rational expectations assumptions

should be particularly suspect. Agents forming forecasts of the consequences of choosing alternative

actions confront the same difficult inferential problems that economists face as they attempt to

perform empirical research. Research in econometric method emphasizes that empirical findings

depend on the data available and the assumptions maintained. How can a theorist presume to know

what data individuals have available and what assumptions they maintain? And what reasoning

justifies the rational-expectations assumption that individuals share a correct understanding of the

structure of the economy, when examination of the state of economic science shows substantial

disagreement among professional economists? 21

       Unable to answer these questions, about ten years ago I began to question seriously the

conventional economic wisdom about elicitation of expectations. I sought to determine the scientific

basis underlying economists’ hostility, and found it to be meager. 22 I subsequently began a program


       21
          A concrete instance may be helpful to have in mind. In Manski (1993c), I pointed out that
youth forming earnings expectations as they contemplate schooling choices confront the same
inferential problems as do labor economists when they study the returns to schooling. The literature
on labor economics exhibits much debate on the credibility of various assumptions and many
disagreements about findings. If experts disagree on the returns to schooling, is it plausible to
assume that youth have rational expectations?
       22
          During the 1950s, economists reported negative evidence on the usefulness of a certain
type of qualitative questioning about expectations in predicting consumer behavior. This narrow
finding appears to have led economists to draw the broad, but unsubstantiated conclusion that all
expectations data are suspect. Dominitz and Manski (1997a, 1999) discuss this history.
        There seems to be a similarly narrow basis for the hostility of economists towards elicitation
of preferences. In this case, the available negative evidence largely concerns the practice of
                                                  32

of research eliciting economic expectations in the form of subjective probabilities (e.g., Dominitz

and Manski, 1997a, 1997b). Research along similar lines has been initiated by others (e.g., Hurd and

McGarry, 1995; Guiso et al., 1992).

       Enough has already been accomplished to make clear that the conventional wisdom is

unfounded. Survey respondents do provide coherent, useful information when queried about their

expectations. However, the new literature on elicitation of expectations is still in its infancy.

Research needs to move beyond its current focus on measurement of expectations to the more

challenging task of eliciting information on how persons form their expectations. Only when that

happens will it be possible to assess the contribution that collection of subjective data can make to

our understanding of expectations interactions.




5. Wanted: Clear Thinking and Adequate Data



       Development of an informative, cumulative body of empirical research on social interactions

will require clear thinking and adequate data. The very first step must be to get the concepts right.

The core concepts of present-day economics – preferences, expectations, constraints, and equilibrium

– offer a coherent framework within which one can define rigorously and analyze constructively

many interaction processes. These economic concepts may not suffice to characterize all of the ways

that humans interact with one another, but I cannot envision how social science might flourish



contingent valuation, where respondents are asked about their willingness to pay for public goods
(e.g. Hausman, 1993).
                                                    33

without them.

          The next step must be to respect both the logic and the credibility of scientific inference.

Empirical researchers obviously need to understand how the conclusions of an empirical analysis

depend logically on the data and assumptions brought to bear. They must also appreciate how the

strength of the assumptions they maintain affects the credibility of the empirical findings that they

report.

          Clear thinking is a prerequisite for productive empirical analysis but it does not suffice. The

data brought to bear must be adequate to make credible inference possible. The practice has been

to infer interaction processes from observations of their outcomes. The discussion of Section 3

makes plain that outcome data do not, per se, provide an adequate foundation for empirical research.

Sustained progress will require richer data. In Manski (1993a), I concluded that experimental and

subjective data will have to play important roles in future efforts to learn about social interactions.

Having observed the subsequent evolution of empirical research, I feel even more strongly about this

today.
                                              34

References


Akerlof, George, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84, 488-500.

Akerlof, George, “A Theory of Social Custom, of Which Unemployment may be One Consequence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1980, 94, 749-775.

Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger, “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106, 979-1014.

Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy, “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
Scholastic Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 533-575.

Arrow, Kenneth and F. H. Hahn, General Competitive Analysis, 1971, San Francisco: Holden-Day.

Arrow, Kenneth, “The Theory of Discrimination,” in O. Ashenfelter and A. Rees (editors),
Discrimination in Labor Markets, 1973, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Arthur, Brian, Steven Durlauf, and David Lane (editors), The Economy as an Evolving Complex
System II, 1997, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Asch, Solomon, Social Psychology, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1952.

Banerjee, Abhijit, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 117,
797-817.

Becker, Gary, “A Theory of Social Interactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82, 1063-
1093.

Becker, Gary, Treatise on the Family, 1991, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Benabou, Roland, “Equity and Efficiency in Human Capital Investment: The Local Connection,”
Review of Economic Studies, 1996a, 63, 237-264.

Benabou, Roland, “Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Implications of
Community Structure and School Finance,” American Economic Review, 1996b, 86, 584-609.

Bergstrom, Theodore, “A Fresh Look at the Rotten-Kid Theorem – And Other Household
Mysteries,” Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97, 1138-1159.

Bernheim, Douglas, “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994,102, 841-877.
                                               35

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 1995, 63, 841-890.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirschleifer, and Ivo Welch, “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100, 992-1026.

Blumstein, Alfred, Jacqueline Cohen, and Daniel Nagin (editors), Deterrence and Incapacitation:
Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on Crime Rates, 1978, Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.

Borjas, George, “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1991, 108, 123-150.

Bowles, Samuel, “‘Social Capital’ and Community Governance,” Focus, 1999, 20, 6-10.

Brock, William and Steven Durlauf, “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,” in B. Arthur, S.
Durlauf, and D. Lane (editors), The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, 1997, Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Brock, William and Steven Durlauf, “Interactions-Based Models,” in J. Heckman and E. Leamer
(editors), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5, 2000, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Cain, Glen, “The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey,” in O. Ashenfelter
and R. Layard (editors), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1, 1986, New York: Elsevier.

Camic, Charles, “The Making of a Method: A Historical Reinterpretation of the Early Parson,”
American Sociological Review, August 1987, 52, 421-439.

Case, Ann, “Spatial Patterns in Household Demand,” Econometrica, 1991, 59, 953-965.

Case, Ann and Larry Katz, “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and Neighborhood on
Disadvantaged Youth,” Working Paper 3705, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1991.

Coase, Ronald, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, 1960, 3, 1-44.

Cole, Harold, George Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, “Social Norms, Savings Behavior, and
Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100, 1092-1125.

Coleman, James, Introduction to Mathematical Sociology, New York: McMillan.

Coleman, James, “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital,” American Journal of Sociology,
1988, 94, S95-S121.
                                               36

Coleman, J., E. Campbell, C. Hobson, J. McPartland, A. Mood, F. Weinfeld, and R. York, Equality
of Educational Opportunity, 1966, Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Coleman, James, E. Katz, and H. Menzel, “The Diffusion of an Innovation Among Physicians,”
Sociometry, 1957, 20, 253-270.

Conlisk, John, “Costly Optimizers Versus Cheap Imitators,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 1980, 1: 275-293.

Crane, Jonathan, “The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on Dropping Out and
Teenage Childbearing,” American Journal of Sociology, 1991, 96, 1226-1259.

Cyert, Richard and Morris DeGroot, “Rational Expectations and Bayesian Analysis,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1974, 82, 521-536.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles Manski, “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income
Expectations,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1997a, 92, 855-867.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles Manski, “Perceptions of Economic Insecurity: Evidence from the Survey
of Economic Expectations,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 1997b, 61, 261-287.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles Manski, “The Several Cultures of Research on Subjective Expectations,”
in R. Willis and J. Smith (editors), Wealth, Work, and Health, 1999, Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.

Dubin, J. and D. McFadden, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance Holdings
and Consumption,” Econometrica, 1984, 52, 345-362.

Duesenberry, James, Income, Savings, and the Theory of Consumption, 1949, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Durlauf, Steven, “The Case ‘Against’ Social Capital,” Focus, 1999, 20, 1-5.

Ehrlich, Isaac, “The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: A Question of Life and Death,”
American Economic Review, 1975, 65, 397-417.

Ehrlich, Isaac, “Crime, Punishment, and the Market for Offenses,” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives,” Winter 1996, 10, 43-67.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano, “Competition Between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers
and Peer Group Effects,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88, 33-63.
                                                37

Fershtman, C. and U. Gneezy, “Trust and Discrimination in a Segmented Society,” Department of
Economics, Tel-Aviv University, 1998.

Flinn, Christopher and Daniela Del Boca, “Rationalizing Child-Support Decisions,” American
Economic Review, 1995, 85, 1241-1262.

Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others: Human
Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103, 1176-1209.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption Function, 1957, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Garfinkel, Irwin, Charles Manski, and Charles Michalopolous, “Micro-Experiments and Macro
Effects,” in C. Manski and I. Garfinkel (editors), Evaluating Welfare and Training Programs, 1992,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Glaeser, Edward, David Laibson, Jose Scheinkman, and Christine Soutter, “What is Social Capital?
The Determinants of Trust and Trustworthiness,” Working Paper 7216, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1999.

Glaeser, Edward, Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose Scheinkman, “Crime and Social Interactions,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1996, 111, 507-548.

Goldberger, Arthur and Otis Dudley Duncan (editors), Structural Equation Models in the Social
Sciences, 1973, New York: Seminar Press.

Granovetter, Mark, “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior,” American Journal of Sociology,
1979, 83, 1420-1443.

Green, Edward and Robert Porter, “Noncooperative Collusion Under Imperfect Price Information,”
Econometrica, 1984, 52, 87-100.

Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese, “Earnings Uncertainty and Precautionary Saving,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 1992, 30, 307-337.

Hansen, Lars Peter and James J. Heckman, “The Empirical Foundations of Calibration,” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Winter 1996, 10, 87-104.

Hanushek, Eric, “The Evidence on Class Size,” Occasional Paper 98-1, Wallis Institute of Political
Economy, University of Rochester, 1998.

Harris, Jeffrey E, “Macroexperiments versus Microexperiments for Health Policy,” in Social
Experimentation, J. Hausman and D. Wise (editors), 1985, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                              38

Hausman, Jerry (editor), Contingent Valuation; A Critical Assessment, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Holland, Paul and Samuel Leinhardt, “A New Method for Detecting Structure in Sociometric Data,”
American Journal of Sociology, 1970, 76, 492-513.

Hurd, Michael and Kathleen McGarry, “Evaluation of Subjective Probabilities of Survival in the
Health and Retirement Study,” Journal of Human Resources, 1995, 30, S268-S292.

Hyman, H., “The Psychology of Status," Archives of Psychology, 1942, No. 269.

Jacobs, J., The Death and Life of Great American Cities, 1961, New York: Vintage.

Jencks, Christoper and Susan Mayer, “Growing Up in Poor Neighborhoods: How Much Does it
Matter?” Science, 1989, 243, 1441-1445.

Jones, Steven, The Economics of Conformism, 1984, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Observable Implications of Models with Multiple Equilibria,” Econometrica,
1989, 57, 1431-1438.

Kagel, John and Alvin Roth, Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1995.

Kalai, Ehud and Ehud Lehrer, “Rational Learning Leads to Nash Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 1993,
61, 1019-1045.

Kandori, Michihiro, “Social Norms and Community Enforcement,” Review of Economic Studies,
1992, 59, 63-80.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, “The Computational Experiment: An Econometric Tool,”
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 1996, 10, 69-85.

Lazear, Edward, “Economic Imperialism,” Working Paper 7300, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1999a.

Lazear, Edward, “Educational Production,” Working Paper 7349, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1999b.

Loury, Glenn, “A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences,” in P. Wallace and A. LaMond
(editors), Women, Minorities, and Employment Discrimination, 1977, Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
                                               39

Lucas, Robert, “On The Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
1988, 22, 3-42.

Manski, Charles, “School Choice (Vouchers) and Social Mobility,” Economics of Education Review,
1992, 11, 351-369.

Manski, Charles, “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,” Review
of Economic Studies, 1993a, 60, 531-542.

Manski, Charles, “Dynamic Choice in Social Settings: Learning from the Experiences of Others,”
Journal of Econometrics, 1993b, 58, 121-136.

Manski, Charles, “Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to Schooling?”
in C. Clotfelter and M. Rothschild (editors) Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education,
1993c, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Manski, Charles, Identification Problems in the Social Sciences, 1995, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Manski, Charles, “Monotone Treatment Response,” Econometrica, 1997a, 65, 1311-1334.

Manski, Charles, “Identification of Anonymous Endogenous Interactions,” in B. Arthur, S. Durlauf,
and D. Lane (editors), The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, 1997b, Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley.

Manski, Charles and John Pepper, “Monotone Instrumental Variables: With an Application to the
Returns to Schooling,” Econometrica, 2000, forthcoming.

Manski, Charles and David Wise, College Choice in America, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1983.

Marsden, Peter, “Network Data and Measurement,” Annual Review of Sociology, 1990, 16, 435-463.

Mayer, Susan, “How Much Does a High School's Racial and Socioeconomic Mix Affect Graduation
and Teenage Fertility Rates?” in C. Jencks and P. Peterson (editors) The Urban Underclass, 1991,
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.

McElroy, Marjorie, “The Empirical Content of Nash-Bargained Household Behavior,” Journal of
Human Resources, 1990, 25, 559-583.

Merton, Robert, Social Theory and Social Structure, 1957, Glencoe: The Free Press.
                                               40

Moffitt, Robert, “Policy Interventions, Low-level Equilibria, and Social Interactions,” Department
of Economics, Johns Hopkins University, 1999.

Munshi, Kaivan, “Social Learning and the Speed of Diffusion Across Innovations,” 1999,
Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Munshi, Kaivan and Jacques Myaux, “Peer-effects and Individual Decisions: With an Application
to the Demographic Transition,” 1999, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Myerson, Roger, “Nash Equilibrium and the History of Economic Theory,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 1999, 37, 1067-1082.

Pollak, Robert, “Interdependent Preferences,” American Economic Review, 1976, 78, 745-763.

Portes, Alexandro, “Social Capital: Its Origins and Application in Modern Sociology,” Annual
Review of Sociology, 1998, 1-14.

Putnam, R. “The Prosperous Community: Social Capital and Public Life,” The American Prospect,
1993, 13, 35-42.

Romer, Paul, “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 98, S71-
S102.

Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin, “Parental and Public Transfers to Young Women and Their
Children,” American Economic Review, 1994, 84, 1195-1212.

Savage, Leonard, The Foundations of Statistics, 1954, New York: Wiley.

Schelling, Thomas, “Dynamic Models of Segregation,” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 1971,
1, 143-186.

Schelling, Thomas, Micromotives and Macrobehavior, 1978, New York: Norton.

Sewell, William and J. Armer, “Neighborhood Context and College Plans,” American Sociological
Review, 31, 159-168.

Sims, Christopher A., “Macroeconomics and Methodology,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Winter 1996, 10, 105-120.

Tamer, Elie, “Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response Models with Multiple Equilibria,”
Department of Economics, Princeton University, 1999.
                                              41

Tiebout, Charles, “A Pure Theory of Local Public Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy,
1956, 64, 416-424.

Willis, Robert and Sherwin Rosen, “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political Economy,
1979, 87, S7-S36.

Woittiez, Isolde and Arie Kapteyn, “Social Interactions and Habit Formation in a Model of Female
Labour Supply,” Journal of Public Economics, 1998, 70, 185-205.

Young, Peyton, “The Economics of Convention,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1996, 10, 105-
122.
