NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDIUM-TERM DETERMINANTS OF CURRENT ACCOUNTS IN
INDUSTRIAL AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
AN EMPIRICAL EXPLORATION
Menzie Chinn
Eswar S. Prasad
Working Paper 7581
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7581
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

We are grateful to Tamim Bayoumi, Hamid Faruqee, Peter Isard, Lori Kletzer, Philip Lane, Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti, Assaf Razin and numerous other colleagues and seminar participants for comments and
helpful discussions and to Sarma Jayanthi for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the IMF or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Menzie Chinn and Eswar S. Prasad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Medium-Term Determinants of Current Accounts in Industrial and Developing
Countries: An Empirical Exploration
Menzie Chinn and Eswar S. Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 7581
March 2000
JEL No. F32, F41
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an empirical investigation of the medium-term determinants of current
accounts for a large sample of industrial and developing countries. The analysis is based on a
structural approach that highlights the roles of the fundamental macroeconomic determinants of
saving and investment. Cross-section and panel regression techniques are used to characterize the
properties of current account variation across countries and over time. We find that current account
balances are positively correlated with government budget balances and initial stocks of net foreign
assets. Among developing countries, measures of financial deepening are positively associated with
current account balances while indicators of openness to international trade are negatively correlated
with current account balances.

Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics
Social Sciences I
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
chinn@cats.ucsc.edu

Eswar S. Prasad
Research Department
IMF
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
eprasad@imf.org

-1-

I. Introduction
The objective of this paper is to provide an empirical characterization of the
determinants of current account balances for a large sample of industrial and developing
countries. The approach taken here is to view the current account from the longer-run
perspective of saving-investment balances. Thus, the roles of the “fundamental” determinants
of saving and investment levels are emphasized rather than factors influencing the short-run
dynamics of the current account. Using both cross-section and panel data estimation techniques
and an extensive dataset that covers industrial and developing countries, we characterize the
main determinants of medium-term current account variation across countries and over time.
The determinants of current account balances are of considerable interest in open
economy macroeconomics. Alternative theoretical models have different predictions about the
factors underlying current account dynamics and about the sign and magnitude of the
relationships between current account fluctuations and these determinants. Hence, empirical
analysis of the sort undertaken in this paper could help discriminate among competing theories.
Understanding the factors that influence medium-term fluctuations in the current
account could have important policy implications as well. In particular, the notion of current
account sustainability has come to be of considerable interest in the context of recent episodes
of macroeconomic turbulence in many emerging markets. Although this paper does not directly
address the question of current account sustainability, the analysis does provide an indication of
the levels of current accounts that may be considered “normal” for a country, based on a
number of its structural and macroeconomic attributes, including stage of development,
demographic profile, the government budget balance etc.
In this paper, we take a uniform approach to analyzing the determinants of current
account balances for industrial and developing countries. Since the world as a whole is a closed
economy, there are obvious inter-relationships among the current account positions of
industrial and developing countries. In our empirical work, we allow for differences in results
across different groups of countries. However, rather than merely positing that these differences
exist, we relate them to observed attributes of these countries. Our dataset is well suited for
such an analysis since it covers a large and heterogeneous group of countries (18 industrial, 71
developing) over a relatively long time span (1971-1995). The empirical analysis in the paper

-2-

also involves a rich set of potential determinants of current account variation--including many
drawn from the literatures on the cross-country determinants of growth, saving, and
investment--and an extensive battery of robustness tests for the main results.
This paper is related to a number of different strands of literature. One set of papers has
explored, using different techniques and datasets, the determinants of saving for both industrial
and developing countries (see, e.g., Schmidt-Hebbel, Webb and Corsetti, 1992; Edwards, 1995;
Masson, Bayoumi and Samiei, 1997). Many of these papers have attempted to link national
saving to structural determinants including levels of economic development, demographic
profiles etc. Interestingly, a number of these studies include the current account as an
independent variable that determines national saving. Thus, our approach is fundamentally
different from this literature in that this paper views current account balances as the outcome of
variations in structural and macroeconomic determinants that influence the saving-investment
balance. A much smaller set of papers has examined the macroeconomic determinants of
investment in developing countries (see, e.g., Serven, 1998). The literature on domestic
investment in industrial countries is vast.
Current accounts have themselves, of course, been the subject of considerable research.
One recent approach, represented by papers such as Ghosh (1995) and Ghosh and Ostry (1995),
is the application of insights derived from the consumption-smoothing literature to the
modeling of current account dynamics. Glick and Rogoff (1995) model the joint dynamics of
investment and current accounts in response to productivity shocks (also see Nason and Rogers,
1999). They show that, for a sample of industrial countries, country-specific shocks rather than
global shocks are important for current account fluctuations and also that the degree of
persistence of a productivity shock affects the current account response in an important way.
These sets of papers, however, focus largely on the short-run dynamics of the current account.
The more ambitious intertemporal approach to current account determination, as
typified by the work of Razin (1995) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998), has attempted to extend
dynamic optimizing models to the open economy context. An alternative structural approach to
current account determination is adopted by Debelle and Faruqee (1996), who use a savinginvestment perspective to motivate empirical specifications that contain the “structural”
determinants of current accounts.

-3-

In this paper, we build upon the work of the authors cited above and, in particular,
generalize the work of Debelle and Faruqee (1996) by extending the analysis to developing
countries and by exploring a wider range of static and dynamic specifications. Although we use
a variety of theoretical models to understand and interpret our results, we do not test any of
these models or their predictions formally. Hence, the paper’s objective is mainly to provide an
empirical, but not entirely atheoretical, characterization of current account determinants that
could be helpful for determining the empirical relevance of and for constructing more formal
theoretical models. Our work is similar in some respects to that of Calderon, Chong and Loayza
(1999) but our focus, unlike theirs, is on medium-term current account determination and our
econometric methodologies are, therefore, quite different.
The next section of the paper contains a discussion of some data and econometric issues
germane to the empirical modeling of current account dynamics. Results from cross-section
regressions are presented in Section III and results from panel estimation are presented in
Section IV. A variety of robustness tests for the main results are discussed in Section V.
Concluding remarks are in Section VI.

II. The Empirical Framework
This section presents a selective overview of certain empirical issues that motivate the
estimation framework used in this paper. A more detailed discussion of the theoretical effects
of different variables on the current account is deferred until the next section.
The benchmark sample for our analysis covers both industrial and developing countries.
The basic data set has annual data for 18 industrial and 71 developing countries and, for most
countries in the sample, covers the period 1971-95. Variable definitions and data sources, along
with the list of countries in the sample and country groupings, are presented in the Appendix.
The dependent variable in most of the analysis is the current account balance, expressed as a
ratio to GDP. A negative value of the dependent variable represents a current account deficit.
The empirical specifications used in the paper are generally of the following form:
 CA 


 GDP  it

= α + β X it + ε it

-4-

where the current account is expressed as a ratio to GDP in order to control for scale effects and
X is a vector of independent variables that includes the government budget balance; relative
income; dependency ratios; average GDP growth; terms of trade volatility; measures of capital
controls; degree of openness; and financial deepening. For cross-section regressions, the time
subscript is not relevant. The precise definitions of these variables and the predictions of
different theoretical models about the signs and magnitudes of the relationships between these
variables and current account balances will be discussed in later sections of the paper.
Dummies for regional groupings of countries are also included in the estimation where
indicated and, in the panel regressions, so are time dummies.
One potential problem with developing country data is the possibility of significant
measurement error in relatively high frequency data, even at an annual frequency. To obviate
any biases in our results arising from such measurement error, and since our interest is
primarily in medium-term rather than short-term variations in current accounts, we construct a
panel that contains non-overlapping 5-year averages of the data for each country. So, for
instance, 25 annual observations for a particular country over the 1971-95 period would be
compressed into 5 observations. This procedure also has the advantage of abstracting from
short-run variations in current accounts and related variables, which are of lesser interest for the
purposes of the analysis in this paper. We later test the robustness of our results to this
compression of the data by recomputing all of the estimates using the underlying annual data.
Table 1 presents a variance decomposition for this panel data set that indicates how
much of the variation in the relevant variables is attributable to variation across countries and
over time, respectively. Certain variables such as current account balances and government
budget balances vary substantially across countries and, within each country, over time. In
contrast, other variables including relative income and net foreign asset positions vary
markedly across countries but are relatively more stable over time within countries. There are
some differences in the contributions of within- and between-country effects across the
industrial and developing country samples, but the relative importance of these two effects for
the total variation in each variable is quite similar across the two samples. The main result to be
taken from this table is that many of the dependent and independent variables of interest for this
study vary quite markedly in both the cross-section and time-series dimensions.

-5-

An important point to note here is that our primary interest is in low-frequency current
account variation. Hence, we do not attempt to distinguish between the effects of temporary
and permanent shocks and among different sources of shocks. These distinctions are potentially
very important for modeling short-run dynamics and for disentangling short-run and long-run
dynamics of the current account.1 Given the frequency of the data that we work with, the
interpretation of our results is less influenced by issues concerning the sources and persistence
of the underlying shocks.

III. Cross-Section Results
In this section, we use cross-sectional specifications to examine the determinants of the
levels of current account balances. Our goal in this section is to provide a broad-brush
characterization of the structural factors that could be important for determining cross-country
variation in current account positions.
We first examine the results from OLS regressions for the full-sample averages of the
independent variable and each of the dependent variables for each country. In principle, these
regressions highlight the factors that are relevant for current account determination at very low
frequencies. The results are presented in Table 2. The first column shows the results for all
countries, while the remaining columns show the results from regressions run separately for
industrial and developing countries, respectively. Since many of the results were sensitive to
the inclusion of African countries, we also report results for the full sample and for the
developing country sample excluding the African countries.
A result that appears to be relatively robust across country groupings is that the
government budget balance is positively related to the current account balance. In other words,
higher levels of public saving across countries tend to be associated with larger current account
surpluses (or smaller current account deficits). This is an interesting result but, since budget

1

Glick and Rogoff (1995), Lee and Chinn (1998) and Prasad (1999) show how the sources of
shocks and their persistence can affect the dynamics of trade and current account balances.
Calderon, Chong and Loayza (1999) try to differentiate between the effects of permanent and
transitory shocks on annual current account variation in developing countries.

-6-

balances vary quite substantially over time within countries, we just note the robustness of this
result here and investigate it further in the next section.
Next, we examine the role of an important “initial condition”—the beginning-of-sample
stock of net foreign assets (NFA). In order to reduce the effects of measurement error, we use
the average value of the NFA to GDP ratio in the first five years of the sample for each
country.2 The initial stock of NFA would, in principle, be expected to be negatively related to
the current account. For instance, from an intertemporal perspective, a country that had a
significant stock of net foreign liabilities (NFL) relative to its GDP would eventually have to
run surpluses, at least on its trade balance, in order to pay off its liabilities or, at the minimum,
would need to run smaller current account deficits (as a ratio to GDP) in order to stabilize its
NFL/GDP ratio. However, even in a sample that spans two-and-a-half decades, this long-run
effect could be overwhelmed by other factors.
Figure 1, which plots initial NFA/GDP ratios versus average current account balances,
hints at a positive relationship between these two variables, especially among the industrial
countries. These scatter plots should be interpreted with caution since they show only
unconditional correlations between two variables, unlike the regression results which control
for a number of other variables. The results in the first column of Table 2 do reveal a strong
positive conditional relationship between the stock of NFA and the current account for the full
sample. An examination of the other columns of this table shows that, in the cross section, this
result is driven largely by industrial countries. In other words, industrial countries that have a
relatively large stock of NFA to begin with tend to run larger current account surpluses. While
the coefficient is also positive for developing countries, it is much smaller and not significant.

2

As a robustness check, we tried replacing the NFA variable with the measure of net external
debt taken from the World Bank saving database. In principle, these variables should be
similar. However, the correlation between these two variables turned out be quite small and,
perhaps because of greater measurement error in the debt variable, the coefficient on the
external debt to GDP ratio was not significant in some specifications (the sample sizes were
smaller since the latter variable was available only for a subset of the countries in our full
sample). An effort is underway by a consortium of international organizations (BIS, OECD,
IMF, World Bank) to improve the quality and consistency of cross-country external debt data
but these improved data are currently available only for a very limited period.

-7-

The “stages of development” hypothesis for the balance of payments suggests that, as
countries move from a low to an intermediate stage of development, they typically import
capital and, therefore, run current account deficits (see Roldos, 1996, for a survey of recent
work on this topic). Over time, as they reach an advanced stage of development, countries run
current account surpluses in order to pay off accumulated external liabilities and also to export
capital to less advanced economies. This is in some ways a rough analogue to the permanent
income life-cycle hypothesis, but at the country rather than individual level. Various models of
the “big push” and “take off” describe the factors that could determine the timing of this
transition but the threshold at which this transition occurs, and especially the point at which it
influences the current account position, is finally an empirical matter. This is, of course, a longterm view of current account determination but using a cross-section of countries distributed
over a wide range in terms of stage of development provides an indirect test of the empirical
validity of this hypothesis.
To capture stage of development effects, we include relative per capita income and its
square in the regressions. In each year, relative per capita income is measured as the ratio of
domestic per capita income to U.S. per capita income. Incomes for countries other than the U.S.
are converted into U.S. dollars using purchasing power parity exchange rates. The squared term
allows for possible nonlinearities in the relationship between relative per capita income and
current account positions. In particular, this term captures the empirical relevance of the stages
of development hypothesis which predicts a U-shaped relationship between the current account
balance and the stage of development, as measured by relative per capita output.3
For the full sample, the coefficient on the relative income term is positive and the
coefficient on the quadratic term is negative, with both coefficients being strongly statistically
significant. Taken together, these coefficients suggest a pattern which is the opposite of that
predicted by the stage of development hypothesis. This pattern, however, appears to be driven
mainly by the industrial countries in the sample (column 3). The coefficients on the relative
3

An interesting issue that arises here is whether the relative income level is the appropriate
measure to capture a country’s stage of development. As noted below, we also control for
growth rates of output, which, however, could also proxy for other factors. This issue is
discussed in more detail in the next section.

-8-

income terms are not significant for the developing country sample separately (columns 4 and
5). Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of the cross-sectional relationship between the
current account to GDP ratio and relative income. The developing and industrial country
groups (the latter set of countries labeled with upper case letters) form two clusters (partly
overlapping) on this scatter plot. Mechanically, it is easy to see from this figure why a
regression that attempts to fit points in both clusters yields the signs it does on the level and
quadratic relative income terms. Thus, in our sample, the cross section regressions do not
provide evidence in favor of the stages of development hypothesis for explaining levels of
current account positions across countries.4
An important structural determinant of domestic saving is likely to be the demographic
profile of the population. One would expect the size of the dependent population relative to the
working-age population to be negatively correlated with aggregate domestic saving. From the
perspective of current account determination, however, demographic profiles should be
important only insofar as they differ across countries and, thereby, influence cross-country
differences in saving. Further, there could be differences in saving patterns depending on the
fractions of the total population that are comprised of young and old dependents. To capture
these differences, we construct young and old dependency ratios separately and express both
these ratios relative to the respective sample averages across all countries.
The results indicate that higher relative dependency ratios are indeed associated with
smaller current account surpluses (or larger deficits) for some of the country groups. There are
differences in the magnitudes of the effects of dependency ratios for the young and the old;
only the youth dependency ratio has a significant negative effect on current accounts among
developing countries. Although few of the estimated coefficients are statistically significant,
they have the same signs but are larger in absolute magnitudes than the coefficients on the total
dependency ratio reported by Masson, Bayoumi, and Samiei (1998) in their study of the
4

Debelle and Faruqee (1996) report similar cross-section results for a sample including
industrial and a few developing countries. They, too, note the instability of these coefficient
estimates across specifications. We experimented with the inclusion of higher order
polynomials of relative income in the regressions, but their coefficients were not statistically
significant and did not change any of the results.

-9-

determinants of national saving, using annual data for industrial and developing countries. We
interpret this as indicating that demographic factors play a more important role in lowfrequency rather than high-frequency current account variation and that national saving is the
channel through which dependency ratios affect current account positions.
A potentially important determinant of saving, that has been emphasized in particular
by Edwards (1995), is “financial deepening.” This is usually proxied by the ratio of a monetary
aggregate such as M2 to GDP. Although he finds that this variable is positively correlated with
national saving rates, Edwards points out that the interpretation of the results using this variable
could be complicated. The traditional interpretation of this variable as a measure of the depth
and sophistication of the financial system suggests that financial deepening could induce more
saving. Alternatively, this variable could be viewed as a proxy for the borrowing constraint
faced by individuals in an economy, and could therefore actually be associated with lower
levels of private saving. Furthermore, the effects of financial deepening on domestic
investment, which is the other side of the saving-investment balance, are even less obvious.
Although we do not have a strong prior on the relationship between financial deepening and the
current account, we include this variable in our cross-country regressions.
The results indicate that the average level of financial deepening does have a significant
and robustly positive effect on the current account in developing countries but not in industrial
countries. This is an interesting result but we defer a more detailed analysis of this result to the
next section, since the extent of financial deepening may have changed substantially over the
last three decades, especially for developing countries.
The terms of trade is an important determinant of short-term fluctuations in the current
account. In particular, the volatility of the terms of trade could influence low-frequency current
account variation for a number of reasons.5 Agents in economies that face more volatile terms
of trade might tend to save more for precautionary reasons in order to smooth their
consumption streams in the face of volatile income flows. However, the effects of terms of
trade volatility on investment and, hence, on the current account, are less clear. Countries with
5

The level of the terms of trade would also be expected to influence the evolution of the trade
balance and the current account over time. However, since the terms of trade variable is
available only as in index, we were unable to use this variable in cross-country analysis.

- 10 -

more volatile terms of trade may be less attractive for international capital. On the other hand,
authors such as Aizenman (1994) have argued that multinationals tend to diversify their
production base across countries with volatile terms of trade in order to have the flexibility to
exploit terms of trade movements that are favorable to them.
The cross-country results do reveal a significant role for terms of trade volatility in
current account determination for developing countries excluding Africa. For these countries,
higher terms of trade volatility is associated with larger current account surpluses, consistent
with the notion of this volatility inducing more precautionary saving and/or lower investment.
For industrial countries, on the other hand, terms of trade volatility appears to be negatively
correlated with current account balances.
Another variable that could influence both saving and investment is the growth rate of
aggregate output. The effects of GDP growth rates on low frequency saving behavior are not
clear-cut. This relationship depends largely on the implications of GDP growth rates, as
perceived by households, for their permanent income. For instance, if current high growth rates
of GDP were to be interpreted as signaling increases in permanent income, then saving rates as
a proportion of current income could, according to the life cycle permanent income hypothesis,
actually decline. On the other hand, increases in GDP growth rates that are viewed as being
transitory, would tend to raise saving rates. Furthermore, these outcomes for aggregate
household saving would also depend on the fraction of households that are liquidity
constrained. High rates of GDP growth presumably also reflect high rates of productivity
growth and would, therefore, be expected to be associated with higher levels of investment and,
presumably, inflows of capital in search of higher rates of return. Again, the net effects of these
influences on current account balances are not obvious.
Our regressions show that there is no clear relationship between average output growth
and current account balances for the full sample. There is, however, a strong positive
relationship between these variables for the industrial countries in our sample, consistent with
the observation that advanced countries that had relatively high growth rates over the last three
decades have generally been net providers of capital to other economies.
Among developing countries there appears to be a negative relationship between the
openness ratio, measured as the sum of exports and imports to GDP, and current account

- 11 -

balances. The degree of openness could well be correlated with other attributes that make a
country attractive to foreign capital. In particular, the capacity that more open economies have
to generate foreign exchange earnings through exports might signal a better ability to service
external debt.6 Since there have been large increases in the degree of openness to international
trade among both industrial and developing countries over the last three decades, we explore
the relationship between openness and current accounts in greater detail in the next section.
We also examined the role of capital controls in current account determination. These
results are also not straightforward to interpret. Capital controls are often viewed as a negative
indicator of a country’s ability to manage its external balance. The introduction of capital
controls might result from a desire to prevent capital flight triggered by current account
deficits, but the imposition of such controls could result in smaller current account deficits
since external financing for subsequent current account deficits may be limited. Hence, issues
of causality and timing complicate this analysis. Nevertheless, as a first pass, we included
indicator variables that capture the existence and severity of controls on capital flows related to
current account and capital account transactions. These binary variables take the value of unity
when there are significant restrictions present and zero otherwise.
Except in the case of the industrial country sample, we do not find a statistically
significant association between capital controls and current accounts. Since capital controls
have varied over time for many of the countries in our sample, it is possible that the crosssection results mask the relationship between these variables. We investigate this further in the
next section.
To summarize the key results from this section, government budget balances and
indicators of financial deepening appear to be positively correlated with current account
balances in the cross section for developing countries. Dependency ratios and indicators of
openness to international trade, on the other hand, appear to be negatively correlated with
average current account positions. For industrial countries, initial NFA positions and average
output growth rates have positive cross-sectional correlations with current account balances.
6

Consistent with this result, Lane (1997) reports a positive association between trade openness
and the level of external debt among developing countries.

- 12 -

IV. Panel Estimates
An obvious concern with the cross-section results discussed thus far is that important
dynamic patterns in the data could be missed by taking averages over long periods of time.
Hence, we now adopt a panel approach that allows us to characterize higher frequency
variations in current account balances. In other words, we exploit both the cross section and
time series aspects of the data to understand variation across countries and over time in current
account balances. As discussed earlier, we work with a panel data set that contains nonoverlapping 5-year averages of the data for each country. We later test the robustness of our
results to this compression of the data. We use OLS specifications for our baseline results and
later test the sensitivity of the results to the choice of empirical specification.
Table 3 shows results from panel OLS regressions for different groupings of countries.
Since we found some of these panel results also to be sensitive to the inclusion of the African
countries, we report separate sets of results with and without the African countries included,
both for the full sample and for the developing country sample. We also experimented with the
inclusion of other regional dummies (for continents as well as for specific groups such as East
Asian countries). These dummies were generally neither individually nor jointly significant for
most of the specifications discussed below. One exception was the dummy for oil-exporting
countries, which was generally positive and significant, reflecting the fact that oil-exporting
countries typically have more favorable current account positions on average. Hence, the
results reported in Table 3 are from regressions that include this dummy.7
An important consideration in understanding current account dynamics is the role of
international capital flows. Especially for developing countries, the ability to run current
account deficits could well be affected by industrial countries’ willingness to finance those
deficits through capital flows. These patterns of capital flows could be influenced by a number
of factors including macroeconomic conditions in industrial countries and have indeed
fluctuated significantly over time (see, e.g., Bosworth and Collins, and references therein). We
return to a more detailed examination of this issue later. As a practical matter, however, we
7

Wald tests confirmed that the hypothesis of homogeneity of coefficients across the different
groupings of countries shown in the table could be rejected.

- 13 -

need to address this issue in our estimation and do so by including time dummies for each 5year period in our regressions. These time dummies were jointly significant in all of the
regressions discussed in this section. We report in the results the specific time dummies that
were individually significant.
One of the striking results that carries over from the cross-sectional regressions is the
strong positive relationship between current account and government budget balances.
However, the coefficient is no longer statistically significant for industrial countries. The
estimated coefficient in column 4 suggests that, for the full sample of developing countries, a 1
percentage point increase in the government budget balance is associated with about a 0.4
percentage point increase in the current account to GDP ratio. One interpretation of the
coefficient estimates is that, in developing countries, private saving provides a significant but
not complete Ricardian offset to changes in public saving. This is consistent with Edwards’s
(1995) result that in developing countries private saving, as a ratio to GDP, declines by about
0.6 percentage points when the ratio of government saving to GDP increases by 1 percentage
point. The relationship that we find between government budget balances and current account
balances is also consistent with a large class of theoretical models. As noted by Obstfeld and
Rogoff (1998), for instance, overlapping generations models suggest that government budget
deficits tend to induce current account deficits by redistributing income from future to present
generations. The positive correlation between budget and current account balances is
reminiscent of the “twin deficits” discussion that was popular in the 1980s, although in our
sample we find this relationship to be stronger for developing than for industrial countries.
Next, we examine the relationship between current accounts and one of the key initial
conditions that would be expected to influence their determination—the existing stock of net
foreign assets or liabilities. For the panel regressions, the initial stock of NFA refers to the
NFA/GDP ratio in the first year of the 5-year period over which the current account and the
independent variables are averaged. The results indicate a robust positive association between
initial NFA to GDP ratios and current account balances. For the combined sample of industrial
and developing countries, this result is as strong as in the cross-section regressions. In the subsample panel regressions, however, the result comes through strongly for the developing
countries as well. Among the industrial countries, this result again reflects the fact that

- 14 -

countries with large NFA positions over the sample period, such as Japan and Switzerland,
have tended to run current account surpluses while, for certain countries such as the United
States, there appears to have been a negative relationship between existing NFA stocks and
current account positions.8
We conjecture that, among developing countries, this result indicates that countries that
have tended to run current account deficits, and that have consequently built up a stock of NFL,
tend to be countries that have better access to capital markets and that are favored by
international investors for a variety of reasons. Hence, despite their existing stock of NFL,
international investors are more willing to finance larger current account deficits for these
countries. This, in turn, could reflect the fact that these countries have higher levels of
productivity and, consequently, higher rates of return to capital.9 Further, large flows of capital
from industrial to developing countries are a relatively recent phenomenon. Therefore, in our
limited sample, this effect could dominate the fact that, from a longer-term perspective, a net
outflow of capital from developing countries could eventually be required to pay off (or, at
least, stabilize as a ratio to GDP) the stock of external liabilities.10

8

When we replaced the initial NFA/GDP ratio variable used here (based on the value of this
variable in the first year of the five years averaged for a particular observation) with the
NFA/GDP ratio used in the cross-section regressions (the average of the NFA/GDP ratio in the
first five years of the full sample for each country), the results were similar to those discussed
here, but only when the African countries were excluded. For the full developing country
sample, the other coefficients did not change much but the coefficient on the initial NFA to
GDP ratio, although still positive, was less strongly significant.
9

An alternative explanation is that the perception among international investors of implicit
guarantees of bailouts for certain countries could induce a moral hazard problem. This would
be reflected in perverse feedback effects, whereby countries with high external debt get further
access to international capital. Lane (1998) documents a strong positive relationship between
the levels of external debt and output among developing economies and notes that this finding
is consistent with models of international credit rationing.
10

Kraay and Ventura (2000) argue that the sign of the current account response to transitory
income shocks depends on the share of foreign assets in a country’s total assets. However,
since our use of 5-year averaged data would be expected to smooth out transitory income
shocks, this explanation might be less relevant for our medium-term results.

- 15 -

In the first three columns of the table, the coefficients on the relative income terms are
not significant. For developing countries, the relative income effect is negative and the
coefficient on the relative income quadratic term is positive, consistent with the implications of
the stages of development hypothesis. However, only the coefficients on the quadratic terms in
columns 4 and 5 are significant, yielding but limited support for this hypothesis.
The coefficients on the dependency ratios indicate that higher relative dependency
ratios are associated with lower current account balances. The effect is stronger for industrial
countries. We find a similar result for developing countries as well, although only the
coefficient on the relative youth dependency ratio is significant and this too only when we
exclude African countries from the sample.
In the panel regressions for the full sample, as was the case in the cross-section
regressions, the financial deepening variable has a clear positive association with current
account balances. As in the cross-section regressions, we find that this result comes through
strongly for all samples that include developing countries. The estimated coefficients are in line
with those reported by authors such as Edwards (1995), who have examined the effects of this
variable on private saving. Thus, we conjecture that private saving is again the channel through
which financial deepening influences the current account.
Terms of trade volatility does have a significant positive relationship with the current
account balance for the developing country sample that excludes Africa. This result comes
through as strongly as in the cross-section regressions and is clearly indicative of the effect of
overall macroeconomic uncertainty on private saving in developing countries. Further, as noted
by Serven (1998), there is also some evidence that investment in developing countries is
negatively affected by terms of trade volatility. Average income growth, on the other hand,
appears to bear little relationship to the current account.11
We find that the degree of openness of an economy is negatively related to its current
account position, although there appears to be no association between these two variables
among industrial countries; the result is driven largely by the developing countries. The
11

Although their relationship to current accounts is not obvious, we also tried including other
macroeconomic variables such as average inflation rates but they did not enter significantly
into any of these regressions.

- 16 -

openness variable might well be indicative of attributes such as liberalized trade that make a
country attractive to foreign investment. Further, international trade often serves as an
important vehicle for transfers of technology to developing countries. Thus, countries with
more exposure to international trade tend to be relatively more attractive to foreign capital,
allowing them to undertake more investment and to finance the resulting current account
deficits with capital from abroad. Also, as noted earlier, more open economies are likely to
have a better ability to service their external debt through export earnings.
In general, capital controls do not appear to have played a significant role in current
account determination (conditional on other variables examined here).12 The coefficients on the
indicator variables that capture various forms of capital controls are generally not statistically
significant. In part, as noted earlier, the absence of an association between these variables could
reflect the existence of two opposing effects. On the one hand, one would expect countries with
capital controls to have relatively limited access to international capital and, therefore, to
perforce run smaller current account deficits. However, an alternative possibility is that the
capital controls could have resulted from attempts to stave off the consequences of a legacy of
chronic current deficits. As an empirical matter, the direction of causation is apparently far
from clear even in a panel context.

IV.1 Outliers and Threshold Effects
To check if our baseline results are sensitive to outliers, we performed a variety of
experiments. To conserve space, we only summarize the main results here. First, we excluded
all observations for which the dependent variable had a value smaller than –0.10 (i.e., a current
account deficit greater than 10 percent of GDP). This cut the total sample from 305 to 269
observations (only 3 of the eliminated observations were for industrial countries). Virtually all
of the coefficients that had been significant before retained their statistical significance with
this smaller sample, although the coefficients on the government budget balance and the
12

To check if any of the other variables in the regressions could be picking up the effects of the
capital controls, we tried a variety of specifications that excluded various combinations of the
openness indicators, financial deepening variables etc. None of these specifications yielded a
statistically significant coefficient on either of the indicators of capital controls.

- 17 -

NFA/GDP ratio were slightly smaller. In fact, the coefficients on certain variables such as the
young dependency ratio and terms of trade volatility became even more strongly significant for
developing countries and there were more significant time dummies when this limited sample
was used. Second, we used a tighter screen and excluded observations for which the dependent
variable was smaller than –0.05 (about a third of all observations). Interestingly, even with this
markedly smaller sample, the main results were preserved, although there was the expected
increase in standard errors for most coefficients.
We also examined the possibility of the results being driven by outliers in key variables
such as the government budget balance and the NFA/GDP ratio. We created a dummy variable
that took the value 1 if the budget balance was smaller than –0.05 (i.e., a budget deficit greater
than 5 percent of GDP). Neither this dummy nor its interaction with the government budget
balance variable were statistically significant and the effects on the estimated coefficients on
the budget balance and other variables were very small. Similarly, we created a dummy for
values of the NFA/GDP ratio lower than –0.50 (50 percent of GDP). Interestingly, the
coefficient on the interaction between this dummy and the NFA variable was positive and
significant, although quite small, for developing countries. The coefficient on the NFA variable
fell slightly but its statistical significance remained unaffected for the developing country
sample. This indicates the possibility of threshold effects in the relationship between NFA
stocks and the evolution of current accounts and bears further investigation in future work.

IV.2 Fitted Current Accounts
We now generate fitted values of current account positions for the countries in our
sample using the coefficient estimates from the panel regressions (based on 5-year averages)
and compare them with actual current account positions. Figure 3 shows the actual and fitted
values of current account to GDP ratios for industrial and developing countries, with the fitted
values generated from the respective OLS panel regressions for each of these groups (columns
3 and 4, respectively, in Table 3). The equations have a reasonably good fit by the standards of
such cross-country exercises.
The balance of payments identity that we have relied on for much of our analysis
implies that current account deficits must be offset by inflows on the capital account. Another

- 18 -

way of stating this is that, for a country to run a current account deficit, other countries must be
willing to contemporaneously finance the deficit by acquiring that country’s liabilities.13 Over
the last three decades, developing countries as a block have generally run net aggregate current
account deficits, which are then financed by industrial countries. However, patterns of capital
flows from industrial to developing countries have fluctuated quite considerably over time.
In terms of our estimation framework, including an aggregate measure of net capital
flows from industrial to developing countries is essentially identical to including time dummies
since this variable would be the same for all developing countries in a given time period.
However, for the purposes of making out-of-sample statements about the “normal” level of
current accounts, given a particular magnitude of capital flows from industrial to developing
countries, replacing the time dummies with this variable would facilitate interpretation. An
underlying (stylized) presumption here is that, based on factors such as macroeconomic
conditions among industrial countries, investors in these countries make a first-stage decision
about the size of capital flows to developing countries. These flows are then assumed to be
apportioned among developing countries (thereby financing their current account deficits)
based on their macroeconomic and structural characteristics. Our approach is more direct than
the alternative of including variables such as industrial country GDP growth or interest rates in
the estimation, since these variables are at best imperfect proxies for the determinants of net
capital flows from industrial to developing countries. Of course, these flows are probably also
driven by macroeconomic conditions in the group of developing countries. We recognize this
endogeneity but dealing with is not critical for our purposes.14

13

Bosworth and Collins (1998) find that a large proportion of capital inflows into developing
countries is indeed used to finance current account deficits. Countries could also finance
current account deficits by running down their reserve positions. This approach is likely to be
sustainable only for short periods of time. Since our focus is on current account determination
at relatively low frequencies, we ignore the role of fluctuations in reserves in our analysis.
14

The flip side to this endogeneity is the notion that domestic saving could be influenced by
capital inflows. Reinhart and Talvi (1998) argue that, in their sample of Asian and Latin
American countries, long-run saving behavior has little do with capital inflows and appears
instead to be driven by the sorts of structural determinants analyzed in this paper.

- 19 -

An interesting question at this juncture is how important the potential role of aggregate
net capital inflows to developing countries is in generating a good fit for this group of
countries. To shed some light on this, we reestimated the panel regression for developing
countries after excluding the time dummies. The adjusted Rsquared dropped from 0.44 to 0.36,
indicating the importance of aggregate time effects that influence current account variations
across all developing countries.
Next, we examine how well our equation works in replicating a summary measure of
the current account across all developing countries. To construct an aggregate developing
country measure of the current account, we add up the levels of the current account balances of
developing countries and express this as a ratio of the sum of GDPs for this group of countries,
with both variables expressed in constant U.S. dollars (and expressed as 5-year averages).
Predicted current accounts for each country are then aggregated across all developing countries
in a similar manner.
Figure 4 (first panel) shows an aggregate measure of current accounts as a ratio to GDP
for developing countries and predicted values for this variable from two OLS regressions—one
with and the other without the time dummies. The figure shows that the empirical model
analyzed in this paper does a far better job of replicating current account variations for
developing countries as a group rather than individually. Further, time effects, which we
interpret as capturing net capital flows to developing countries, appear to be quite important for
matching the within-sample variation of developing country current accounts. The remaining
panels of this table show the results of similar exercises (based on the regression for all
developing countries) for countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America, respectively. In all
cases, the regression with time effects does a better job of picking up the variation in aggregate
current accounts for these areas compared to the regression that excludes time effects.15
This exercise has demonstrated that, using coefficient estimates from the panel
regressions and based on projections of current account balances for industrial countries, it
would be straightforward to generate predicted current account positions for developing
15

The turnaround in the aggregate current account position for Africa between the first and
second halves of the 1980s is largely attributable to developments in Nigeria and South Africa.

- 20 -

countries, either individually or for particular blocks. An important feature of these predicted
current accounts is that they reflect the effects of medium-term rather than short-term
determinants of current account variation and can, therefore, be interpreted as providing some
indication of a country’s “normal” current account position, conditional on its structural and
macroeconomic attributes and based on the historical experiences of a large sample of
developing countries. Further, it is relatively easy to incorporate predictions about aggregate
net capital flows from industrial to developing countries in making such assessments.

V. Robustness Tests
In this section, we consider additional robustness tests for our results. Rather than
present a plethora of results for sensitivity tests in different dimensions, here we only
summarize the main features of the results.

V.1 Fixed Effects
Many cross-country panel studies use country fixed effects in order to capture all
country-specific effects. Our view is that, for understanding cross-country variation in current
accounts, including fixed effects would detract from much of the economically meaningful
parts of the analysis. Indeed, as shown in Table 1, about 40 percent of the sample variation of
the current account to GDP ratio is attributable to cross-section rather than time-series
variation, for both the industrial and developing country samples. Thus, using fixed effects
estimators would sweep under the rug much of the cross-country variation in current accounts
that is, after all, the focus of this study.16
Nevertheless, as a robustness check, we redid the estimates including country fixed
effects and dropping those regressors that, by construction, have no time variation—terms of
trade volatility; average output growth; and the openness indicator. The results are reported in

16

A similar point, in the context of cross-country growth and convergence regressions, is made
forcefully by Quah (1996, p. 38) and is echoed by Lane (1998) in his work on the determinants
of external debt.

- 21 -

Table 4.17 The government budget balance continues to be positively related to the current
account balance for the full sample and for developing countries. The coefficients on the NFA
to GDP ratio are smaller than the corresponding OLS coefficients, but are still significantly
positive except in columns 3 and 5. This weaker result in the FE estimates is not unsurprising
since this variable would be expected to be more important for understanding cross-country
differences rather than within-country evolutions of current account balances. The youth
dependency ratio is still negatively related to current account balances for the developing
countries excluding Africa, although the financial deepening variable is no longer significant.
One noteworthy difference between the OLS and FE estimates is that, for the
developing countries, the FE specification yields statistically significant coefficients on the
relative income and relative income squared terms that are more in line with the stages of
development hypothesis. Since the OLS regressions included controls for average output
growth, it is possible that the effects of relative income were masked by the systematic
differences in growth rates associated with convergence effects. However, when we omitted
average output growth from the OLS specifications, the coefficients and associated standard
errors on the relative income terms did not change much. Thus, only when we control for
country characteristics using FE estimation do we find some evidence that current accounts in
developing countries appear consistent with the stages of development hypothesis.18
An alternative econometric approach to cross-country panel data, used by some authors
such as Alesina, Hausmann, Hommes and Stein (1999), is to estimate an FE model but to then
regress the estimated fixed effects on time-invariant country-specific variables in order to
understand the determinants of cross-country variations in the dependent variable. Results from
17

The last row of Table 4 reports Hausman test statistics for the validity of random effects (RE)
versus fixed effects specifications. For the industrial countries and the full sample of
developing countries, we could not reject the null hypothesis that the RE specification is
appropriate. We estimated RE models for these two sub-samples but few of the results were
affected. Hence, to maintain consistency, we report only FE results in this table.
18

To check if the East Asian countries in our sample could be driving the OLS and FE
coefficients on the relative income terms in columns 4 and 5, we re-estimated the equations
excluding them. The coefficient on the squared relative income term fell slightly in both cases
but little else changed.

- 22 -

such second-stage regressions using the estimated fixed effects as the dependent variable are
reported in Table 5. For this part of the analysis, we tried a number of additional variables used
in the growth literature. Few of these variables yielded significant results. Hence, we report
estimates using only a couple of additional country-specific variables. Note also that data
constraints (related to the availability of data for these additional variables) slightly lower the
sample sizes in Table 5 relative to the basic FE estimates.
Consistent with the OLS results, terms of trade volatility is positively associated with
current account balances, but this result is not true either for industrial countries or for the
developing country sample when African countries are excluded. Among developing countries,
higher average GDP growth is positively correlated with current account balances.
Interestingly, the human capital variable used by Hall and Jones (1999) is strongly negatively
correlated with current account balances. This is consistent with the notion that the returns to
physical capital are likely to be higher in countries with relatively higher stocks of human
capital; thus, larger current account deficits in countries with relatively high human capital
stocks could reflect investment inflows. We also tried using a variable that captures the price of
physical capital relative to that of consumption. Jones (1994) interprets this variable as an
indicator of tax and other distortions that influence investment decisions. Among developing
countries excluding Africa, a higher relative price of capital is indeed associated with smaller
current account deficits, consistent with the notion that investment levels across countries are
negatively correlated with the relative price of capital.19
Overall, we view the results from FE estimation as supportive of the main conclusions
we derived from the basic OLS specifications. Nevertheless, given our interest in explaining
low frequency cross-country variations in current account positions with structural variables,
the OLS estimator is preferable to the FE estimator for reasons cited earlier.

19

We thank Sergio Rebelo for this suggestion. Jones (1994) finds that the relative price of
machinery is more important in cross-country growth regressions than the relative prices of the
other components of investment. The relative prices of the components did not in general enter
significantly into any of our regressions either independently or once we had controlled for the
relative price of total investment.

- 23 -

V.2 Other Econometric Issues
A possible concern with our baseline estimates is the effect of serial correlation.
Although the standard errors for the coefficient estimates are robust to serial correlation (and
heteroscedasticity), the coefficient estimates could themselves be contaminated by the presence
of serial correlation. Since we use 5-year averaged data in the estimation, however, it is less
likely that serial correlation is a problem. When we included the lagged (5-year average) level
of the current account in the panel regressions, the coefficient on this variable was generally not
economically or statistically significant and, in any case, did not have much effect on the point
estimates of the other coefficients. More sophisticated attempts to identify and deal with serial
correlation also did not make much difference.
Although we have been cautious about not assigning causal explanations to the
conditional correlations that we have found, the issue of endogeneity in our specifications is
another potential concern. Some of the right hand side variables in our specifications, such as
government budget balances, could be influenced by current account developments. Further, in
a dynamic context, there is clearly a relationship between current accounts and the stock of
NFAs. However, we faced two major problems with IV estimation. First, the lack of additional
variables that could constitute good instruments. In addition, the low correlations between
lagged and contemporaneous values of relevant variables such as the government budget
balance to GDP ratio meant that lagged values of the right hand side variables made for poor
instruments. Second, given our use of 5-year averages, the sample size shrank considerably
when we used lagged values of right hand side variables as instruments. Nevertheless, we
experimented with using a set of instruments that included plausibly exogenous variables.
For instance, as instruments for the government budget balance and initial NFA, we
used lagged values of these variables, contemporaneous values of all other independent
variables (which we take to be exogenous), and lagged values of the time-varying exogenous
variables. Numerous combinations of instruments were tried. In general, the coefficients on the
instrumented variables were slightly smaller in absolute magnitude in the IV regressions
compared with the OLS estimates. However, the standard errors on some of the coefficient
estimates increased, reflecting the problems with IV estimation discussed above. Overall, these
results were broadly supportive of the conclusions obtained from the OLS estimates.

- 24 -

V.3 Foreign Aid and the Current Account
An interesting question that is related to the discussion of causality is that of exogenous
variations in the current accounts of developing countries that are attributable to aid and other
transfers from abroad. This could give rise to spurious correlations in our data among current
account balances and macroeconomic variables. One transparent way to deal with this issue is
to include aid and other official grants (expressed as a ratio to GDP) as an additional control.
We re-estimated the OLS and FE specifications for developing countries including this variable
as a regressor. Table A1 shows that the coefficient on this variable is significantly negative in
the OLS specification for all developing countries. This is the expected result, since inflows of
aid should in principle allow a country to finance larger current account deficits. The estimated
coefficients on this variable in the other columns of this table are, however, not significant. The
coefficients on other variables, in particular the government budget balance and the NFA/GDP
ratio, are not much affected when the aid variable is added to the regressions. The one major
difference, however, is that the coefficients on the relative income terms are no longer
significant in the FE regressions.

V.4 Regressions with Annual Data
Finally, in order to examine the robustness of the results at higher frequencies, we
reestimated the panel regressions using annual data rather than 5-year averages. As noted
earlier, we were concerned that there could be considerable noise and measurement error in
annual data for some of the developing countries. Nevertheless, it is useful to examine the
sensitivity of the results to the choice of data frequency.
Using the annual data, we re-estimated the baseline OLS specifications with time
effects and also included lagged values of the current account to GDP ratio and, in order to
capture relative price effects, lagged changes of (the logarithms of) the real effective exchange
rate. The results are reported in Table A2. The coefficients on the lagged current account to
GDP ratio are in the range of 0.50-0.60 for both the industrial and developing country samples,
indicating rather limited persistence in this variable even at an annual frequency. The estimated

- 25 -

relative price effects on current accounts are negative, as would be expected, but are
statistically significant only for industrial countries.20
For developing countries, government budget balances remain positively associated
with current account balances even at annual frequencies. Financial deepening and terms of
trade volatility are also positively associated with current accounts among developing
countries. The coefficients on many of the other variables have the same sign and often similar
magnitudes as in the regressions using the 5-year averaged data, but they are much less
precisely estimated. This could in part be due to the greater amount of noise in annual data for
developing countries but probably also reflects the fact that variables such as relative
dependency ratios are far more important for explaining medium-term rather than short-term
variations in current account balances.

VI. Concluding Remarks
We conclude by summarizing some of the main results from the paper, followed by a
brief discussion of directions for further research. The aim of this paper was to investigate the
empirical relationships between current account balances and variables that, through their
effects on saving and investment, would be expected to influence medium-term variation in
saving-investment balances and, hence, in the current account. We used a broad sample of
industrial and developing countries and employed cross-section and panel regressions to
investigate these relationships across countries and over time. The main results were subjected
to an extensive battery of robustness tests to ensure that they were not sensitive to issues such
as choice of empirical specification and frequency of the data. We found a few similarities and
some interesting differences among different groups of countries that we examined.
We found that government budget balances, initial net foreign asset positions and, for
developing countries, indicators of financial deepening are positively correlated with current
20

These results are not that surprising since one would expect relative price effects to be more
systematically related to variations in the trade balance rather than the current account. When
we included the contemporaneous rather than lagged change in the real exchange rate in the
regressions and instrumented this variable with its lags, the coefficients were negative and
slightly larger, but were still not statistically significant.

- 26 -

account balances. Among developing countries, we also found that higher terms of trade
volatility is associated with larger current account surpluses (or smaller deficits), perhaps
because greater macroeconomic uncertainty increases domestic saving and possibly also has a
negative impact on investment. The degree of openness to international trade appears to be
weakly associated with larger current account deficits among developing countries. We found
at best limited evidence to support the patterns of evolutions in current accounts predicted by
the stages-of-development hypothesis. Other potentially important variables such as indicators
of capital controls and average GDP growth, however, appear to bear little systematic
relationship with current account balances.
The stylized facts presented in this paper have left a number of important questions
unanswered, presenting a fertile agenda for future work. For instance, from an intertemporal
perspective, a better understanding of the dynamic effects on the current account of shocks with
different degrees of persistence could have important theoretical as well as policy implications.
Another important issue is to separate out the channels, i.e., via the trade balance or other
components of the current account, through which different shocks could affect variations in
the current account. The empirical regularities documented in this paper point to some
interesting directions for further work towards understanding the factors that ultimately
determine sustainable current account balances in the medium term.

- 27 -

Data Appendix
The data used in this paper were drawn from a number of different sources. We provide
below a listing of the mnemonics for the variables used in the analysis, descriptions of these
variables and the source(s) from which the primary data for constructing these variables were
taken. A listing of the countries in the final sample, along with the country groupings used in
the analysis, is also provided below. For most countries, data were available from 1971 through
1995.
Mnemonic

Source*

Variable description

CAGDP
GOVBGDP
NFAGDP
RELY

IFS
WBSD
LM, Sinn
WBSD

RELDEPY

WBSD

RELDEPO

WBSD

YGRAVG
YGRSD
TOTSD
LREER
OPEN

WBSD
WBSD
WDI, IMF
IFS, IMF
IFS

FDEEP
KC2
KC3

IFS
GM
GM

Current account to GDP ratio
General government budget balance, ratio to GDP
Stock of net foreign assets, ratio to GDP
Relative per capita income, adjusted by PPP exchange rates
Measured relative to the U.S., range (0 to 1]
Youth dependency ratio (relative to mean across all countries)
Population under 15 / Population between 15 and 65
Old dependency ratio (relative to mean across all countries)
Population over 65 / Population between 15 and 65
Average real GDP growth
Standard deviation of GDP growth
Standard deviation of terms of trade
Logarithm of trade-weighted real exchange rate
Openness indicator: ratio of exports plus imports of goods and
nonfactor services to GDP
Financial deepening, ratio of M2 to GDP
Capital controls on current account transactions
Capital controls on capital account transactions

* These are sources for basic data used to construct the corresponding variables. WBSD: World
Bank Saving Database (see Loayza et al., 1998, for a description); WDI: World Development
Indicators; IFS: IMF’s International Financial Statistics; IMF: Other IMF databases; Sinn:
Stefan Sinn (1990); GM: Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1998); LM: Philip Lane and Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti (1999).
We attempted to minimize the amount of preliminary screens on the data, choosing
instead to check the sensitivity of each of our main results to the presence and effects of
outliers. These are noted in the text of the paper. However, to maintain consistency in the set of
countries used for the cross-section and panel analyses, we dropped those countries for which
we had fewer than 10 full observations. We also dropped two countries—Kuwait and
Nicaragua—that had average current account to GDP ratios considerably out of line with other
countries in the sample. The final sample includes 18 industrial and 71 developing countries.

- 28 -

Industrial Countries
Australia (AUS), Austria (AUT), Canada (CAN), Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN), France
(FRA), Greece (GRC), Iceland (ISL), Ireland (IRL), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN), Netherlands
(NLD), New Zealand (NZL), Norway (NOR), Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP), Switzerland
(CHE), United States (USA).
Developing countries
Algeria (DZA), Argentina (ARG), Bahrain (BHR), Bangladesh (BGD), Benin (BEN), Bolivia
(BOL), Botswana (BWA), Brazil (BRA), Burkina Faso (BFA), Burundi (BDI), Cameroon
(CMR), Chad (TCD), Chile (CHL), Colombia (COL), Congo (COG), Costa Rica (CRI), Cote
d’Ivoire (CIV), Dominica (DMA), Ecuador (ECU), Egypt (EGY), El Salvador (SLV), Gabon
(GAB), Gambia (GMB), Ghana (GHA), Guatemala (GTM), Haiti (HTI), Honduras (HND),
India (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Iran (IRN), Israel (ISR), Jamaica (JAM), Jordan (JOR), Kenya
(KEN), Korea (KOR), Madagascar (MDG), Malawi (MWI), Malaysia (MYS), Mali (MLI),
Mauritania (MRT), Mauritius (MUS), Mexico (MEX), Morocco (MAR), Nepal (NPL), Niger
(NER), Nigeria (NGA), Pakistan (PAK), Panama (PAN), Papua New Guinea (PNG), Paraguay
(PRY), Peru (PER), Philippines (PHL), Rwanda (RWA), Senegal (SEN), Seychelles (SYC),
Sierra Leone (SLE), Singapore (SGP), South Africa (ZAF), Sri Lanka (LKA), Swaziland
(SWZ), Syria (SYR), Thailand (THA), Togo (TGO), Trinidad & Tobago (TTO), Tunisia
(TUN), Turkey (TUR), Uganda (UGA), Uruguay (URY), Venezuela (VEN), Zambia (ZMB),
Zimbabwe (ZWE).

- 29 -

References
Aizenman, Joshua, 1994, “Monetary and Real Shocks, Productive Capacity and Exchange Rate
Regimes,” Economica, vol. 61, pp. 407-434.
Alesina, Alberto, Ricardo Hausmann, Rudolf Hommes, and Ernesto Stein, 1999, “Budget
Institutions and Fiscal Performance in Latin America,” Journal of Development
Economics, vol. 59, pp. 253-273.
Bosworth, Barry, and Susan M. Collins, 1999, “Capital Flows to Developing Economies:
Implications for Saving and Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
pp.143-180.
Calderon, Cesar, Alberto Chong, and Norman Loayza, 1999, “Determinants of Current
Accounts in Developing Countries,” Manuscript, The World Bank.
Debelle, Guy, and Hamid Faruqee, 1996, “What Determines the Current Account ? A CrossSectional and Panel Approach,” IMF Working Paper 96/58.
Ghosh, Atish R., 1995, “International Capital Mobility Amongst the Major Industrialized
Countries: Too Little or Too Much?” Economic Journal, vol. 105, pp. 107-128.
Ghosh, Atish R., and Jonathan D. Ostry, 1995, “The Current Account in Developing Countries:
A Perspective from the Consumption-Smoothing Approach,” World Bank Economic
Review, vol. 9, pp. 305-333.
Edwards, Sebastian, 1995, “Why are Saving Rates So Different Across Countries? An
International Comparative Analysis,” NBER Working Paper No. 5097.
Glick, Reuven, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, “Global versus Country-Specific Productivity
Shocks and the Current Account,” Journal of Monetary Economics, pp. 159-192.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output Per Worker than Others “ Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, pp. 83-116.
Isard, Peter, and Hamid Faruqee, 1998, eds., “Exchange Rate Assessment: Extensions of the
Macroeconomic Balance Approach,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 167.
Jones, Charles I., 1994, “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 34, pp. 359-382.
Kraay, Aart, and Jaume Ventura, 2000, “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor Countries,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

- 30 -

Lane, Philip, 1998, “Empirical Perspectives on Long-Term External Debt,” Manuscript, Trinity
College, Dublin.
Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1999, “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures
of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” IMF
Working Paper 99/115.
Lee, Jaewoo, and Menzie Chinn, 1998, “The Current Account and the Real Exchange Rate: A
Structural VAR Analysis of Major Currencies,” NBER Working Paper No. 6495.
Loayza, Norman, Humberto Lopez, Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, and Luis Serven, 1998, “The
World Saving Database,” Manuscript, The World Bank.
Masson, Paul, Tamim Bayoumi, and Hossein Samiei, 1998, “International Evidence on the
Determinants of Private Saving,” World Bank Economic Review, vol. 12, pp. 483-501.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, 1998, “Why Capital Controls? Theory and Evidence,” in S.
Eijffinger and H. Huizinga, eds., Positive Political Economy: Theory and Evidence
(Cambridge University Press).
Nason, James, and John H. Rogers, 1999, “Investment and the Current Account in the Short
Run and the Long Run,” International Finance Discussion Paper 647, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1998, Foundations of International Macroeconomics
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Prasad, Eswar S., 1999, “International Trade and the Business Cycle,” Economic Journal, vol.
109, pp. 588-607.
Quah, Danny T., 1996, “Convergence Empirics Across Economies with (Some) Capital
Mobility,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 1, pp. 95-124.
Razin, Assaf, 1995, “The Dynamic-Optimizing Approach to the Current Account: Theory and
Evidence,” in Understanding Interdependence: The Macroeconomics of the Open
Economy, Peter Kenen ed. (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press).
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Ernesto Talvi, 1998, “Capital Flows and Saving in Latin America
and Asia: A Reinterpretation,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 57, pp. 45-66.
Roldos, Jorge, 1996, “Human Capital, Borrowing Constraints, and the Stages of the Balance of
Payments,” Manuscript, IMF.

- 31 -

Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus, Steven B. Webb, and Giancarlo Corsetti, 1992, “Household Saving in
Developing Countries: First Cross-Country Evidence,” World Bank Economic Review,
vol. 6, pp. 529-547.
Serven, Luis, 1998, “Macroeconomic Uncertainty and Private Investment in LDCs: An
Empirical Investigation,” manuscript, World Bank.
Sinn, Stefan, 1990, “Net External Asset Positions of 145 Countries,” Kieler Studien 234, Kiel
University.

Table 1. Decomposition of Variance into Cross Section and Time Series Components
(in percent)

Industrial Countries

Developing Countries

Across countries

Over time

Across countries

Over time

39.05

60.95

43.56

56.44

41.31

58.69

46.94

53.06

NFA to GDP ratio

80.07

19.93

67.37

32.63

Relative income

93.21

6.79

90.92

9.08

Relative income squared

92.43

7.57

76.88

23.12

Relative dependency ratio (young)

61.59

38.41

88.82

11.18

Relative dependency ratio (old)

75.22

24.78

94.26

5.74

Financial deepening

83.36

16.64

84.36

15.64

Terms of trade volatility

23.49

76.51

35.69

64.31

GDP growth

9.07

90.93

9.91

90.09

Openness ratio

85.58

14.42

90.78

9.22

Capital controls (current account)

64.83

35.17

60.95

39.05

Capital controls (capital account)

50.25

49.75

70.43

29.57

Current account
to GDP ratio
Govt. budget balance
to GDP ratio

Notes: This table shows the proportion of the total variance (of 5-year nonoverlapping averages) of each variable
that is attributable to variation across countries and over time, respectively. For four of the variables--NFA to GDP
ratio; terms of trade volatility; GDP growth; and the openness ratio--the variance decomposition is for the underlying
(5 year averaged) data, rather than the transformations that are used in the regressions (e.g. average GDP growth
over the full sample).

Table 2. Cross Section Regressions
(Dependent Variable --Current Account to GDP Ratio)

Full Sample

Full Sample
Excluding
Africa

Industrial
Countries

Developing
Countries

Developing
Countries
Excluding
Africa

Govt. budget balance
(ratio to GDP)

0.375***
(0.120)

0.153**
(0.068)

0.340***
(0.078)

0.458***
(0.146)

0.246**
(0.103)

NFA to GDP ratio

0.046**
(0.023)

0.051***
(0.016)

0.127***
(0.023)

0.038
(0.026)

0.024
(0.027)

Relative income

0.119**
(0.056)

0.097***
(0.036)

0.174*
(0.085)

0.013
(0.106)

0.046
(0.055)

Relative income
squared

-0.096**
(0.039)

0.070**
(0.031)

-0.176*
(0.072)

0.117
(0.150)

0.042
(0.086)

Relative dependency ratio
(young)

-0.054*
(0.031)

-0.029
(0.027)

-0.057
(0.060)

-0.060*
(0.035)

-0.057
(0.040)

Relative dependency ratio
(old)

-0.173
(0.138)

-0.097
(0.107)

0.195
(0.124)

-0.156
(0.195)

-0.211
(0.174)

Financial deepening
(M2/GDP)

0.031**
(0.011)

0.023*
(0.012)

0.001
(0.014)

0.045**
(0.018)

0.044*
(0.023)

Terms of trade
volatility

0.022
(0.028)

0.053**
(0.021)

-0.092**
(0.034)

0.027
(0.028)

0.052**
(0.026)

Average GDP growth

-0.152
(0.184)

-0.099
(0.169)

2.409***
(0.364)

-0.184
(0.185)

-0.180
(0.168)

Openness ratio

-0.010
(0.008)

0.006
(0.008)

-0.040
(0.030)

-0.024**
(0.012)

-0.017
(0.015)

Capital controls
(current account)

0.011
(0.011)

0.006
(0.008)

0.016**
(0.006)

0.010
(0.014)

0.005
(0.011)

Capital controls
(capital account)

0.001
(0.012)

-0.002
(0.008)

-0.027
(0.010)

-0.005
(0.017)

-0.008
(0.013)

Dummy for oilexporting countries

0.023***
(0.008)

0.023***
(0.006)

...
...

0.017*
(0.009)

0.016**
(0.013)

Adjusted Rsquared
Number of observations

0.51
89

0.64
56

0.94
18

0.46
71

0.57
48

Notes: The dependent and independent variables are the full sample averages of the corresponding annual variables
for each country. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

Table 3. Panel Regressions, OLS Specification with Time Effects
(Dependent Variable -- Current Account to GDP Ratio)
Developing
Countries
Excluding
Africa

Full Sample

Full Sample
Excluding
Africa

Govt. budget balance
(ratio to GDP)

0.306***
(0.065)

0.195***
(0.059)

0.131
(0.079)

0.389***
(0.071)

0.259***
(0.062)

NFA to GDP ratio

0.048***
(0.012)

0.047***
(0.015)

0.074***
(0.016)

0.043***
(0.011)

0.039***
(0.013)

Relative income

0.042
(0.037)

0.041
(0.034)

-0.038
(0.096)

-0.088
(0.063)

-0.103
(0.066)

Relative income
squared

-0.018
(0.034)

-0.013
(0.032)

0.031
(0.075)

0.250**
(0.098)

0.268**
(0.107)

Relative dependency ratio
(young)

-0.025
(0.024)

-0.023
(0.018)

-0.108*
(0.063)

-0.039
(0.032)

-0.055*
(0.030)

Relative dependency ratio
(old)

-0.051
(0.086)

-0.010
(0.082)

-0.109
(0.120)

-0.138
(0.156)

-0.156
(0.169)

Financial deepening

0.026**
(0.008)

0.020**
(0.008)

0.018
(0.013)

0.039***
(0.013)

0.037**
(0.017)

Terms of trade
volatility

0.018
(0.022)

0.044**
(0.020)

0.007
(0.057)

0.022
(0.021)

0.034*
(0.022)

Average GDP growth

-0.052
(0.151)

0.020
(0.143)

0.727
(0.512)

-0.071
(0.157)

-0.087
(0.154)

Openness ratio

-0.008
(0.010)

0.001
(0.011)

0.023
(0.018)

-0.027**
(0.012)

-0.024
(0.015)

Capital controls
(current account)

0.010
(0.006)

0.010
(0.006)

0.002
(0.009)

0.010
(0.008)

0.011
(0.007)

Capital controls
(capital account)

0.001
(0.007)

-0.002
(0.006)

0.004
(0.007)

-0.004
(0.011)

-0.011
(0.012)

Dummy for oilexporting countries

0.020**
(0.010)

0.020**
(0.008)

...
...

0.012
(0.010)

0.011
(0.010)

Significant time
dummies

86-90

86-90

91-95

81-85

81-85

Adjusted Rsquared
Number of observations

0.42
305

0.43
237

0.58
82

0.44
223

0.45
155

Industrial
Countries

Developing
Countries

Notes: The dependent and independent variables are non-overlapping 5-year averages of the corresponding annual
variables. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

Table 4. Panel Regressions, Fixed Effects Specification with Time Effects
(Dependent Variable -- Current Account to GDP Ratio)
Developing
Countries
Excluding
Africa

Full Sample

Full Sample
Excluding
Africa

Govt. budget balance
(ratio to GDP)

0.376***
(0.076)

0.187**
(0.076)

0.141
(0.113)

0.446***
(0.096)

0.209**
(0.098)

NFA to GDP ratio

0.018***
(0.008)

0.016**
(0.007)

0.015
(0.033)

0.017*
(0.009)

0.012
(0.009)

Relative income

-0.137
(0.144)

-0.122
(0.133)

0.859**
(0.434)

-0.322*
(0.186)

-0.441**
(0.171)

Relative income
squared

0.237*
(0.132)

0.256**
(0.121)

-0.511*
(0.299)

0.478**
(0.193)

0.624***
(0.176)

Relative dependency ratio
(young)

-0.053
(0.064)

-0.151**
(0.063)

-0.004
(0.102)

-0.089
(0.073)

-0.196***
(0.072)

Relative dependency ratio
(old)

-0.063
(0.335)

0.199
(0.307)

-0.261
(0.256)

0.579
(0.627)

1.758**
(0.614)

Financial deepening

-0.017
(0.025)

-0.001
(0.024)

0.030
(0.024)

-0.039
(0.036)

-0.025
(0.037)

Terms of trade
volatility

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

Average GDP growth

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

Openness ratio

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

Capital controls
(current account)

0.006
(0.010)

0.005
(0.010)

-0.012
(0.016)

-0.012
(0.012)

0.014
(0.012)

Capital controls
(capital account)

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.014
(0.010)

0.004
(0.010)

-0.016
(0.019)

-0.017
(0.016)

Dummy for oilexporting countries

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

Significant time
dummies

None

81-85
91-95

None

81-85

76-80, 81-85
86-90, 91-95

Rsquared
Number of observations

0.21
317

0.12
249

0.22
82

0.14
235

0.20
167

Hausman test statistic

24.81
[0.0245]

36.41
[0.0005]

12.00
[0.5274]

18.17
[0.1512]

46.21
[0.0000]

Industrial
Countries

Developing
Countries

Notes: The dependent and independent variables are non-overlapping 5-year averages of the corresponding annual variables.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively. The last row shows Hausman test statistics for random effects versus fixed effects
specifications. P-values are reported in square brackets.

Table 5. Second Stage Regressions Using Estimated Fixed Effects

Full Sample

Full Sample
Excluding
Africa

Industrial
Countries

Developing
Countries

Developing
Countries
Excluding
Africa

Terms of trade volatility

0.037*
(0.021)

0.158**
(0.060)

0.106
(0.285)

0.059*
(0.034)

0.029
(0.093)

Average GDP growth

0.226
(0.178)

0.492
(0.391)

0.688
(1.597)

0.483**
(0.208)

1.303**
(0.564)

Openness ratio

0.013
(0.017)

0.063**
(0.023)

0.049
(0.074)

0.011
(0.021)

0.015
(0.057)

Human capital (log H/L)

-0.059**
(0.022)

-0.165***
(0.026)

-0.136**
(0.057)

-0.034
(0.034)

-0.143**
(0.067)

Relative price of
physical capital

-0.016
(0.009)

-0.016
(0.013)

-0.019
(0.045)

0.005
(0.009)

0.066**
(0.023)

Rsquared
Number of observations

0.28
56

0.78
45

0.49
16

0.22
40

0.51
29

Notes: The dependent variable is the set of estimated fixed effects corresponding to the regressions in the 5 columns
of Table 4. The human capital variable is from Hall and Jones (1999). The relative price of capital is the price of total
investment divided by the price of consumption and expressed relative to this ratio for the United States. These data
are from Jones (1994). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

Table A1. Current Account Regressions with Controls for Foreign Aid
(Dependent Variable -- Current Account to GDP Ratio)

Developing
Countries

OLS
Developing Countries
Excluding Africa

Developing
Countries

Fixed Effects
Developing Countries
Excluding Africa

Govt. budget balance
(ratio to GDP)

0.347***
(0.062)

0.180***
(0.064)

0.434***
(0.103)

0.166*
(0.100)

NFA to GDP ratio

0.038***
0.007

0.036***
0.007)

0.029***
(0.010)

0.026***
(0.009)

Relative income

-0.133
(0.087)

-0.000
(0.006)

-0.084
(0.243)

-0.195
(0.220)

Relative income
squared

0.278*
(0.149)

0.119
(0.149)

0.230
(0.332)

0.380
(0.312)

Relative dependency ratio
(young)

-0.000
(0.026)

-0.010
(0.031)

-0.006
(0.079)

-0.111
(0.073)

Relative dependency ratio
(old)

0.056
(0.163)

0.135
(0.164)

-0.070
(0.641)

0.794
(0.626)

Financial deepening

0.035***
(0.012)

0.025*
(0.014)

-0.075*
(0.039)

-0.061
(0.038)

Terms of trade
volatility

0.019
(0.021)

0.031
(0.025)

...
...

...
...

Average GDP growth

-0.021
(0.164)

0.166

(0.173)

...
...

...
...

Openness ratio

-0.014
(0.012)

-0.022
(0.017)

...
...

...
...

Capital controls
(current account)

0.003
(0.007)

0.004
(0.007)

0.007
(0.013)

0.008
(0.012)

Capital controls
(capital account)

0.012
(0.010)

0.009
(0.009)

0.004
(0.020)

-0.002
(0.016)

Dummy for oilexporting countries

0.015
(0.011)

0.023
(0.010)

...
...

...
...

Foreign aid/GDP

-0.202***
(0.073)

0.049
(0.106)

-0.096
(0.156)

0.019
(0.164)

Significant time
dummies

81-85

81-85

None

81-85

Rsquared
Number of observations

0.49
206

0.49
142

0.22
206

0.08
142

Notes: The dependent and independent variables are non-overlapping 5-year averages of the corresponding annual variables
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

Table A2. Panel Regressions for Annual Data, OLS Specification with Time Effects
(Dependent Variable --Current Account to GDP Ratio)

Full Sample

Full Sample
Excluding
Africa

Industrial
Countries

Developing
Countries

Developing
Countries
Excluding
Africa

Govt. budget balance
(ratio to GDP)

0.173***
(0.034)

0.121***
(0.027)

0.076**
(0.034)

0.213***
(0.041)

0.167***
(0.036)

NFA to GDP ratio

0.023***
(0.007)

0.024***
(0.007)

0.052**
(0.012)

0.020**
(0.009)

0.016*
(0.010)

Relative income

0.004
(0.022)

0.010
(0.020)

0.012
(0.049)

-0.054*
(0.031)

-0.049*
(0.031)

Relative income
squared

-0.001
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.017)

-0.017
(0.038)

0.114**
(0.045)

0.114**
(0.047)

Relative dependency ratio
(young)

-0.003
(0.012)

-0.001
(0.012)

-0.042
(0.033)

-0.005
(0.014)

-0.008
(0.017)

Relative dependency ratio
(old)

0.041
(0.045)

0.041
(0.045)

-0.012
(0.061)

0.049
(0.080)

0.021
(0.093)

Financial deepening
(M2/GDP)

0.010***
(0.005)

0.006
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.007)

0.015**
(0.007)

0.012
(0.010)

Terms of trade
volatility

0.015
(0.010)

0.019*
(0.010)

-0.016
(0.028)

0.018*
(0.010)

0.018
(0.011)

Average GDP growth

0.047
(0.087)

0.045
(0.085)

0.793**
(0.312)

0.027
(0.094)

0.007
(0.099)

Openness ratio

0.003
(0.004)

0.007*
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.005)

Capital controls
(current account)

0.001
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.004)

0.007
(0.004)

0.004
(0.004)

Capital controls
(capital account)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.005)

Dummy for oilexporting countries

0.007
(0.007)

0.009
(0.007)

...
...

0.004
(0.007)

0.007
(0.007)

Lagged CA to GDP
Ratio

0.566***
(0.032)

0.573***
(0.035)

0.642***
(0.048)

0.541***
(0.035)

0.536***
(0.040)

Lagged change in real
exchange rate

-0.003
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.007)

-0.011**
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.008)

-0.011
(0.009)

Rsquared
Number of observations

0.54
1469

0.53
1081

0.69
378

0.53
1091

0.51
703

Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

Figure 1. Current Accounts & NFAs, Cross Section
Current Account to GDP Ratio

Industrial Countries
0.05

che

nld

jpn

fra

0.00

can
isl

ita

nor
usa
aut
esp
dnk
fin
prt

grc
aus
irl

-0.05
nzl

-100

-50
0
Initial NFA/GDP Ratio

50

Current Account to GDP Ratio

Developing Countries
0.05
gab
irn
bhr
zaf

0.00
sgp
png

-0.05
jam

-0.10

ven

syr

bwa
tto
nga
ind
dza arg
tur
col
ury
kor
idn
swz
rwa
bra
mex
mys
gha
zwe
bfa
hti mus
slv
jor
gtm
phl
pan
pak ugabgd
isr
bdi
cmr
egy per tha
ken
npl
ecu
chl
mar
tun
lka
tcd
sle
pry

bol
hnd
cri
mli
mwi
sen
mrt
zmb

mdg
ben
gmb
ner
tgo

-0.15
civ

cog

-100

-50
Initial NFA/GDP Ratio

0

25

Fig. 2. Current Accounts and Relative Income, Cross Section
0.05
gab
che

nld

Current Account to GDP Ratio

irn
syr
zaf

0.00

-0.05

nga
ind

-0.10

ven

bwa

jam

jpn
tto

dza tur arg
col
kor ury
swz bra
rwa idn
prt
mex
mys
gha
bfazwe
mus
phl gtm jorpan
ugahti slv
grc
pak
irl
bgd png cmr
bdi
egy
tha
per
nplken
ecu
chl
lka mar tun
tcd
sle
pry
mdg
ben
bol
hnd
gmb
ner

bhr

ita
noraut
dnk
fin

esp
sgp

fra
usa

isl can
aus

isr
nzl

cri

mli tgo
mwi sen
zmbmrt

-0.15
civ cog

0.00

0.20

0.40
0.60
Relative Income

0.80

1.00

Fig. 3. Actual, Fitted Values of CA/GDP Ratios
Industrial Countries

0.15

Fitted CA/GDP Ratios

0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15

-0.20
-0.20

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.05

0.10

0.15

Actual CA/GDP Ratios
Developing Countries

0.15

Fitted CA/GDP Ratios

0.10

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15

-0.20
-0.20

-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

Actual CA/GDP Ratios

Current Account to GDP Ratio

Actual
Fitted, no time effects

Fitted, with time effects

Actual
Fitted, no time effects

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

-0.03

-0.03

-0.04

-0.04

-0.05

-0.05

1971-75

1976-80

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

1971-75

1976-80

All Developing Countries in Sample
Actual
Fitted, no time effects

Current Account to GDP Ratio

Fitted, with time effects

1986-90

1991-95

Asia

Fitted, with time effects

Actual
Fitted, no time effects

0.00

0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.02

-0.02

-0.03

-0.03

-0.04

-0.04

-0.05
1971-75

1981-85

Fitted, with time effects

-0.05
1976-80

1981-85

Africa

1986-90

1991-95

1971-75

1976-80

1981-85

1986-90

1991-95

Latin America

Fig. 4. Actual, Fitted Current Accounts for Developing Country Blocks

