                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SELF-CONFIDENCE AND SOCIAL INTERACTIONS


                                             Roland Bénabou
                                               Jean Tirole


                                          Working Paper 7585
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7585

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




We are grateful for helpful comments and discussions to Isabelle Brocas, Robert Lane, Marek Pycia, Gérard
Roland, Julio Rotemberg, and participants at the Franqui conference on “The Economics of Contracts”
(Brussels, November 1999). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Self-Confidence and Social Interactions
Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 7585
March 2000
JEL No. A12, C70, D10, D60, J22, J24, J53
                                           ABSTRACT
       This paper studies the interactions between an individual’s self–esteem and his social
environment –in the workplace, at school, and in personal relationships. Because a person generally
has only imperfect knowledge of his own abilities, people who derive benefits from his performance
(parent, spouse, friend, teacher, manager, etc.) have incentives to manipulate his self–confidence.
We first study situations where an informed principal chooses an incentive structure, such as offering
payments or rewards, delegating a task, or giving encouragement. We show that extrinsic rewards
may have hidden costs –as stressed by psychologists– in that they undermine intrinsic motivation.
As a result, they may be only weak reinforcers in the short run, and become negative reinforcers once
withdrawn. Similarly, empowerment is likely to increase motivation, while offers of help may create
a dependance. More generally, we identify when the hidden costs of rewards are a myth or a reality.
We next consider situations where people criticize or downplay the performance of their spouse,
child, colleague, or subordinate. We formalize ego–bashing as reflecting battles for dominance or
authority within the relationship. Finally, we turn to the self–presentation strategies of privately
informed agents. We study in particular how depressed individuals may engage in self-deprecation
as a way of seeking leniency (a lowering of expectancies) or a “helping hand” on various obligations.

Roland Bénabou                                                Jean Tirole
Department of Economics                                       Institut d’Economie Industrielle
and Woodrow Wilson School                                     Université des Sciences Sociales
Robertson Hall, 440                                           Place Anatole France
Princeton University                                          F31042 – Toulouse
Princeton, NJ 08544                                           France
and NBER                                                      tirole@cict.fr
rbenabou@princeton.edu
1       Introduction
Should a child be rewarded for passing an exam? What impact do performance bonuses,
monitoring or empowerment have on employees’ morale and productivity? What are the
costs and bene…ts of standards and expectancies? How can depressive subjects react
negatively to information favorable to their self–esteem while simultaneously seeking help
from others in costly fashions? These questions are approached in this paper from a
unifying perspective which emphasizes the interaction between an individual’s self–esteem,
his self–presentation strategies, and his environment.
    The …rst premise of our analysis is that people have imperfect knowledge of their
own abilities in many of the tasks they face. We therefore study decision–making by an
agent (child, student, employee, etc.; “he”) who faces uncertainty about his payo¤s from
pursuing a ceratin course of action. The unknown variable could be a characteristic of
the individual himself, such as his talent, of the speci…c task at hand (long–run return,
how di¢cult or enjoyable it is to complete, etc.), or of the match between the two. In
presenting the model we shall generally emphasize the case of unknown ability, which
corresponds most closely to the intuitive notion of self–con…dence; but it will be clear
from the analysis that all three are formally equivalent.
   Second, we adopt a cognitive approach, assuming that the individual is an informa-
tion processor who extracts from his environment signals that are relevant for his self–
con…dence.1 We in fact focus on the polar case where individuals are fully rational and
Bayesian; although people surely make mistakes in processing information, we want to
account for the fact that they cannot systematically and repeatedly fool themselves, or
others for that matter.
   Third, self–knowledge is relevant to the extent that, in most tasks, ability and e¤ort
are complementary factors in the production of performance.2 Thus, an agent undertakes
an activity only if he has su¢cient self–con…dence in his ability to succeed.
   Because of this complementarity, people interacting with this individual and having
a stake in his action have an incentive to manipulate information relevant to his self–
knowledge. Thus, in much of the paper, a principal (parent, spouse, friend, teacher,

    1
    In section 3.3 we will compare this approach to a more behaviorist rendition of social interactions.
    2
    There are also instances of substitutability, and we shall consider them as well. What is essential for
our argument is nonseparablility.



                                                    1
boss, colleague, etc.; “she”) has a vested interest in (derives a bene…t from) the agent’s
undertaking and succeeding in the activity. In other words, success generates a spillover
or positive externality on the principal.
   In many circumstances, both the agent and the principal have private information
about the agent’s ability to perform the task. The agent usually has better access to
memories of his previous performances and of the way these were accomplished (his e¤ort
intensity, the idiosyncratic random events facilitating or inhibiting performance). That
is, the agent often has more factual information that is relevant to his self.
     By contrast, the principal often has private complementary information about the task.
For example, a teacher or manager has information about he di¢culty of the subject or
assignment which, together with the agent’s ability, conditions the probability of success.
She may also know better than the agent whether the task is attractive, in terms of either
being enjoyable to perform, or of having a high payo¤ for the agent. Last, while having less
information relevant to the agent’s self than him, she may be better trained at interpreting
it. This may result from her having performed the current task herself, having seen many
others do it, and thus having more experience with inferring ability from outcomes. As we
discuss below, the observation that others have private information about an individual’s
self underlies several …elds of research in education and management.
    The paper analyzes the consequences of both types of private information. Sections 2
and 3 look at attributions made by the agent when a principal with private information
makes a decision, such as selecting a reward, delegating a task or more simply encouraging
the agent, that impacts the agent’s willingness to perform the task. As was pointed out
by Cooley (1902), the agent should then take the principal’s perspective in order to
learn about himself. The agent’s attribution of ulterior motivation to the principal, or,
in economics parlance, his attempt to infer the principal’s information from the latter’s
decision, was called the “looking–glass self” by Cooley. The in‡uence of the principal’s
decision on the agent’s behavior is then twofold: direct, through its impact on the agent’s
payo¤ from accomplishing the task (keeping information constant); and indirect, through
his inference process. We …rst show that rewards may be weak reinforcers in the short term
and that, as stressed by psychologists, they may have hidden costs, in that they become
negative reinforcers once they are withdrawn. By o¤ering a low–powered incentive scheme,
the principal signals that she trusts the agent. Conversely, rewards (extrinsic motivation)
have a limited impact on current performance, and reduce the agent’s motivation to

                                             2
undertake the same (or a similar) task in the future. We then use the same logic to show
that empowering the agent is likely to increase his intrinsic motivation. Similarly, help
o¤ered by others may be detrimental to one’s self–esteem and create a dependance.
   We conclude that rewards may, but need not, be negative reinforcers. Our analysis
actually suggests when rewards work and when they back…re. The negative reinforcement
e¤ect requires that the individual be less knowledgeable in some dimensions than the
principal; this asymmetry of information is important in some settings, and negligible in
others. Furthermore, a “sorting condition” must hold, in that the principal must be more
tempted to o¤er a reward when the agent has limited ability or the task is boring. Thus,
before worrying about the negative impact of rewards, one should …rst check that the
reward provider has private information about the task or the agent’s talent (including,
as we have noted, a greater ability to interpret the agent’s track record). One should then,
as the agent does, think through the provider’s ulterior motivation and how her payo¤
from giving a contingent reward is a¤ected by her knowledge.
   While much of the social psychology and human resource management literatures
emphasize the necessity of coaching and boosting the self–esteem of one’s personal and
professional partners, people often criticize or downplay the achievements of their spouse,
child, colleague, coauthor, subordinate or teammate. We consider several reasons why
this may be so, and formalize in more detail the most important one. We argue that
ego–bashing may re‡ect battles for dominance. By lowering the other’s ego, an individual
may gain real authority within the relationship.
   Section 4, in contrast to sections 2 and 3, looks at the impact of the agent’s having
superior information about his self. The theme there, related to the literature on self–
presentation, is that the agent may attempt to signal his self–relevant information to the
principal. We are particularly interested in the strategies employed by individuals with
low self–esteem. These often “blackmail” others for attention and try to get reassurance
about their talent or worthiness (as colleagues, students, spouses, or children). They also
deprecate their own accomplishments in order to obtain leniency (a lowering of expectan-
cies) or a “helping hand” on various obligations. Such strategies are costly: they are met
with disapproval, and may back…re if the response does not bring the desired reassurance
or indulgence. We provide an equilibrium analysis of these phenomena, and characterize
the levels of self–esteem that give rise to self–deprecation.



                                             3
2      The looking–glass self
2.1     General con…dence–management strategies
Let us begin with an abstract framework, then specialize it. There are two players, an
agent and a principal. The agent selects an action or e¤ort level e that impacts his and
the principal’s utilities. The principal knows a parameter µ (e.g., the agent’s ability to
perform the task) that a¤ects the e¤ectiveness of this action. Furthermore, the principal
selects a policy p. Depending on the application, this policy may be a contingent reward,
help, surveillance, delegation, disclosure of information, or any other policy that may
a¤ect, directly or indirectly, the agent’s behavior. The agent’s and the principal’s payo¤
functions are UA (µ; e; p) and UP (µ; e; p). The agent may privately receive a signal ¾ that
is relevant to his self–knowledge, i.e., be informative about µ. The timing goes as follows

      Stage 1 :   The principal selects a policy p.

      Stage 2 :   The agent, after observing the policy chosen by the principal and lear–
                  ning ¾, chooses an action e.

   Let us assume, for notational simplicity, that the agent’s optimal action e¤ depends on
p and on the agent’s conditional expectation b
                                             µ(¾; p) of her ability. The conditioning of b
                                                                                         µ on
p means that the agent tries to see through the principal’s ulterior motivation in choosing
p. The principal’s expected payo¤ from choosing policy p when she has information µ is

                                     h ³      ³          ´ ´i
                                   E¾ UP µ; e¤ p; b
                                                  µ(¾; p) ; p :


Assuming di¤erentiability, again for simplicity, the principal’s choice of policy takes three
e¤ects into consideration:
                               "                            #
                                   @UP   @UP @e¤ @UP @e¤ @b
                                                          µ
                          E¾           +        +             = 0:                       (1)
                                    @p    @e @p   @e @b
                                                      µ @p
    The …rst term on the left–hand side of (1) is the direct e¤ect on the principal’s payo¤.
So, for example, if the policy is a bonus as in the next section, the …rst term is the direct
compensation cost of this bonus, keeping the agent’s behavior constant. The second
term corresponds to the direct impact on the agent’s behavior. For example, ceteris

                                                4
paribus, a bonus increases the agent’s incentive to exert e¤ort. These two e¤ects have
been investigated in detail in the agency literature.
   We shall be interested in the third e¤ect, which represents “con…dence management”.
To the extent that the choice of policy is guided by the principal’s knowledge, the agent
updates his beliefs in reaction to the policy choice (term @b µ=@p). The principal must
account for the fact that her choice is interpreted by the agent, and thereby a¤ects his
self–con…dence. A key aspect is then whether a higher self–con…dence
                                                                µ      level in‡uences
                                                                              ¶        the
                                                                  @UP @e¤
agent’s decision–making in a direction that the principal likes           > 0 or dislikes
µ              ¶                                                   @e @bµ
  @UP @e¤
           <0 :
   @e @b µ
      Section 2 examines situations in which the principal gains from boosting the agent’s
self–con…dence. Section 3.4, on the other hand, argues that in a variety of situations the
principal may be reluctant to enhance the agent’s self–con…dence, or may even want to
undermine it; section 3.5 provides a formal illustration.


2.2      The hidden cost of rewards: the debate
It is a common theme of economics that contingent rewards encourage e¤ort and per-
formance, and there is a good amount of evidence that they actually do (Gibbons 1997,
Lazear 1996).3 In other words, rewards serve as “positive reinforcers” for the desired
behavior. In psychology, their e¤ect is more controversial. A long–standing paradigm
clash has opposed proponents of the economic view of a positive relation between rewards
and attitude to the “dissonance theorists”, who argue that rewards may actually impair
performance, i.e., be “negative reinforcers”.4
   A di¤erent and substantial body of evidence has shown that extrinsic motivation (con-
tingent rewards) may con‡ict with intrinsic motivation (the individual’s drive to perform
the task for its intrinsic qualities). For example, in an experiment run by Wilson et al.
(1981), college students were either paid or not paid to work on a interesting puzzle. Sub-
jects who were rewarded played with the puzzle signi…cantly less in a later unrewarded

  3
     At least along the dimension that is being targeted by the reward. Other tasks may be impaired
by the reward given for a speci…c task, for instance through a crowding-out e¤ect as in Holmström and
Milgrom (1991).
   4
     See, e.g., Kruglanski (1978) for an account of this debate.



                                                 5
“free–time” period than unrewarded subjects. Similarly, Kruglanski et al. (1971) induced
high–school children to perform tasks involving verbal skills. Some were promised a re-
ward, others not. Those in the no–reward condition later reported a greater interest in the
task. In daily life, parents are quite familiar with what we may call the “forbidden fruit”
e¤ect: powerful or salient extrinsic constraints employed to induce a child to comply with
an adult’s prohibition of an activity decrease the likelihood of the child’s subsequent in-
ternalization of the adult’s preference over this activity.5 Taken together, these two points
hint at a limited impact of rewards on “engagement” (current activity) and a negative
one on “re–engagement” (persistence).
   Another body of work transposes these ideas from the educational setting to the
workplace. In well known contributions, Etzioni (1971) argues that workers …nd control
of their behavior via incentives “alienating” and “dehumanizing,” and Deci and Ryan
(1985) devote a chapter of their book to a criticism of the use of performance–contingent
rewards in the work setting.6 And, without condemning contingent compensation, Baron
and Kreps (1999, p.99) conclude that

        “there is no doubt that the bene…ts of [piece–rate systems or pay–for–performance
        incentive devices] can be considerably compromised when the systems under-
        mine workers’ intrinsic motivation.”

      Kreps (1997) reports on his uneasiness when teaching Human Resources Management
and discussing the impact of incentive devices in a way that is somewhat foreign to
standard economic theory.
   Our goal here is twofold. First, for reasons explained in more detail in section 3.3, we
want to analyze potential hidden e¤ects of rewards from an economic angle instead of just
positing an aversive impact of rewards on motivation. Second, and given that extrinsic
incentives work e¤ectively in many well–documented settings, we want to understand
when they should be employed with caution.
    Section 3.1 will relate our approach and conclusions to some of the relevant psychology
literature, in particular Deci and Ryan (1985) and Lepper et al. (1973). Let us just here
mention alternative interpretations of the hidden cost of rewards, that are unrelated to

  5
      See, e.g., Lepper and Greene (1978).
  6
      See also Kohn (1993) and several chapters in Lepper and Greene (1978).


                                                   6
our modeling. As for the engagement part, Condry and Chambers (1978, 66) suggest
that “rewards often distract attention from the process of task activity to the product
of getting a reward”. As for the re–engagement part, Condry and Chambers argue that
current rewards may decrease the individual’s willingness to persist because they orient
activity toward performance rather than progress; that is, Condry and Chambers o¤er
what to economists is a familiar multitask interpretation: the individual is led by higher
short–term rewards to sacri…ce long–run payo¤s.7 For example, a stylized fact is that
subjects who are paid to solve problems choose easier ones than those who do not expect
a reward. While this explanation is well–taken, it does not apply uniformly. For instance,
the individual may not be aware of future re–engagement or may not face an investment
decision that crowds out current e¢ciency. Furthermore, the multitask story cannot
account for the evidence on reported posterior intrinsic interest in the activity.


2.3     Interaction between extrinsic and intrinsic motivation
As in the general framework of section 2.1, there are two players, an agent and a principal.
The agent chooses whether to undertake an activity or task (exert e¤ort) or not (exert
no e¤ort). His disutility or cost of undertaking the task is denoted c > 0. If the task is
successful it yields direct payo¤ V > 0 to the agent and W > 0 to the principal; if it fails,
both get 0:
   Success requires e¤ort; yet e¤ort is not su¢cient for success. Let µ 2 [0; 1] denote
the probability of success when the agent works. This section focuses on the principal’s
superiority of information; without loss of generality, we shall assume that she knows µ
perfectly. The agent knows that µ is drawn from a cumulative distribution function F (µ)
with density f (µ), and learns a signal ¾ 2 [0; 1] with conditional cumulative distribution
G (¾ j µ) and positive conditional density g (¾ j µ). We assume that a higher ¾ is “good
news”, in the sense that the expectation E [µ j ¾; I] is weakly increasing in ¾ for any
information I the agent may have besides ¾: We further assume the monotone likelihood

   7
     For example, in La¤ont and Tirole (1988), an agent exerts e¤ort today both to reduce current
operating cost and to increase future e¢ciency. Faced with a higher powered incentive scheme (a greater
sensitivity of current reward to current cost level), the agent substitutes toward current cost reduction
and sacri…ces long-term investment (see Holmström and Milgrom 1991 for a broader perspective on
multitasking). Condry and Chambers’ argument follows a similar pattern, with the individual allocating
his attention between the resolution of the current problem and a “deeper understanding” of the problem.


                                                   7
ratio property (MLRP):

                                                            g (¾ 1 jµ)
                    for all ¾ 1 and ¾ 2 with ¾ 1 > ¾ 2 ,               is increasing in µ:                   (2)
                                                            g (¾ 2 jµ)
       We take the principal–agent relationship as a given, and so the non–contingent part of
the reward has no impact and is normalized to zero. By contrast, we allow the principal
to select a reward or bonus b < W , in case of success. Thus, the agent’s (respectively, the
principal’s) total bene…t in case of success is V +b (respectively; W ¡b), while both parties
obtain 0 in case of failure (the agent’s payo¤, as noted earlier, is de…ned gross of the e¤ort
cost). The stage–1 policy decision for the principal is therefore the choice of a reward. We
formalize the reward as being a monetary one, but, in line with the psychology literature,
b could with slight modi…cations be interpreted as working conditions, praise, friendliness
or (minus) punishment.
    Note that, were the agent to know his ability µ, he would choose to exert e¤ort if and
only if

                                               µ (V + b) ¸ c:

That is, when the agent has the same information as the principal, the reward is a positive
reinforcer.
    In our model, however, only the principal observes µ; the agent receives only a signal ¾
about µ:8 We analyze perfect Bayesian equilibria of the two–stage game. Observing reward
b, the agent updates his beliefs about µ; using the principal’s equilibrium strategy. Let
b
µ (¾; b) ´ E [µj¾; b] denote the agent’s (interim) self–con…dence, that is, the expectation of
ability conditional on his signal and the reward he is o¤ered. This expectation is a weakly
increasing
         h function of the signal
                              i   ¾: Letting e 2 f0; 1g denote the agent’s e¤ort, his utility
is UA = b µ (¾; b) (V + b) ¡ c e. There exists a threshold signal ¾ ¤ (b) in [0; 1] such that9

                                              c
                             E [µj¾; b] ¸        if and only if ¾ ¸ ¾ ¤ (b):                                 (3)
                                            V +b
   8
     That the principal be uncertain about what the agent exactly knows is needed in order for her choice
of a bonus to be informative. If the principal did not face some uncertainty, the probability that a bonus
b elicits e¤ort would be known in advance. The optimal bonus, which maximizes the principal’s payo¤
Pr [e = 1jb] £ µ [W ¡ b], would then be independent of µ:
   9
     If E (µj0; b) ¸ c= (V + b), one can de…ne ¾ ¤ (b) = 0; if E (µj1; b) · c= (V + b) one can de…ne ¾ ¤ (b) = 1.

                                                       8
The principal’s payo¤ if she o¤ers the bonus b when her information is µ is thus


                               E¾ [UP ] = µ [1 ¡ G (¾ ¤ (b)jµ)] [W ¡ b] ,                     (4)

which she maximizes over b. Let B denote the set of equilibrium bonuses; that is, b 2 B
if and only if b is an equilibrium o¤er by the principal for some “type” µ. Clearly, if b1
and b2 both belong to B, with b1 < b2 , then


                                             ¾ ¤ (b1 ) > ¾ ¤ (b2 ).                           (5)

   If this inequality did not hold the principal could, regardless of her information about
the probability of success, (weakly) increase the likelihood of e¤ort while o¤ering the lower
wage. Therefore, b2 could not be an equilibrium bonus.

Proposition 1 In an equilibrium:
  (i) Rewards are positive short–term reinforcers: if b1 < b2 , then ¾ ¤ (b1 ) > ¾ ¤ (b2 ).
    (ii) Rewards are bad news, in that a trusting principal o¤ers a lower bonus: if b1 and
b2 are o¤ered when the principal assesses the probability of success to be µ1 and µ2 > µ1
respectively, then b1 · b2 .
    (iii) Rewards undermine the agent’s self–con…dence: for all (¾ 1 ; ¾ 2 ) and equilibrium
rewards b1 < b2 ,
                                       E [µj¾ 1 ; b1 ] > E [µj¾ 2 ; b2 ] .

Future self–con…dence is also always reduced by an increase in the reward; that is, the ex-
pectation of µ conditional on ¾; b, the action and the outcome is decreasing in b regardless
of ¾, the action and the outcome.

Proof. (i) has already been proved. The proof of part (ii) rests on a standard revealed
preference argument. Suppose that bi is an optimal bonus when the principal has in-
formation µi ; i = 1; 2; and denote ¾ i = ¾ ¤ (bi ): Since bi is optimal given µi; it must be
that:
                    µi [1 ¡ G (¾ i j µi )] [W ¡ bi ] ¸ µi [1 ¡ G (¾ j j µi )] [W ¡ bj ] ;

hence:

                           1 ¡ G (¾ 1 j µ1 )   W ¡ b2   1 ¡ G (¾ 1 j µ 2 )
                                             ¸        ¸                    :
                           1 ¡ G (¾ 2 j µ1 )   W ¡ b1   1 ¡ G (¾ 2 j µ 2 )

                                                       9
Since µ 1 > µ2 ; the MLRP requires that ¾ 2 · ¾ 1 :10 Thus ¾ ¤ (b2 ) · ¾ ¤ (b1 ); hence b1 · b2
since ¾ ¤ (¢) is decreasing.
    This establishes part (ii) which, in turn, implies that pooling occurs only over inter-
                                                      £      ¤                    £       ¤
vals.11 Therefore, if the principal o¤ers b1 to types µ1 ; µ1 and b2 > b1 to types µ2 ; µ2 ,
it must be that µ2 · µ1 . This establishes part (iii) of the proposition. ¥
       Appendix 1 illustrates the computation of equilibrium in the case where µ takes only
two values, µL and µH : In equilibrium, the principal o¤ers no bonus (b = 0) to a more able
agent (µ = µH ); and randomizes between no bonus and a positive bonus when dealing
with a less able agent (µ = µL ):
   While our analysis shows that the short–term incentive e¤ect of rewards is reduced by
their informational content, it also demonstrates how an outside observer might actually
underestimate the power of these incentives. The probability of e¤ort, 1 ¡ G (¾ ¤ (b) j µ) ;
and the probability of success, µ [1 ¡ G (¾ ¤ (b) j µ)] [W ¡ b] ; are both increasing in µ; which
is known only to the principal. Because µ varies negatively with b in equilibrium, the
observer who simply correlates b with outcomes may conclude that rewards are not very
e¤ective. The reason is that such unconditional correlations or regressions fail to take
into account the fact that the highest incentives are given to those who would otherwise
be the least likely to work.12

       ² Impact of rewards on intrinsic motivation.
   The literature on intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation refers to an apparently di¤erent
argument: the subject …nds the task less attractive when o¤ered a reward. However,
Proposition 1 holds unchanged when the principal has private information about the at-
tractiveness of the task, rather than the probability of success. Let us assume that µ is
symmetric information. By contrast, the principal knows from previous experience the
cost c of undertaking the task, while the agent only has signal ° distributed according to

  10
     The MLRP implies that (1 ¡ G (¾jµ1 )) = (1 ¡ G (¾jµ 2 )) is increasing in ¾; for all µ1 > µ2 :
  11
     There exists no pure strategy separating equilibrium. In such an equilibrium, the agent’s behavior
would not depend on his signal. The principal’s preference over bonuses that induce compliance with
probability 1 is the same for all µ (i.e., choose the lowest such bonus), and so some pooling must occur.
  12
     In the two–type example, for instance, the observer will see the agent working with positive probability
(perhaps even a relatively high probability) even when no reward is o¤ered. From this he might be led
to infer that rewards do not make much of a di¤erence, and could thus perhaps be reduced or done away
with. This would be a mistake, because, in situations where the reward is actually given (µ = µL ); it
does have a signi…cant impact on motivation.

                                                     10
a cumulative distribution G (° j c) with the MLRP. An attractive task is one with a low
c, and a high signal ° makes this more likely. The principal’s objective function is then

                                     µ [1 ¡ G (° ¤ (b) j c)] [W ¡ b] ,

while the agent exerts e¤ort if and only if

                                         µ (V + b) ¸ E [c j °; b] :

      The same proof as above shows that a higher reward is, in equilibrium, associated
with a less attractive task; therefore, bonuses reduce intrinsic motivation. Conversely,
“forbidden fruits” are the most appealing ones. Note that, under either interpretation
of the model, the optimal bonus could well be zero, perhaps even negative. A famous
(literary) case is that of Tom Sawyer demanding bribes from other boys to let them paint
a fence in his place –thereby “signalling” a pleasurable activity rather than a chore:13

        “Boys happened along every little while; they came to jeer, but remained to
        whitewash.... And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a poor
        poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth...
        Tom... had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it -
        namely, that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only nec-
        essary to make the thing di¢cult to attain. If he had been a great and wise
        philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have comprehended that
        Work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do, and that Play consists of
        whatever a body is not obliged to do.”
        Mark Twain, “The Adventures of Tom Sawyer” (1876, Chapter 2).


      ² Paternalism: altruism towards a time–inconsistent agent.
      One interesting class of situations for which our framework is relevant arises when an
agent (child or adult) has time–inconsistent preferences, generating a divergence between
his own short– and long–run interests. As a result of this “salience of the present”, he
may for instance shirk on homework or professional duties, fail to stick to a necessary diet

 13
      We are grateful to Ilya Segal for reminding us of this example.

                                                    11
or exercise regimen, or remain addicted to tobacco, drugs or alcohol. A well intentioned
principal –parent or close friend– who takes the long run view of the agent’s welfare will
then have the exact same incentives as those we analyze here to manipulate the agent’s
perceptions of himself and of the tasks he faces –“for his own good”.14

       ² Retrospective justi…cation.
    Combined with imperfect memory, the previous result has an interesting implication
for situations where currently available information provides only insu¢cient justi…cation
for a certain course of action.15 Suppose that in the future the agent faces the choice of
whether to undertake the same or a similar task; and that, come that time, he remembers
only that he chose to engage in it and the extrinsic incentives that were then o¤ered, but
not his intrinsic interest in the task (and the later observation of c). For instance, an
individual engaged in a long–term project (writing a book, proving a theorem, running
a marathon) may, at times, be seized by doubt as to whether the intellectual and ego–
grati…cation bene…ts which successful completion is likely to bring will, ultimately, justify
the required e¤orts. (The situation envisioned is one where …nancial and career rewards
are small). He may then re‡ect that since he chose to embark on this project after com-
pleting other, similar ones, the personal satisfaction enjoyed from previous completions
(and which, at this later and perhaps somewhat depressed stage, he cannot quite recall)
must have been signi…cant. Hence it is worth persevering on the chosen path. The result
that E [c j °; b] < E [c j °; b0 ] for b0 > b can provide an explanation for this kind of ex–post
rationalization (Bem 1967, Staw 1977).


2.4       Empowerment and motivation
We showed earlier that the principal signals her trusts in the agent’s ability (high µ) or
intrinsic motivation (low c) through the use of a low–powered incentive scheme. We now
investigate the use of delegation or empowerment to induce an agent to carry out the

  14
     Formally, W in this case is equal to V =¯; where ¯ 2 (0; 1) is the agent’s quasi–hyperbolic discount
factor (Strotz 1956, Phelps and Pollack 1968, Laibson 1997); equivalently 1=¯ measures the salience of
the e¤ort cost c for the agent, at the time when he must incur it.
  15
     See Benabou and Tirole (1999) for a model of rational selective memory, awareness, or attention. The
present argument requires only that memory be imperfect, especially with regard to one’s past feelings
and emotions (hedonistic payo¤s).



                                                   12
objectives of the principal (Miles 1965).16 In a nutshell, the principal demonstrates trust
in the agent’s ability (or, alternatively, his intrinsic motivation) by delegating control of
the task to him, and thereby makes it more likely that the agent exerts e¤ort.
   In this section, we abstract from rewards by assuming a non–contingent compensation
(b = 0). Let W1 (µ) and W0 (µ) denote the principal’s expected payo¤ when she delegates
(d = 1) and does not delegate (d = 0) to an agent with ability µ, and the agent exerts e¤ort.
These reduced forms could be derived from a situation where the principal decides to either
relinquish some control rights to the agent, or put in place a monitoring technology or
supervisor. As earlier, we assume that the principal knows the agent’s probability of
success µ, while the agent has a signal ¾ drawn from a cumulative distribution G (¾ j µ),
with density g (¾ j µ) satisfying the monotone likelihood ratio property (2). The agent’s
utility is, as usual, µV ¡ cd ; d 2 f0; 1g: We assume that c1 · c0 : ceteris paribus, the agent
prefers delegation. The timing is as follows. At stage 1, the principal selects d 2 f0; 1g.
At stage 2, the agent decides whether to undertake the task; the principal’s payo¤ is
Wd (µ) if he does, and 0 otherwise.
       We make the following assumptions:

Assumption 1
                             µ            ¶
                        d        W1 (µ)                  W1 (0)     W1 (1)
                                              > 0 and           <1<        :
                        dµ       W0 (µ)                  W0 (0)     W0 (1)

       In words, an empowered agent is less likely to create damage to the principal when
he is talented than when he is not. Furthermore, the principal does not want (ceteris
paribus) to delegate the task to an inept agent (µ = 0), and prefers to delegate the task
to a very talented one (µ = 1). The assumption implies that there exists µ¤ in (0; 1) such
that, under symmetric information, it is e¢cient to delegate the task if µ > µ ¤ ; and not
to delegate it if µ < µ¤ .

  16
    The analysis given here is not based on the initiative e¤ect studied in Aghion and Tirole (1997).
There, an agent invests more in the acquisition of information about potential projects if he knows that
the principal won’t interfere too much with his suggestions. In Dessein (1999), the principal delegates so
as to enable the …nal decision to re‡ect the agent’s information better than is the case when the agent
communicates it strategically and the principal decides. Delegating to the agent the principal signals a
greater congruence of their objectives. Salancik (1977) proposes yet another viewpoint, the “co-optation
of personal satisfaction”: “By having a person choose to do something, you create a situation that makes
it more di¢cult for him to say that he didn’t want to do it. And the ironic thing is that the more freedom
you give him to make the decision, the more constraining you make his subsequent situation.”

                                                    13
Assumption 2 For all (¾ 0 ; ¾ 1 ) ;
                                 ·µ                    ¶µ            ¶¸
                            d         1 ¡ G (¾ 1 jµ)        W1 (µ)
                                                                          > 0:
                            dµ        1 ¡ G (¾ 0 jµ)        W0 (µ)

   Assumption 2 imposes an upper bound on the information e¤ect arising from the
correlation between the signals µ and ¾ received by the principal and the agent (and
which was the focus of the previous section).17 It substantially simpli…es the analysis by
guaranteeing that, in choosing whether to delegate, the principal is more concerned about
the relative damage which the agent may cause when undertaking the task under each
regime (Assumption 1), than about the potential impact of the delegation decision on the
likelihood that the agent will undertake the task.

Proposition 2 In equilibrium, under Assumptions 1 and 2:
(i) Empowerment is good news for the agent about his ability, and therefore changes his
attitude towards the task.
(ii) There is more empowerment than under symmetric information: the principal dele-
gates if and only if µ > µ¤¤ , where µ¤¤ < µ¤ .

Proof. (i) For a given delegation policy d 2 f0; 1g, the agent undertakes the task if and
only if
                                          E [µ j¾; d] V ¸ cd .

Therefore, there is a cuto¤ ¾ ¤d such that the agent exerts e¤ort if and only if ¾ ¸ ¾ ¤d . The
principal chooses d 2 f0; 1g so as to maximize

                                       [1 ¡ G (¾ ¤d j µ)] Wd (µ) .

Assumption 2 then implies that the principal delegates if and only if µ ¸ µ¤¤ for some
µ¤¤ . Furthermore, ¾ ¤1 < ¾ ¤0 , for two reasons: …rst, delegation directly makes the task more
attractive, by assumption (c1 · c0 ). Second, delegation is good news about ability.

       (ii) Obvious. ¥


  17
    For example if G (¾jµ) = 1 ¡ expf¡¾= (µ + k)g for ¾ 2 [0; +1); Assumption 2 amounts to imposing
a lower bound on k.

                                                   14
       Proposition 2 and its premise are consistent with Pfe¤er’s (1994) observation that

         “when employees are subjected to close external monitoring or surveillance,
         they may draw the psychological inference that they are not trusted and thus
         not trustworthy, acting in ways that reinforce this perception.”18


Remark (when delegation back…res): Assumptions 1 and 2 are restrictive. To see this,
suppose for instance that W0 and W1 are proportional to µ, W1 = µW1 and W0 = µW0 ,
and that delegation is always costly: W1 < W0 . Delegation to the agent is then equivalent
to giving him a bonus of c1 ¡ c0 ; at a cost to the principal of µ (W0 ¡ W1 ) : Following the
steps of the proof of Proposition 1, one can show that, in equilibrium, delegation always
represent bad news about the agent’s ability .

  This remark leads to a more general point. What we have said about rewards and
empowerment applies more generally to any type of policy that is less costly to the prin-
cipal when the agent is more talented. This sorting condition implies that the principal
can demonstrate trust and boost the agent’s self–con…dence. The same e¤ect may not
hold when the principal simply encourages the agent by telling him how able he is and
how pleasant the task can be. Unless the principal is known to have a strong aversion to
lying or has built a reputation for honest appraisals, such encouragements are cheap talk
and may be perceived by the agent as self–serving.
    That the sorting condition is needed in order for the principal to boost the agent’s
self–con…dence is further demonstrated by the standard observations that the use of com-
pliments to ingratiate oneself with a person may back…re, that parents often have a hard
time to motivate their children to work at school by telling them about their ability (µ),
the rewards from education (V ), and the pleasure of learning (c); and that depressed
individuals often attribute ulterior motivation to those who try to comfort them.19

  18
    Cited in Baron and Kreps (1999), who provide a further illustration at Hewlett-Packard.
  19
    It would be interesting to assess in this light the evidence on the role of expectancies. For example,
teachers with initially over-optimistic expectations about their students lead to changes in the perfor-
mances of the students which tend to con…rm the expectations (Rosenthal and Jacobson 1968; see also
Merton (1948) for a discussion of self- ful…lling prophecies). It seems, however, that while the students’
behavior changes, the students’ self-con…dence is una¤ected (Darley and Fazio 1980).




                                                   15
3     Discussion and robustness
Let us now step back and discuss the relevance, scope, and methodology of our approach.


3.1    Relevance
We …rst return to the hidden cost of rewards. We showed that:

    ² Rewards impact intrinsic motivation. While under symmetric information the in-
      trinsic (µV ) and extrinsic (µb) motivations can be cleanly separated, under asym-
      metric information they cannot. In particular, the “intrinsic motivation” ^µ (¾; b) V
      decreases with the level of the bonus. Similarly, when the agent does not know how
      costly or exciting the task is, his perception E [c j °; b] is a¤ected by the level of the
      reward.

    ² A reward is a positive reinforcer in the short–term, but always decreases future
      motivation.

    While adopting an economic approach, our analysis is well in line with a branch of
the social psychology literature. The standard references on the hidden costs of rewards
(Lepper et al. 1973, Deci 1975, Deci and Ryan 1985) are based on self–perception and
attribution theories, according to which individuals constantly reassess the reasons for
their and others’ behavior. Both approaches emphasize the information impact of rewards.
As Deci (1975, p142) argues,

      “Every reward (including feedback) has two aspects, a controlling aspect and
      an informational aspect which provides the recipient with information about
      his competence and self–determination.”

   Both views also stress the re–engagement e¤ects of rewards. Thus Schwartz (1990),
commenting on Lepper et al. (1973), argues:

      “reinforcement has two e¤ects. First, predictably it gains control of [an] activ-
      ity, increasing its frequency. Second,...when reinforcement is later withdrawn,
      people engage in the activity even less than they did before reinforcement was
      introduced.”

                                              16
   The tension between the short–term and long–term e¤ects on motivation of o¤ering a
reward also suggests the following interesting conjecture: once a reward is o¤ered, it will
be required (and “expected”) every time the task has to be performed again –perhaps even
in increasing amounts. In other words, through their e¤ect on self–con…dence, rewards
have a “ratchet e¤ect”. This irreversibility may explain people’s (e.g., parent’s) reluctance
to o¤er them, even on occasions where they would seem like a small price to pay to get
the current job done. Properly exploring this idea will require an explicit dynamic model,
however, and is therefore left for future work. Our current framework really corresponds
to settings where the agent’s successive interactions or “engagements” are with di¤erent
principals (e.g., successive teachers or managers), or between myopic players.20
   Our results are also consistent (in sign, perhaps not in magnitude) with Etzioni’s
(1971) claim that workers …nd control of their behavior via incentives “alienating” and
“dehumanizing”, with Kohn’s (1993) argument that incentive schemes make people less
enthusiastic about their behavior, and with Deci and Ryan’s (1985) view that rewards
change the locus of causality from internal to external and make employees bored, alien-
ated, and reactive rather than proactive.
   We should, however, issue two important caveats here. The …rst is alluded to in Deci
(1975, p. 41):

         “If a person’s feelings of competence and self–determination are enhanced,
         his intrinsic motivation will increase. If his feelings of competence and self–
         determination are diminished, his intrinsic motivation will decrease.
         We are suggesting that some rewards or feedback will increase intrinsic mo-
         tivation through this process and others will decrease it, either through this
         process or through the change in perceived locus of causality process.”

       Our model may clarify the di¤erence between what we would label “promised” or “‘ex
ante” contingent rewards, and “discretionary” or “ex post” rewards. The model of section
2 is about the control of behavior through rewards. The principal selects a reward for a

  20
     In particular, if the agent and the principal are in a long–term relationship (the engagement and
re–engagement take place with the same actors), there is a second ratchet e¤ect to take into account: the
agent may have an incentive to shirk at the initial stage, in order to signal that he has bad information
(a low ¾), and thereby elicit a higher bonus in the future.



                                                   17
well–de…ned performance before the agent’s decision. The agent then rationally interprets
the reward scheme as a signal of distrust or of a boring task.
    By contrast, rewards that are discretionary (not contracted for) may well boost his
self–esteem or intrinsic motivation, because of a di¤erent learning e¤ect: the worker or
the child learns from the reward that the task was generally considered di¢cult (and
therefore that he is talented), or that the supervisor or parent is appreciative of, proud
of, or cares about his performance –and therefore that repeating this performance is
worthwhile. Thus, giving ex post a bicycle to a hard–working child or a special pay raise
or early promotion to a productive assistant professor will boost rather than hurt their
self–con…dence. The agent then does not infer that his behavior was controlled, because
the principal was under no obligation (no commitment) to reward any particular outcome.
And receiving the reward is good news, because the agent did not know how to interpret
his performance. The reward is then an indirect measure of performance for the agent.
   The second caveat is that our economic analysis also unveils necessary conditions for
rewards to have a negative impact on self–con…dence. The …rst key condition is that
the principal has information about the agent or the task that the agent does not have.
This may explain why the existence of hidden costs of rewards is less controversial in an
educational setting than in the workplace. Children have particularly imperfect knowledge
of their selves and of their aptitudes in the quickly changing tasks which they face as
they grow up (curriculum, sports, social interactions, etc.). By contrast, the structure
of rewards in the workplace is more anonymous: in most sectors, it is the same for all
workers with the same “job description”. The terms of this (contingent) contract still
re‡ect information about the nature of the job, but much of this information may already
be publicly known.
   The second key condition is the sorting condition: for rewards to signal a low ability
or a boring task, it must be the case that the principal is comparatively more tempted to
o¤er performance incentives under those circumstances. Conversely, consider the case of a
manager who is promoted from a …xed–pay job and given the leadership of a new project
or division, together with a pay–for–performance scheme. In this example, which can be
thought of as a convex combination of Sections 2.3 and 2.4, the sorting condition works in
the opposite direction: the contingent reward is associated with a high level of trust from
the principal (demonstrated by a large “empowerment” e¤ect), and should thus boost the
manager’s self–con…dence.

                                            18
   To sum up, before worrying about the negative impact of rewards, one should …rst
check that the reward provider has private information about the task or the agent’s
talent (including as we have noted, a greater ability to interpret the agent’s track record).
One should then, as the agent does, think through the provider’s ulterior motivation and
how her payo¤ from giving a contingent reward is a¤ected by her knowledge.


3.2    Scope
Section 2 studied rewards and delegation as speci…c policies impacting the agent’s self–
con…dence. Several other types of social interactions are worth studying. Some involve
mere reinterpretations of the model, other unveil richer patterns:

 a) Help.
   Suppose that the principal o¤ers to contribute a level of help h (at private cost h) in
case the agent decides to undertake the task. This help improves the probability of the
agent’s success, which is thus a function P (µ; h) with Pµ > 0 and Ph > 0: The agent then
undertakes the project if and only if ¾ ¤ ¸ ¾ ¤ (h), where E [P (µ; h) j ¾ ¤ (h); h] V = c; and
¾ ¤ (h) is a decreasing function. Ignoring rewards, the principal’s payo¤ is


                          UP = [1 ¡ G(¾ ¤ (h) j µ)] [P (µ; h)W ¡ h] :

The term in the second bracket is her expected payo¤ conditional on the agent’s under-
taking the task. Let us assume that the percentage increase in that payo¤ achieved by a
higher level of help (the expected rate of return on investing in help) is smaller when the
agent is talented than when he is untalented:

                                 @ 2 ln (P (µ; h)W ¡ h)
                                                        < 0:
                                           @µ@h

   Intuitively, this means that help makes more of di¤erence for weak agents than for
strong ones. Following the steps in the proof of Proposition 1, one can show that in
equilibrium, a trusting principal helps less: if µ1 > µ 2 and hi is an optimal level of help
for type µi , then h1 · h2 : Conversely, a high level of help is bad news for the agent,
permanently weakening his intrinsic motivation for the task.



                                              19
   This observation may explain why help (like rewards or lack of delegation) can be
detrimental to self–esteem. For example, depression, a recognized disorder of self–esteem
(Bibring 1953), is relatively common among individuals with “dependent” personality
patterns, that is, individuals with backgrounds characterized by pampering and overpro-
tection (Snyder et al. 1983, p233). Similarly, Gilbert and Silvera (1996) observe that
a parent who …nds dependence of his or her child gratifying may provide unnecessary
assistance.
   A sorting condition like the one assumed above seems quite appropriate when task
performance is of a zero–one nature: graduating high school or passing and exam, getting
a job or keeping it, etc. In other situations the sorting condition may be reversed, so that
receiving help is a positive signal. This is likely to occur when the principal’s payo¤ in
case of success rises with the agents’ ability, or with the level of help which was provided
(a more helping principal gets more “credit”).21 One can think of situations such as
joining a start–up …rm, or contributing time and money to a political party or candidate.
The two types of sorting conditions can be illustrated by the contrast between the case
of a professor helping a student write a term paper or getting his/her thesis done (the
professor’s payo¤ is largely independent of the margin of success with which the student
passes the hurdle), and that where the same professor coauthors a research paper with
the student or with a younger faculty member (helping is then more attractive, the better
the prospects for the paper’s success due to the coauthor’s talent).

 b) Disclosure of information.
   The use of encouragement, praise, strategies to minimize the e¤ect of failures and
the like, is a central theme in human resource management and education.22 Successful
coaches are viewed as those who build up others’ con…dence (Kinlaw 1997). Although
section 3.4 will argue that coaches may not always want to boost self–con…dence, the
complementarity between e¤ort and talent makes it clear why even a sel…sh coach will
often bene…t from doing so. Formally, the principal’s policy p is here the disclosure (or
absence of disclosure) to the agent of information relevant to this self, that is, of a signal
held by the principal and covarying with the agent’s ability. The release of a signal

  21
     Formally, replacing W by W (µ) or W (h) in the expected payo¤ P (µ; h)W ¡ h (with W 0 > 0) tends
to reverse the sorting condition, by generating a complementarity between µ and h:
  22
     For example, Korman (1970) emphasizes the positive role of one’s self-image in the determination of
work attitude/e¤ort, and argues that managers should attempt to improve the employee’s self-image.

                                                  20
covarying positively (negatively) with µ boosts (lowers) the agent’s self–con…dence. In
the model of section 2, the principal indeed wants to release good signals and conceal bad
ones.
   Taking it for granted that the principal wants to boost the agent’s self–esteem, it is
interesting to note that, in some circumstances, the released signal may have ambiguous
consequences. Suppose that the agent failed previously. The principal may then try
to convince him that the link from talent and e¤ort to performance is rather random
(e.g., the probability of success was "µe, where " is noise) or, relatedly, that the agent
was discriminated against. O¤ering such excuses 23 may sometimes prove self–defeating.
Indeed, if the noise a¤ecting the past performance is recurrent (e.g., the agent is likely
to be discriminated again in the future if he has been in the past), then the excuse may
discourage rather than encourage the agent.24
    We have not yet discussed the credibility of the principal’s disclosure. Credibility is
no issue if the information is “hard” (i.e., if the agent can verify the veracity of the infor-
mation). Often, however, the principal’s information is “soft”, in that the agent cannot
verify it. The agent then may not believe proclaimed “good news” because he understands
that the principal’s ulterior motivation is to boost his self–esteem. The credibility of an-
nouncements with soft information may be restored, however, if the principal succeeds in
building a reputation for not exaggerating her claims. By contrast, a professor who tells
all her students and colleagues how great they are may do little to their egos.25


3.3       Methodology
Our approach, in the tradition of economics and some of cognitive psychology, focuses on
the individual’s motivation. An alternative viewpoint, along the lines of the behaviorist
school (Hull 1943, Skinner 1953) would shunt the inner process and posit a direct link
from stimulus to response. The agent in our context would just exhibit an instinctive,
aversive reaction to being o¤ered a contingent reward.
       Unsurprisingly, we feel reluctant to adopt such a “reduced form” approach. Certainly,

  23
     See Snyder et al. (1983) for a broad discussion of excuses.
  24
     We are just saying that, while an outside observer could interpret the excuse as an exercise in
con…dence building (an increase in b µ), the relevant ability ("µ) includes the noise.
  25
     See Baker et al (1997) for an illustration of the role of the principal’s reputation in relationship
contracts.


                                                   21
individuals do not constantly compute perfect Bayesian equilibria when trying to …gure
out the cognitive implications of their environment’s actions. Indeed economists are con-
tent with the idea that individuals are boundedly rational and use rules of thumb and
analogies in order to economize time and thinking, as long as the resulting inferences and
behavior are not too much at odds with their self–interest. In particular, from casual
experience, we feel that individuals are quite sophisticated at drawing inferences from the
behavior of people they interact with (with some variations in the population26 ).
   In our view, the cognitive/economics approach delivers two bene…ts. First, it helps
understand why the response to the stimulus is the way it is. Second, it makes testable
predictions as to when rewards may have a hidden cost and when the hidden cost of
rewards is likely to be a myth. We refer the reader to section 3.2 for these predictions.


3.4       Undermining the other’s ego
Our premise (and that of much of the human resources literature for example) has been
that one bene…ts from boosting the self–esteem of one’s spouse, child, colleague, coauthor,
subordinate, or teammate. But while bene…ts from others’ self–con…dence are indeed
a pervasive aspect of social interactions, it is also a fact that people often criticize or
downplay the achievements of colleagues and relatives, and disclose information that is
detrimental to their ego. The study in section 2 must therefore be part of a broader
construct, in which the principal may sometimes bene…t from repressing the agent’s ego.
This section lists some potential motivations for such behaviors.

 a) Direct competition.
       A rather trivial reason for why someone may want to bash another person’s ego is that
the two are in direct competition (for a job, a mate, a discovery, a title, and so forth).
Then the former is directly hurt when the latter succeeds. In the context of our model,
W is negative.

 b) The risk of “coasting”.
       One of the basic equations in social psychology (and, consequently, our starting point
in section 2) is that the marginal payo¤ to an individual’s e¤ort is increasing in his talent.

  26
    For example, children exhibit di¤erent speeds of learning how to interpret social signals. And adults
usually have more experience in the matter than children.

                                                   22
In certain situations, however, e¤ort and ability are substitutes rather than complements,
creating the risk that the agent may reduce e¤ort when feeling more self–con…dent (“rest-
ing on his laurels”). This situation arises in particular when the agent’s private payo¤
for performance is of a “pass–fail” nature. For example, a pupil whose only ambition is
to pass an exam may cram less if he feels talented. Similarly, an individual who aims at
little more than keeping his spouse and takes her for granted won’t put much e¤ort into
being attractive to her.27 The teacher or parent may then want to downplay the pupil’s
achievements, and the spouse may tell him that he is not that great after all.
   In these examples, a high self–con…dence reduces e¤ort. In other examples, it may
induce the wrong type of e¤ort. For example, the agent may demonstrate excess initiative
and select a new and risky path that he feels will pay o¤ due to his talent, while the
principal would have preferred a more conservative approach. There are probably many ³ ´
situations in which the principal’s payo¤ as a function of the agent’s self–con…dence b
                                                                                      µ is
(inverted) U–shaped, as opposed to constantly increasing as posited in section 2: an
increase in the agent’s self–esteem helps up to a point, where it starts hurting the principal.

 c) Shadow cost of reputation
    A teacher or a manager who makes very complimentary comments to every pupil or
employee may lose her credibility. As we already noted, when disclosing soft information to
several agents the principal must realize that they will see through her ulterior motivation,
and believe her only if she builds a reputation for not exaggerating claims. Refraining
from boosting some agents’ self–esteem may help her make more credible statements to
other agents.
    We now turn to, and analyze in more detail, what is probably the most common reason
for restraining another person’s ego.


3.5     Ego bashing and battles for dominance
Many circumstances in private life or at the workplace are characterized by power rela-
tionships. Egos clash as individuals try to establish dominance over each other along some

  27
     A simple formalization of these two examples goes as follows: Suppose the agent aims at performance
y0 and gets no extra utility from y > y0 . Consider a deterministic technology y = µe where µ is talent
and e e¤ort. Then e = y0 =µ, and so self-con…dence reduces e¤ort.


                                                  23
dimension (e.g., intellectual). What matters in such situations is one’s relative standing in
the relationship, rather than any absolute standing. Shattering the other’s self–con…dence
in the relevant dimension may then increase one’s power in the relationship.
    To illustrate this, consider a pair of individuals, 1 and 2. They must take a joint
decision (they share the “formal control right” over the decision). Each comes with
one idea or project, but only one project can be selected. Individual i’s idea yields, in
expectation, µ i V + B to i and µi V to j, where µi is individual i’s talent and B > 0 is a
private bene…t accruing to individual i when his point of view prevails. The existence of a
private bene…t B is natural, since individuals are more likely to search for (or reveal) ideas
that favor them; B admits several interpretations: the task may be easier for individual
i, may have positive spillovers over i’s other activities, or bring him outside credit for
having had the idea.
   Let us assume for simplicity that µ1 is known while µ2 can take two values µL2 and µH
                                                                                       2 ,
with µH     L
      2 > µ 2 , and
                                   µH                   L
                                    2 V + B > µ 1 V > µ 2 V + B:                              (6)

Individual 1 knows µ 2 , while individual 2 does not. In our terminology, individual 1
can thus be viewed as the principal and individual 2 the agent, even though there is no
hierarchy in terms of control rights. The principal has no hard information about µ2 when
µ2 = µH                    L
      2 , but when µ 2 = µ 2 she does, and can choose to disclose to the agent these “bad
news” about his talent.28 We rule out monetary transfers between the two individuals for
simplicity. The timing goes as follows:

       Stage 1:     The principal learns µ 2 and (if µ2 = µ L2 ) chooses whether to disclose the
                    information.

       Stage 2:     Both come up with an idea each for a joint undertaking.

       Stage 3:     With probability 1=2 each, one of them is selected to make a take–it–
                    or–leave–it project o¤er, i.e., chooses the project.

      It is easy to see that when µ2 = µL2 the principal wants to convey these bad news to
the agent, because she thereby establishes dominance: from (6), even if the agent gets to

 28
      Thus µH                                    L
            2 corresponds to “no bad news”, and µ2 to individual 1 learning “bad news”.




                                                  24
propose a course of action he then defers to the principal, which he would not do if he
were more self–con…dent. By lowering the other’s self–con…dence, individual 1 enjoys real
authority despite sharing formal authority over decisions with individual 2.29
   The situation described above may still be viewed as a relatively tame and e¢cient
version of the “battle of the egos”, as the principal’s lowering of the agent’s self–con…dence
by revealing that µ 2 = µL2 is Pareto–improving (introducing monetary transfers would
thus not a¤ect anyone’s decision in this case). When this information is brought to him,
individual 2 he may feel disappointed, but should recognize he is being saved from making
a costly mistake. A slight variant of the model, however, can yield a much less harmonious
and e¢cient outcome.
   Suppose now that when µ 2 = µL2 the principal has no hard information, but when
µ2 = µH
      2 he does.
                30
                   Let µ¹2 denote the agent’s initial self–con…dence, i.e. his prior about
his own ability in the absence of information. Finally, instead of (6), assume now that:

                           µ1 V + 2B > µH                 ¹                                       (7)
                                        2 V + B > µ 1 V > µ 2 V + B;


The …rst inequality states that the principal would like to be in control even when µ2 = µH
                                                                                          2 :
The second and third ones mean that the agent will not submit if he becomes aware that
he is of high ability, but will yield if he remains uninformed. The principal will then
systematically censor positive signals about the agent’s ability, and would even be willing
to spend resources in order to prevent them from reaching the agent. In contrast to
the earlier case, the principal’s undermining the agent’s self–con…dence (by omission) is
now detrimental to the latter, and may even result in a lower total surplus (if µH
                                                                                 2 > µ 1 ):
This case seems to correspond well to that of a mediocre and insecure manager who
abstains from passing on to his subordinates positive feedback about their performance
from higher–ups or customers, for fear that they may then challenge his authority and
diminish his ability to shape decisions (an extreme case being going after his job).
   The two types of ego–bashing behavior could also be combined into the same model,
by allowing agent 1 to pay a cost in order to try and …nd out (with some probability) the
value of µ2 : If he learns that µ 2 = µ L2 he will disclose it, but if he …nds out that µ2 = µH
                                                                                              2


  29
     We thank Isabelle Brocas for suggesting the analogy with real authority and the Aghion and Tirole
(1997) paper.
  30
     Thus µH                                                              L
           2 now corresponds to individual 1 learning “good news”, and µ 2 to “no good news”.




                                                 25
he will stay mum, and feign ignorance. One could further enrich the analysis to capture
escalating “arguments” by allowing agent 2, in response to an attack on his ego, to seek
costly counter–evidence, as well perhaps as information that re‡ects negatively on agent
1’s ability.
    There are also other reasons why individual 2 may resent having his ego undercut.
First, he may be su¤ering from a general self–motivation problem (perhaps most relevant
in other, more important tasks) due to time–inconsistent preferences, which results in his
attaching negative value to information about his ego (Benabou and Tirole 1999). Second,
the two agents may be involved in bargaining over how to share the surplus created by
their joint project, and the revelation that µ2 = µL2 may hurt individual 2’s bargaining
position more than its helps him by making sure that the e¢cient project is selected.
    Ego–bashing may also have costs for the principal. As shown earlier, the agent’s
lack of self–con…dence may reduce his initiative in coming up with (searching for) good
projects initially, as well as his motivation for putting e¤ort into the joint endeavor later
on. Another cost may stem from individual 2’s drawing more complex inferences about
individual 1’s ulterior motivation. Suppose that individual 2 cares not only about this
project, but also about individual 1’s altruism/friendship/love towards him, over which he
has incomplete information as well. Ego–bashing may then be interpreted as individual
1 caring little about individual 2, and back…re.
   Nonetheless, individuals may often be willing to incur such costs in order to establish
dominance. Because this may result in very ine¢cient outcomes, an interesting avenue
for future research is how people try, in practice, to limit the scope for such ego clashes.
Let us, for now, content ourselves with a few thoughts in this regard. One possible
strategy suggested by the model is to allocate formal control to individual 1. An example
may be the allocation of decision rights to parents until the children have reached a
certain age. Another arrangement sometimes observed is the acceptance by individual 2
of individual 1’s dominance (presumably because individual 2 also has private information
about his self). Individual 2’s “puppy dog strategy” may enable him to avoid ego clashes
with individual 1. Another promising topic is the study of institutional structures and
personnel management strategies designed to prevent excessive rivalry and ego clashes
within organizations, and promote instead a cooperative interpersonal atmosphere.




                                             26
4      Self–presentation: signaling one’s self–esteem
4.1     Introduction
A large literature in social psychology addresses self–presentation, namely the set of be-
haviors and attitudes (self–promotion, excuse–making, supplication, intimidation, ingra-
tiation, etc.) that are strategic and aim at manipulating others people’s beliefs about
oneself. For instance, Baumeister (1998) de…nes self–presentation as “attempts to convey
information about or images of oneself to others”. This topic has also been widely ex-
plored in economics, albeit with a very di¤erent range of applications, under the heading
of signaling theory (Spence 1974).
    While sections 2 and 3 were concerned with the principal’s private information, this
section focuses on the impact of self–knowledge on self–presentation, that is, on the rela-
tionship between the “inner self” and the “outer self”. We will of course not attempt to
cover this huge territory here, and only wish to illustrate the formal approach on a speci…c
issue, namely the strategic nature of the relationship between depressed individuals and
their environment.
   Depression has long been diagnosed as a disorder of self–esteem (Bibring 1953, Freud
1957). Its symptoms are well–known: poor self–image, inhibition of all activity, public
admission of one’s weaknesses, lack of interest in the outside world, low tolerance for
frustration, etc. Of particular interest for our analysis are the self–esteem maintenance and
self–presentation strategies used by depressed individuals to cope with their condition.31
    First, depressed individuals sometimes “blackmail” others for attention. They want
to verify that they are not unworthy nor unloved, and therefore look for sympathy and
reassurance (Cohen 1954, Coyne 1976). Yet, paradoxically, they are often unreceptive to
the positive feedback which others may o¤er (see, e.g., Hill et al. 1986). Finally, they
are willing to incur disapproval costs in order to avoid demands to perform. That is,
through acts and words, they confess their weakness in order to ask for leniency on a web
of obligations, and attempt to lower others’ standards or expectancies (Shaw 1982, Hill
et al. 1986).32

  31
    See, e.g., Hill et al (1986) and Snyder et al. (1983) for reviews.
  32
    Relatedly, individuals who are not depressed may also ask for a milder form of moratorium, for
example by reporting test anxiety to set up excuses for possible failure. It is interesting to note in this
respect that self-reports of test anxiety do not occur when the incentives for success are high or when


                                                    27
   These behaviors and attitudes can be analyzed from the perspective of our self–
con…dence model. Depressed individuals lack self–esteem (believe they have a low µ), and
are therefore in search of good news about their self.33 They realize, however, that the
news may be favorable, but may also push them deeper into depression and helplessness.
In economics parlance, depressed individuals are willing to “gamble for resurrection”.
    There are various ways of obtaining this self–relevant information. First, the individual
may undertake activities to try and obtain reassurance about his self; but precisely because
of the lack of self–con…dence, this route is very costly, and indeed depressed individuals
face inhibition in most activities (“what’s the use?”). Second, the individual may attempt,
usually with the help of others, to recover certain repressed or unconscious information
about the self. Indeed, the general goal of Freudian theory and traditional psychoanalysis
is to make the unconscious conscious. This strategy also has substantial costs. For
example, an adult may get reassurance about his talent by remembering that he failed in
school partly because of abuse by his parents. Third, the individual can turn to others
and ask for encouragement, reassurance, and similar boosts to his self–esteem: “Will I
ever make it? Do you still love me?”, and so forth.
   Alternatively, a depressed person may “admit defeat” by openly confessing (sometimes
even exaggerating) his low self–worth, which then justi…es asking for help or indulgence
with respect to the tasks he face. Under this strategy, the depressed person calls for
others to lower their expectations of his performance. Because of the existence of costs
which we discuss later, however, neither leniency nor e¤ective reassurance will come about
easily. As we discussed in section 2, a sorting condition on the helper’s side must be
satis…ed. In particular, the depressed face an attributional dilemma in evaluating positive
responses from others (Wortman and Linsenmeier 1977). Due to the arousal of guilt and
the presence of spillovers, people do not like their child, spouse, parent, friend or colleague
to be depressed. They therefore have a vested interest in boosting his or her self–esteem,
in order to reduce these costs imposed on them by the individual’s depressed state and
associated behavior. This, in turn, may explain why the depressed often question the

subjects are told that test anxiety does not a¤ect performance on the particular test (see Greenberg et
al. 1986 for an overview).
   33
      This need for ego–relevant information is particularly acute when low self–esteem combines with time–
inconsistent preferences (e.g., hyperbolic discounting) to undermine motivation, resulting in constant
procrastination and lack of e¢cacy. See Benabou and Tirole (1999) for an analysis of individuals’ demand
for self-knowledge which incorporates this additional element.


                                                    28
optimistic feedback that is given to them; they want to make sure that the encouraging
evaluations and other “pep talks” are genuine, and therefore are willing to challenge them.
   Conversely, and provided that others are willing to incur costs to credibly help a
depressed individual by boosting his morale and/or lowering their standards, a sorting
condition on the individual’s side must also hold . Otherwise, a person could always fake
a depression in order to manipulate his environment to his own advantage. We shall now
use the principal–agent framework to illustrate the logic of this last point in the speci…c
context of standard–setting.


4.2     Standards and calls for a lowering of expectancies
4.2.1   Preliminaries: the costs and bene…ts of standards.

A student comes to his advisor’s o¢ce and exposits an idea that re‡ects serious e¤ort but
only moderate promise. Should the advisor tell the truth or should she praise and encour-
age the student to pursue the idea and suggest some improvements? In this decision, the
advisor implicitly selects a (loose or tough) standard. In this respect, she faces a choice
similar to that facing parents setting school performance standards for their children, or
managers setting work standards for their subordinates.
    There are various ways of setting standards. One, suggested above, is to disclose
information to the agent, telling him that his current performance is not acceptable: the
payo¤ in the task pursued (V ) is low (“you will never enter a good university or …nd a good
job with such grades”), or the principal has high expectancies (“I will be disappointed
if you don’t enter a good university or don’t get a good job”, “your father would have
wished you to be more ambitious”). A simpler form of setting standards is to limit the
agent’s choice (“you are not allowed to take this route”). For the sake of simplicity, this
section describes standard–setting as the principal restricting the agent’s choice set. More
subtle standards, based on persuasion, would be worth studying as well.
   Standards have costs and bene…ts: on the one hand, a standard forces or persuades
the agent to align his goals with those of the principal. On the other hand, the agent’s
self–con…dence may not be adequate for the lofty goal set by the principal.
    Suppose there are two tasks. Task i involves private cost ci to the agent, and, if
completed successfully, yields Vi to the agent and Wi to the principal; either task yields



                                            29
0 to both parties in case of failure. Task 1 is the easy task in that

                       0 < V1 < V2 ,          0 < W1 < W2 , and 0 < c1 < c2 .                 (8)

We further assume that:
                                              c1        c2 ¡ c1
                                       µ1 ´      < µ2 ´         < 1.                          (9)
                                              V1        V2 ¡ V1

The probability of success, µ, is the same in both tasks, for simplicity. In this section, the
agent knows µ and the principal does not. The prior cumulative distribution of µ on [0; 1]
is denoted F (µ), with density f (µ): If left free by the principal to choose between the two
tasks (or not exerting e¤ort at all), the agent solves

                                       max f0; µV1 ¡ c1 ; µV2 ¡ c2 g :


He thus shirks if 0 · µ < µ1 , chooses task 1 if µ1 · µ < µ2 , and task 2 if µ 2 < µ · 1:
   Suppose now that the principal can forbid one of the tasks. The …rst observation is
that the principal never forbids the hard task. If she did, the only change in the agent’s
behavior would be that the agent would “select” task 1 rather than task 2 when µ ¸ µ2 .
But the principal’s payo¤ in task 2, µW2 , is higher than that, µW1 , in task 1. Would the
principal want to forbid task 1? With this standard, the agent exerts e¤ort if and only if
µV2 ¡ c2 > 0, or
                                                     c2
                                                µ¸      ´ µ¤;                                (10)
                                                     V2
Note that µ1 < µ¤ < µ2 . The tradeo¤ faced by the principal is that a standard makes
types in [µ¤ ; µ2 ] more ambitious, but makes weaker types in [µ1 ; µ¤ ] give up. The principal
wants to forbid task 1 if and only if the net gain from imposing the standard is positive:

                             µZ                ¶                ÃZ              !
                                  µ2                                 µ¤
            S(µ1 ; µ 2 ) ´             µf (µ)dµ (W2 ¡ W1 ) ¡              µf (µ)dµ W1 > 0:   (11)
                              µ¤                                   µ1




    Remark: A similar tradeo¤ might be present if the principal were to set a standard by
disclosing “hard” information rather than by constraining task selection. Suppose that
the principal discloses information about the bene…t V1 being low for the agent (“I don’t

                                                     30
like this job for which you are studying”, “A low performance won’t do”, “This project
won’t lead to a paper publishable in a …rst–rate journal”). Then, the agent may react by
becoming more ambitious or else by being discouraged, and so a similar pattern holds.


4.2.2     Call for leniency

Let us assume that (11) is satis…ed, so that the principal is eager to impose a standard.
The agent prefers not to face such a constraint (at least weakly), and so may be willing to
incur a cost to induce the principal to remove it. In practice, this cost may take several
forms, from mild (procrastination, which raises the cost of task completion) to severe
(drug use, self–mutilation). We will focus on another common one: self–deprecation.
When asking for a lenient treatment or a helping hand, the agent admits his weakness;
this admission has a negative impact on future relationships with the principal or with
other parties, who will disapprove of the agent or will not turn to him for new interactions.
As Hill et al. (1986, p. 219) argue in their discussion of depressive self–protection,

   “by emphasizing his or her weakness or illness, the depressive, then, may risk short–
term disapproval and may even deprecate his or her present accomplishments in order to
avoid altogether future demands to perform, or at least to avoid the embarrassment that
may result for unanticipated future negative performance outcomes (i.e., the depressive
may risk a short–term loss of esteem in order to avoid any further losses). Unfortunately,
the avoidance of future performance likely serves only to maintain the depressive’s self–
doubts and shaky self–con…dence.”

   Similarly, Aronson and Carlsmith (1962) state that

        “the individual may self–deprecate in order to lower expectancies by rejecting
        an unexpected success”.

   We assume that the endogenous self–deprecation cost incurred by the agent is propor-
tional to the di¤erence between his expected ability conditional on accepting the standard,
Es [µ], and his expected ability conditional on asking for a leniency, Em [µ] (where “m”
stands for “moratorium”), with coe¢cient of proportionality ¹:

                                     ¹ (Es [µ] ¡ Em [µ]) .                               (12)


                                              31
   While we could entertain alternative functional forms (the appropriate one depending
on the exact nature of future interactions), the important features of this self–deprecation
cost are that: a) the cost is associated with the change in others’ perceptions of the agent’s
self, and b) this cost is endogenous, and depends on rational attributions by others.34
   Note, on the other hand, that we restrict this inference to be as simple as possible: it
re‡ects only whether or not the individual asks to be allowed to perform the easy task, and
not his performance in the task ultimately chosen. This can be rationalized by assuming
that outcomes are revealed only at a later stage, after the principal and other observers
have already made their decisions concerning future interactions (or lack thereof) with
the agent. Note also that an individual whose ability is so low that he would not exert
e¤ort under either regime will not request the lower standard, but pool instead with high
ability agents (until his performance is ultimately observed), by nominally choosing task
2 but putting zero e¤ort into it. By focussing on this particular timing of signals and
decisions we are, once again, leaving to further research the more complex learning issues
which would arise in a truly dynamic model.

       Given the assumptions stated above, we thus analyze a simple two–stage game:35

 Stage 1:       The agent asks or does not ask for a lowering of expectancies with respect to
                his performance.

 Stage 2:       The principal chooses whether to impose (or maintain) the standard.


       We will …rst look at a pure–strategy perfect Bayesian equilibrium, then later on discuss
mixed strategies.36


  34
     In particular, the agent could o¤er a “bribe” to the principal (money, favors, friendship) in exchange
for the moratorium. By doing so he would signal that he is of a relatively low type, and thus bear a cost
qualitatively similar to (12), in addition to the direct cost of the bribe.
  35
     The model described in this section is one of “cheap talk”, as in Crawford and Sobel (1982). Its payo¤
structure, however, di¤ers from that of Crawford and Sobel, where a monotonicity condition implies that
the sender’s message reveals that his type belongs to a certain interval. In our model, by contrast, pooling
will generally occur over a non–connected set: agents with very high and very low ability will not ask for
a lowering of standards, while those in some intermediate range will. See Lemma 1 below.
  36
     We shall ignore the usual “babbling equilibrium” in which the agent’s request is simply ignored and,
conversely, the request is totally uninformative about his type.




                                                    32
Lemma 1 In an equilibrium in which there is a positive probability that the principal
lowers the standard, there exists b
                                  µ1 and b
                                         µ2 , with

                                         µ1 < b
                                              µ1 < µ ¤ < b
                                                         µ2 < µ2 ;

such that the agent
                 h asksi for leniency (lifting of the standard) if and only if his self–
con…dence lies in b
                  µ1 , b
                       µ2 .

Proof. First, note that asking for a lenient treatment, or extra help, must be associated
with a reputation cost (Es [µ] > Em [µ]); otherwise everyone would ask for it, since the
agent always prefers to have more choice, ceteris paribus. But then the principal would
always impose the standard, by condition (11).
    Second, the agent has no incentive to ask for leniency if he ends up not exerting e¤ort
or choosing task 2, since the option of choosing task 1 then has no bene…t, while the plea
for indulgence has a positive self–deprecation cost. In particular, types in [0; µ1 ] and [µ2 ,1]
have a strict preference for accepting the standard.
       Third, the agent solves

                          max f0; µV1 ¡ c1 ¡ ¹ (Es [µ] ¡ Em [µ]) , µV2 ¡ c2 g .                                   (13)
                                                                                     h       i
                                                                                      b    b
This shows that the set of types asking for a lowering of expectancies is an interval µ1 , µ2 ,
as described in the lemma. ¥

       The lemma implies that
                                       R bµ1              R1              0     R bµ2                         1
                    ³        ´                µf (µ) dµ + bµ2 µf (µ) dµ      b µf (µ) dµ
 Es [µ] ¡ Em [µ] = D bµ1 ; b
                           µ2 ´          0
                                               ³ ´             ³ ´      ¡ @ ³µ1 ´     ³ ´ A : (14)
                                                 b
                                             F µ1 + 1 ¡ F µ 2   b            b
                                                                           F µ2 ¡ F b  µ1

                                                        ³        ´
The self–deprecation cost is ¹ (Es [µ] ¡ Em [µ]) = ¹D b   µ1 ; b
                                                               µ2 :37 The lemma also implies
that an equilibrium with a positive probability of a plea for indulgence is fully described
by the following two equations in two unknowns (b  µ1 ; bµ2 ) :



                                                                         ³       ´        ³               ´
                                                                                              1¡b
                                                                                                µ1 ¡b
  37
       In the case of a uniform distribution (F (µ) = µ), for instance, D b
                                                                          µ1 ; b
                                                                               µ2 =   1
                                                                                      2       1+b
                                                                                                     µ2
                                                                                                µ 1 ¡b
                                                                                                     µ2
                                                                                                              :


                                                     33
                                     ³        ´
                                ¹D b   µ1 ; b
                                            µ2 = b µ1 V1 ¡ c1 ;                             (15)
                            ³        ´
                          ¹D bµ1 ; b
                                   µ2 = b  µ2 (V1 ¡ V2 ) ¡ (c1 ¡ c2 ) ;                     (16)

which de…ne the indi¤erence points in (13). Finally, it must be the case that the plea
for leniency is e¤ective.
                  h        iThat is, the gain for the principal of lifting the standard and
inducing types in b      ¤
                   µ1 , µ to undertake task 1 rather than doing nothing must be greater
                                                                             h      i
than the loss associated to the switch from task 2 to task 1 by types in µ¤ , b   µ2 . Thus,
whereas in the absence of information about µ the net value of imposing the standard was
positive (S(µ1 ; µ2 ) > 0 in (11)), it must now be negative:
                        ÃZ                 !                  ÃZ               !
           ³       ´          b
                              µ2                                   µ¤
          S b
            µ1 ; b
                 µ2 =              µf (µ) dµ (W2 ¡ W1 ) ¡               µf (µ) dµ W1 < 0.   (17)
                             µ¤                                b
                                                               µ1

                                 ³        ´
An equilibrium is thus a solution bµ1 ; b
                                        µ2 to (15)–(16), or equivalently to


                                          b    c2 ¡ b
                                                    µ1 V1
                                          µ2 =            ;                                 (18)
                                                V2 ¡ V1
                                                    ³        ´
                                     b
                                     µ1 V1 ¡ c1 = ¹D bµ1 ; b
                                                           µ2 ;                             (19)

with µ1 < b µ1 < µ¤ , and such that (17) is satis…ed. Note from condition (18) that, as b
                                                                                        µ1
increases from µ1 to µ¤ ; b
                          µ2 decreases from µ2 to µ ¤ :
   We shall now solve for the equilibrium (and verify that (17)–(19) are consistent with
the earlier assumption (11)) in the case where ¹ is relatively small, meaning that self–
deprecation
³        ´    is relatively cheap. As (18)–(19) make clear, the equilibrium thresholds
 bµ1 ; b
       µ2 are then uniquely determined and close to the cuto¤s (µ1 ; µ2 ) corresponding to
the no–standard case. Indeed, a simple Taylor approximation yields:

                             b
                             µ1 ¼ µ1 + ¹D (µ1 ; µ2 ) =V1                                    (20)
                             b
                             µ2 ¼ µ2 ¡ ¹D (µ 1 ; µ2 ) =(V2 ¡ V1 );                          (21)

where ¼ means that we neglect terms of higher order. Recall from (14) that ¹D is the cost
of self–deprecation, which must be positive. From here on we shall therefore assume that

                                                 34
                                                           h        i
D (µ1 ; µ2 ) > 0. As intuition suggests, the range of types bµ1 ; b
                                                                  µ2 who ask to be allowed
to perform the easier task is smaller: a) the higher the implied signalling cost ¹D(µ1 ; µ2 );
b) the lower the relative payo¤ to that task compared to the alternative chosen under the
standard (the smaller V1 for those with relatively low ability; the higher V2 ¡ V1 for those
with relatively high ability).                                        ³       ´
   The last step is to verify that the equilibrium pair satis…es S b   µ1 ; b
                                                                            µ2 < 0 (condi-
tion (17)), while making sure that this is compatible with the previous requirement that
S (µ 1 ; µ2 ) > 0 (condition (11)). To that e¤ect, we shall assume that:
                             µ             ¶µ             ¶
                                 W2 ¡ W1           V1             µ 1 f (µ1 )
                                                              >               :               (22)
                                   W1           V2 ¡ V1           µ 2 f (µ2 )

Proposition 3 Assume that D(µ1; µ2 ) > 0, that (22) holds, and that S (µ1 ; µ2 ) is positive
                                                                             £    ¤
but relatively small. Then there exist ¹ and ¹ such that for all ¹ 2 ¹; ¹ , there is a
unique pure strategy PBE, (b µ1 ; b
                                  µ2 ), with positive probability of e¤ective self–deprecation.
                 b           b
As ¹ increases, µ1 rises and µ2 falls.


Proof. For small ¹; a Taylor expansion using (20)–(21) yields:
    ³       ´                               ·           µ          ¶             µ     ¶¸
                                                          W  ¡ W                   W
  S bµ1 ; b
                                                           2     1                   1
          µ2 ¼ S (µ1 ; µ 2 ) ¡ ¹D (µ1 ; µ2 ) µ2 f (µ2 )              ¡ µ1 f(µ1 )          :   (23)
                                                          V2 ¡ V1                  V1

   By assumption (22) ³ the term
                              ´ in square brackets, which will be denoted !; is strictly
                       b    b
positive. Therefore, S µ1 ; µ2 > 0 for all ¹ greater than ¹ ´ S (µ1 ; µ2 ) =!D (µ1 ; µ2 ) << 1
but still small enough for the Taylor approximations to be valid. ¥

   Does there exist a mixed–strategy equilibrium in which the principal lifts the standard
only with probability x 2 (0; 1) when receiving a call for leniency? Such a mixed–strategy
equilibrium is characterized in the following way: a) the left–hand sides of (15) and (16)
are both multiplied by x, so that the function D is replaced everywhere by D=x; intuitively,
the principal’s mixed strategy ampli…es the cost of self–deprecation; b) condition (17) is
satis…ed with equality. Equating the right–hand–side of (23) to zero, one easily sees that
        £   ¤
for ¹ 2 ¹; ¹ the only equilibrium is the one in pure strategies described in Proposition
3, while for ¹ < ¹ the only equilibrium involves the principal using the mixed–strategy
x = ¹=¹:


                                                 35
4.3       Humbleness as posturing
“Don’t be so humble – you are not that great.”
       Golda Meir (1898–1978) to a visiting diplomat.

   In the situation described earlier, the agent self–deprecates in order to bene…t from
lower expectancies. In other situations humility may, on the contrary, be a way of sig-
nalling a high level of self–con…dence. A researcher who insistently “pushes” his work on
others may be perceived as insecure about the value of his contribution or professional
recognition; as a result, the pitch may back…re. By contrast, one who is more humble in
his self–presentation may thereby reveal that he knows (perhaps from his track record)
the quality of his work to be such that it will, sooner or later, “speak for itself”. Similarly,
in professional and social interactions, very wealthy people can a¤ord to “dress down”or
even look grungy, and very famous people will eschew boasting and name–dropping. Both
types are con…dent that their interlocutors will …nd out soon enough whom they are deal-
ing with.
   The signalling approach provides a simple explanation for such behaviors. Suppose
that the agent knows the quality of his work, µ, and that a higher µ makes it more
likely that the principal will later on receive a signal that the work is of high quality.
Assume further that the agent may already have a piece of hard information that re‡ects
positively on his work (whether accurately or not), but is less informative than the signal
to be received later on. Upon meeting the principal, the agent chooses whether or not
to disclose the favorable hard information.38 As long as this disclosure is costly (it takes
time or resources, or may involve criticizing someone else’s work, which is unpleasant), the
following behavior may emerge in equilibrium: a su¢ciently self–con…dent agent does not
disclose the information even when he has it, whereas an agent with lower self–con…dence
always does. The sorting condition results from the fact that the self–con…dent type knows
the costly disclosure to be unnecessary, since a favorable signal is likely to be received
later on anyway.39

  38
     Keeping with the researcher example, he may or may not mention that his paper was cited by some
famous and highly–regarded colleague, that it is under revision at some prestigious journal, etc.
  39
     To completely rationalize the Golda Meir repartee, one may also allow the principal to have indepen-
dent information about the agent’s quality.




                                                   36
5      Concluding remarks
Psychologists, experts in human resource management and sociologists have long empha-
sized the central role played by self–esteem and self–perception in personal motivation
and social interactions. People are quite capable at drawing inferences about their self
from others’ behavior, and at analyzing the impact of their own actions on others’ feel-
ings. This side of social psychology has been largely neglected by economists. Yet the
tools of economic theory can help us understand that the strategies of social interaction
emphasized there are often quite rational, and analyze when these strategies are e¤ective
or back…re.
   Rather than stating again the main results of the paper, we would like to indicate a
few avenues of research that we feel are particularly interesting. The …rst avenue is a more
systematic investigation of the many strategies related to the looking–glass self (sections 2
and 3) and to self–presentation (section 4). The second will consist in combining the two
forms of signaling.40 The third relates to the long–term dynamics of self–con…dence in
dyads (two–person relationships), particularly the learning and ratchet e¤ects suggested
by our analysis. Fourth, while our modeling currently accommodates the possibility of
feelings of altruism/friendship/love, it ought to be extended to allow for asymmetric in-
formation about such feelings. As noted earlier, each party would then draw from the
other’s behavior subtle inferences not only about abilities and task characteristics, but
also about how much the other cares about them. Rich dynamics in the relationship
might ensue. Last, the analysis ought to be extended to groups. One hears frequent
complaints about workplace settings where egos loom large and clash too much to allow
a pleasant and cooperative environment. More generally, the interactions between intrap-
ersonal con…dence–maintenance strategies, the looking–glass self, and self–presentation
raise a fascinating set of positive questions, (e.g., whether these strategies are mutually
reinforcing), as well issues of institutional design related to the optimal organization of
educational and work environments.




  40
    For example, in the literatures on depression and on excuses, when the agent tries to lower the
principal’s expectations the latter’s course of action is often a choice of whether to accept the stated
reason and o¤er comfort, or to oppose it. In so doing, the principal reveals information to the agent,
which impacts his subsequent behavior.

                                                  37
                                           APPENDIX 1

   To further illustrate the hidden cost of rewards, let us derive equilibrium behavior in
the two–type case. The agent’s ability may be high, µH , with probability fH ; or low,
µL , with probability fL . Let b¤k , k 2 fL; Hg, denote the minimum bonus that induces
compliance when the agent is fully informed about his ability:
                                                ½      ¾
                                                    c
                                     b¤k   = min 0; ¡ V ,
                                                   µk

and assume
                                           0 = b¤H < b¤L < W .

  The conditional densities of the agent’s signal are denoted gH (¾) and gL (¾), and the
MLRP simply means that gH =gL is increasing. Let us assume that this likelihood ratio
has full support (0; +1).
   To pin down the equilibrium, let us adopt the common re…nement that the mono-
tonicity of beliefs with respect to the signal (bonus), which we showed must necessarily
hold on the equilibrium path, also holds o¤ the equilibrium path. This condition implies
that the lowest equilibrium bonus is equal to 0. On–the–equilibrium–path monotonicity,
in turn, implies that when µ = µH the principal o¤ers no bonus in equilibrium. Any
other equilibrium bonus therefore fully reveals that the principal has information µL , and
therefore such a bonus must necessarily be b¤L . Next, note that when µ = µL the principal
must randomize between b = 0 and b = b¤L : if she played only b¤L , then b = 0 would induce
compliance with probability 1; and therefore would be preferred to b¤L : The equilibrium is
then described by two parameters: x¤ 2 (0; 1], the probability that a principal observing
type µL selects bonus 0 (pools), and ¾ ¤ , the cut–o¤ signal when bonus 0 is o¤ered. These
parameters are given by:

                               µL (W ¡ b¤L ) = µL [1 ¡ GL (¾ ¤ )] W                         (24)

and        µ                                                                      ¶
                      fH gH (¾ ¤ )                       fL gL (¾ ¤ )x¤
                                             µH +                               µL V = c.   (25)
               fH gH (¾ ¤ ) + fL gL (¾ ¤ )x¤      fH gH (¾ ¤ ) + fL gL (¾ ¤ )x¤




                                                   38
The second equation can be rewritten as
                                              µ        ¶µ               ¶
                             gH (¾ ¤ )            fL        c=V ¡ µL
                                  ¤
                                       = x¤                                 ;
                             gL (¾ )              fH        µ H ¡ c=V

so by the above assumptions on the likelihood ratio, for any x¤ > 0 there exists a unique
solution ¾ ¤ = s(x¤ ) to (25), with s0 > 0: Substituting into (24), the principal’s net incentive
to o¤er bonus 0 when µ = µL and he is expected to randomize with probability x¤ is:

                            µ L [1 ¡ GL (s(x¤ ))] W ¡ µL (W ¡ b¤L ) :

This function is increasing in x¤ ; and negative at x¤ = 0+ : So either the function has
a unique zero on (0; 1);which then de…nes the principal’s mixing strategy; or else the
function is non–positive on all of (0; 1]; in which case the principal’s equilibrium strategy
is x¤ = 1; which means that no bonus is ever o¤ered. In both cases the equilibrium is
unique. Note, …nally, that the agent works only with probability 1 ¡ GH (s(x¤ )) when
µ = µH ; and with probability 1 ¡ x¤ GL (s(x¤ )) when µ = µL : Thus, in either state of the
world, he works less than under symmetric information (where e = 1 with probability
one). ¥




                                                  39
References
 [1] Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1997) “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 105: 1–29.

 [2] Aronson, E. and Carlsmith, J.M. (1962) “Performance Expectancy as a Determinant
    of Actual Performance,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 65: 178–182.

 [3] Baker, G., Gibbons, R. and K. Murphy (1997) “Relationship Contracts and the
    Theory of the Firm,” mimeo, MIT.

 [4] Baron, J. and D. Kreps (1999) Strategic Human Resources, New York: John Wiley.

 [5] Baumeister, R. (1998) “The Self,” in The Handbook of Social Psychology, edited by
     D. Gilbert, S. Fiske and G. Lindzey, Boston: McGraw–Hill.

 [6] Benabou, R. and J. Tirole (1999) “Self–Con…dence: Intrapersonal Strategies,”
     mimeo, IDEI, Toulouse and NYU, June.

 [7] Bem, D. (1967) “Self–Perception: An Alternative Interpretation of Cognitive Disso-
     nance Phenomena,” Psychological Review, 74: 183–200.

 [8] Bibring, E. (1953) “The Mechanism of Depression,” in P. Greenacre, ed. A¤ective
     Disorders, New York: International University Press.

 [9] Cameron, J. and D. Pierce (1994) “Reinforcement, Reward, and Intrinsic Motivation:
     A Meta–Analysis,” Review of Educational Research, 64: 363–423.

[10] Carrillo, J., and T. Mariotti (1997) “Strategic Ignorance as a Self–Disciplining De-
     vice,” forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.

[11] Cohen, M. (1954) “An Intensive Study of Twelve Cases of Manic–Depressive Psy-
     chosis,” Psychiatry, 17: 103–137

[12] Condry, J. and J. Chambers (1978) “Intrinsic Motivation and the Process of Learn-
     ing,” in M. Lepper and D. Greene, eds. The Hidden Cost of Reward: New Perspectives
     on the Psychology of Human Motivation, New York: John Wiley.

[13] Cooley, C. (1902) Human Nature and the Social Order, New York: Scribner’s.



                                           40
[14] Coyne, J. (1976) “Toward an Interactional Description of Depression,” Psychiatry,
    39: 24–40.

[15] Crawford, V. and Sobel, J. (1982) “Strategic Information Transmission,” Economet-
     rica;, 50(6), November: 1431–51.

[16] Darley, J. and R. Fazio (1980) “Expectancy Con…rmation Processes Arising in the
    Social Interaction Sequence,” American Psychologist, 35: 867–881.

[17] Deci, E. (1975) Intrinsic Motivation, New York: Plenum Press.

[18] Deci, E., and R. Ryan (1985) Intrinsic Motivation and Self–Determination in Human
     Behavior, New York: Plenum Press.

[19] Dessein, W. (1999) “Authority and Communication in Organizations,” ULB mimeo.

[20] Eisenberger, R., and J. Cameron (1996) “Detrimental E¤ects of Reward: Reality or
    Myth?,” American Psychologist, 51: 1153–1166.

[21] Etzioni, A. (1971) Modern Organizations, Englewood Cli¤s, N.J.: Prentice–Hall.

[22] Gibbons, R. (1997) “Incentives and Careers in Organizations,’ in D. Kreps and K.
     Wallis, eds., Advances in Economic Theory and Econometrics, vol.II, Cambridge
    University Press.

[23] Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T. and S. Solomon (1986) “The Causes and Consequences
     of a Need for Self–Esteem: A Terror ManagementTheory,” in Public Self and Private
    Self, ed. By R. Baumeister, New York: Springer Verlag.

[24] Hill, M., Weary, G. and J. Williams (1986) “Depression: A Self–Presentation Formu-
     lation,” in Public Self and Private Self, ed. By R. Baumeister, New York: Springer
    Verlag.

[25] Holmström B. and P. Milgrom (1991) “Multi–Task Principal–Agent Analyzes: In-
     centive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics
    and Organization, Vol.7, special issue, 24–52.

[26] Hull, C.L. (1943) Principles of Behavior, N.Y.: Appleton–Century–Crofts.

[27] Kinlaw, D. (1997) Coaching: Winning Strategies for Individuals and Teams, Gower
     Publishing, U.K.

                                           41
[28] Kohn, A. (1993) Punished by Rewards, New York: Plenum Press.

[29] Korman, A.K. (1970) “Toward an Hypothesis of Work Behavior,” Journal of Applied
     Psychology, 54: 31–41.

[30] —– (1971) “Expectancies as Determinants of Performance,”Journal of Applied Psy-
     chology, 55: 218–222.

[31] Kreps, D.(1997) “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives, ” American Eco-
     nomic Review, 87(2): 359–364.

[32] Kruglanski, A. (1978) “Issues in Cognitive Social Psychology,” in The Hidden Cost
     of Reward: New Perspectives on the Psychology of Human Motivation, New York:
    John Wiley.

[33] Kruglanski, A., Friedman, I. and G. Zeevi (1971) “The E¤ect of Extrinsic Incentives
    on Some Qualitative Aspects of Task Performance,” Journal of Personality, 39: 608–
    617.

[34] La¤ont J–J. and J. Tirole (1988) “Repeated Auctions of Incentive Contracts, In-
     vestment and Bidding Parity, with an Application to Takeovers,” Rand Journal of
     Economics, 19: 516–537.

[35] Laibson, D. (1997) “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 112: 443–478.

[36] Lazear, E. (1996) “Performance, Pay and Productivity,’ mimeo.

[37] Lepper, M. and D. Greeene (1978) “Overjusti…cation Research and Beyond: Toward
    a Means–Ends Analysis of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” in The Hidden Cost
    of Reward: New Perspectives on the Psychology of Human Motivation, New York:
    John Wiley.

[38] Lepper, M., Greene, D., and R. Nisbett (1973) “Undermining Children’s Interest
    with Extrinsic Rewards: A Test of the ‘Overjusti…cation Hypothesis’,” Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 28: 129–137.

[39] Luthans, F., and R. Kreitner (1985) Organizational Behavior Modi…cation and Be-
     yond, London: Scott, Foresman and Co.


                                          42
[40] Merton, R. (1948) “The Self–Ful…lling Prophecies,” Antioch Review, 8: 193–210.

[41] Miles, R. (1965) “Human Relations and Human Resources,” Harvard Business Re-
     view, July/August.

[42] Pfe¤er, J. (1994) Competitive Advantage Through People: Problems and Prospects
     for Change, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.

[43] Phelps, E. and Pollack, R. (1968) “On Second–Best National Savings and Game–
     Equilibrium Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 35: 185–199.

[44] Rosenthal, R. and L. Jacobson (1968) Pygmalion in the Classroom, Holt–Rinehart–
     Winston.

[45] Schwartz, B. (1990) “The Creation and Destruction of Value,” American Psycholo-
     gist, 45: 7–15.

[46] Skinner, G.F. (1953) Science and Human Behavior, NY: MacMillan.

[47] Snyder, C., Higgins, R., and R. Stucky (1983) Excuses: Masquerades in Search of
    Grace, New York: John Wiley.

[48] Spence, M. (1974) Market Signaling, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

[49] Staw, B. (1977) “Motivation in Organizations: Toward Synthesis and Redirection,”
     in B. Staw and G. Salancik, eds. New Directions in Organizational Behavior, Chicago:
     St. Clair Press.

[50] Steers, R., and L. Porter (1975) Motivation and Work Behavior, McGraw–Hill.

[51] Strotz, R. (1956) “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,”
    Review of Economic Studies, 23: 165–180.

[52] Wilson, T., Hull, J. and J. Johnson (1981) “Awareness and Self–Perception: Verbal
    Reports on Internal States,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 40: 53–71.

[53] Wortman, C., and J. Linsenmeier (1977) “Interpersonal Attraction and Techniques
    of Ingratiation in Organizational Settings,” in B. Staw and G. Salancik, eds, New
    Directions in Organizational Behavior, Chicago: St Clair Press.




                                           43
