                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GERMANY’S ECONOMIC UNIFICATION
                             AN ASSESSMENT AFTER TEN YEARS


                                           Hans-Werner Sinn


                                          Working Paper 7586
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7586

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




The author gratefully acknowledges useful comments by Wolfgang Keller and Holger Wolf as well as careful
research assistance by Robert Koll and Marcel Thum. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2000 by Hans-Werner Sinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Germany’s Economic Unification: An Assessment after Ten Years
Hans-Werner Sinn
NBER Working Paper No. 7586
March 2000
JEL No. H0, O52


                                           ABSTRACT

     A political miracle occurred when Germany was reunited, and at first glance an economic
miracle has followed. Real incomes in the east have now reached the western level, and investment
per capita has been much higher than in the west. However, every third deutschmark spent in the east
has been coming from the west, investment in equipment has fallen below the west German per
capita level, and convergence seems to have come to a halt at an overall labor productivity of only
55% of west Germany. Excessively high wages coupled with investment incentives that made the
cost of capital negative rank high among the possible explanations. This paper describes reforms of
the labor market that could help to make convergence continue.




Hans-Werner Sinn
CESifo
Poschinger Str. 5
81679 München
and NBER
hws@ces.vwl.uni-muenchen.de
                                                                                             2




1. A political miracle occurred ...

Even the day the wall came down, there were very few people in Germany who believed in

rapid unification. Today, ten years after that event, the political unification of Germany is

history. It went surprisingly smoothly, without riots and bloodshed. Only a handful of neo-

Nazis have disturbed the picture, but even they have become less vocal.

       German unification was a political miracle since it was hard to imagine that the

military forces of the Soviet Union would ever retreat peacefully from their occupied

territories. However, the courage of Michael Gorbachev, the loyalty of George Bush and the

cleverness of Helmut Kohl made the unthinkable true. With incredible speed, the two parts of

Germany were again unified after 45 years of separation. Given the political instability of the

Soviet Union at that time, it is hard to imagine better policy decisions by the Western leaders

than those which had actually been taken.

       In relation to the political achievements, the economic aspects of unification seemed of

secondary importance to many. Helmut Kohl, a historian by education, predicted “flourishing

landscapes in three, four, five years,” and he thought that the budgetary costs of unification

would be small enough to be financed from the “petty cash”. Today we know that things were

not that easy and that the economic unification turned out to be much more difficult than

political unification. This paper reports on the state of economic integration in Germany and

tries to draw some conclusions for the future course of unification policy.



2. ... and at first glance an economic miracle has followed ....

In an important sense Helmut Kohl was right. Today there are flourishing landscapes in east

Germany. A gigantic building boom has led to a marvelous renovation of east German cities.

Less destroyed by British bombers than the western cities, many east German cities have been
                                                                                                              3

restored to their pre-war glamour. Spectacular facades, golden ledges, expensive shops and

luxurious pedestrian areas define the urban life in the post-communist era. Many of the

eastern city centers now outshine the cheap charm of the sixties that characterizes the cities of

west Germany.

         The infrastructure, too, has been quickly renovated. Nearly all streets have been newly

paved, the electricity, fresh water and sewage systems have been overhauled, many new

autobahns have been built, and the airports and railway stations have been renovated and

converted into lively shopping centers. Fast ICE trains now connect the cities, and the fiber

optic telecommunications network is one of the best in the world. Most importantly, the well-

functioning legal system of west Germany was implemented in east Germany right from the

beginning. This has been a major advantage over the other eastern countries, which are still

undergoing a cumbersome process of gradually adjusting their legal systems to the

requirements of a market economy.

         Living standards, which had been extremely poor in communist times, have nearly

reached those in the west. The micro data analyzed by the Ifo Institute show that east German

households’ average net-of-tax incomes have surpassed 80% of the western level. Given the

somewhat lower price level in the east, which primarily results from the low housing costs,

this implies an average real household income of at least 90% of the west.1 Figure 1 depicts

the time path of nominal household incomes relative to the west German level since the year

1990.




1
    The data refer to typical households and may suffer from a selection bias insofar as richer households which
    tend to concentrate in the west are not included in the sample. They also neglect wealth income which is
    indeed negligible with the typical west and east German household, but, once again, not with richer
    households not included in the sample. See Paqué (1999).
                                                                                                            4

Figure 1: Average nominal and real net-of-tax household incomes in east Germany

                                        relative to west Germany


                  West Germany = 100
          120
                                                  Pension per household
          100

            80
                                                         Nominal incomes per household

            60

            40
                   a) b)
            20

             0
                 1990      1991    1992      1993        1994     1995    1996     1997      1998

Source: Ifo Wirtschaftskonjunktur No. 7, 1999, p. A18.

Note: a) Spring 1990, before currency union, evaluated at an exchange rate of 1:1. b) July 1990, shortly after
       currency union.



        Not all of these incomes are active ones. They include pensions, social aid and

unemployment insurance benefits. The separate level of relative pensions is also shown in the

figure. Remarkably, in east Germany household pension income is higher than in west

Germany, since the labor force participation of women is higher and since an overly favorable

formula for the translation of GDR claims into the western pension system was chosen. In

1998, on average, household pensions in the east are 111% of those in the west in nominal

terms and about 120% in real terms.2

        The high living standard in the east does have a correspondence in the real economy

which has been modernized very rapidly. The general approach has been to close down the

existing manufacturing firms and to open new ones next door, the General Motors plant in

Eisenach being the most prominent example. The result was a decline in employment in the
                                                                                             5

manufacturing sector by 80% and a dramatic productivity boost. According to Barrell and te

Velde (1999), in the period from 1990 through 1997 real labor productivity in east Germany

increased by nearly 80%, while real labor productivity in Poland, Ireland and Hungary

increased only by about 30%.

         The development was paralleled, if not induced, by a remarkable investment boom

that exceeded all expectations. While the share of investment in GDP in west Germany was

about 20% in the last decade, it was way above 40% in east Germany, with peak levels close

to 50% in the years 1992 through 1995. It may be argued that these figures are so high

because east German GDP has been so low. However, even in per capita terms it exceeded the

west German level by up to 52%. Figure 2 demonstrates the time path of east German per

capita investment relative to the respective west German level. The figure shows that the

relative investment volume in east Germany has declined recently, but it still is at a level of

more than 130%.



      Figure 2: Aggregate investment per capita in east Germany relative to west Germany

                      West Germany = 100
                160

                140

                120

                100

                 80

                 60

                 40

                 20

                  0
                       1991      1992     1993        1994   1995   1996     1997   1998


Source: Ifo investment database; see Müller (2000).

Note: Aggregate investment per head of working population (15–65 years of age).



2
    See Nierhaus (1999).
                                                                                                                  6


3. ... however, vast resources have been coming from the west Germany.....

The development of the east German living conditions is remarkable. The problem is,

however, that the abundance of resources available to the east Germans does not fully result

from east German production. As figure 3 shows, aggregate absorption -- the resource use by

private households, investors and the government -- has been much larger than east German

GDP since the time of unification, indicating a large current account deficit. In 1998, east

German GDP was 436 billion deutschmarks, but absorption was 655 billion deutschmarks,

which is 220 billion deutschmarks or 50% more. In other words, every third deutschmark

spent in east Germany came from the west.



                              Figure 3: Excess absorption in east Germany


           Billion Deutschmarks
  700                                                                                           655
                                                Total absorption
                                                                                                78 Capital imports
  600

  500                                                                                           141 Public transfers

                                                                                                 436
  400
                                                           GDP in current prices
  300

  200

  100

     0
           1991       1992       1993       1994       1995       1996       1997      1998




Sources: German Statistical Office, Ministry of Economics, German Institute of Economic Research, German
National Bank.
Note: The official absorption statistics are available only until 1994. In the subsequent years, absorption has been
calculated from the official GDP and transfer figures by adding an estimate of the private capital import based on
Ifo’s investment database.
                                                                                                                 7

         As the figure shows, nearly two thirds of the current account deficit of east Germany is

financed by public transfers, and one third by private capital flows. More than 50% of the

transfers, in turn, are for social security and only 12% are infrastructure expenses. The

remainder includes intergovernmental grants of various kinds, in particular the payments of

the fiscal equalization fund (Länderfinanzausgleich) and the federal supplemental grant

(Bundesergänzungsabgabe). The private capital flows include direct investment in plant and

equipment, business loans and public loans. The latter is noteworthy insofar as it shows that it

would be wrong to interpret the private capital flows as resulting exclusively from the superb

investment opportunities in the east. Public borrowing is part of the explanation of these

flows.

         This points to another problem of the new Länder: the enormous increase in public

debt. In 1998, public per capita expenditure in the new Länder was 19% more than in the old

ones, but per capita tax revenue was 26% less. The difference was partly financed by the

public transfers reported in figure 3 and partly by funds the new Länder borrowed in the

capital market. In 1998, up to 33 billion deutschmarks of the estimated 78 billion

deutschmarks capital inflow may simply have resulted from an increase in east German public

debt.3 As was recently shown by Seitz (1999), by 1998 per capita debt of the east German

communities and Länder had surpassed the respective figure for the west German Länder,

although they had started with practically no public debt in 1990.4

         The size of the current account deficit is an unresolved problem for German

unification since it indicates that the east German economy is far from being self-sustaining.

To get a feeling for the size of the problem figure 4 compares the current account deficit

shares in GDP of various other countries, including those which rank highest in a worldwide



3
    The figure measures the net increase in east German public debt; see Seitz (1999, p. 33), who found for 1998
    an external financing ratio of 42 % concerning total investment in east Germany.
4
    The figures refer to the territorial states; the three city states Bremen, Hamburg and Berlin are excluded. The
    public debt does not include the debt of the communal building societies which was inherited from the GDR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8

comparison. It is alarming to see that even fragile economies like Mexico, Poland, Portugal or

Hungary have deficit shares that are only one tenth of the east German figure.



     Figure 4: Current account deficit as a percentage of GDP. A comparison of different

                                                                                                              countries and regions

            Current account deficit as percentage of GDP 1998
     20
                          Finland




                                                                                        Sweden
                                                                               France



                                                                                                         Turkey
                                                                       Japan




     10
                                                                                                                  Ireland
                                                                                                 Italy



                                                                                                                            UK

       0
            Switzerland

                                    Netherlands




                                                                                                                                           Spain
                                                  Belgium/Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                 Germany


                                                                                                                                                   Danmark
                                                                                                                                                             Norway
                                                                                                                                                                      Canada
                                                                                                                                                                               Czech Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                          US
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Portugal
    -10

    -20

    -30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 East Germany
    -40

    -50

    -60


Source: OECD, Economic Outlook, November 1999, p. 70 (preliminary edition), and CES.

Note: For the east German current account deficit see figure 3.




           The east German deficit figure reminds us more of other countries’ import shares in

GDP than their deficit shares. For a country the size of east Germany an import share of 50%

would not be implausible. Countries like Belgium, Austria or the Netherlands have import

shares of between 45% and 70%. However, unlike east Germany, there the import shares are

backed by equivalent export shares. This, indeed, is the east German problem. The sector of

non-traded goods operates as well as in other countries, and there is no shortage of imported

goods and services. To the visitor the visible way of life does not differ much from the west.

Given that there is enough money around, construction, retailing, restaurants, cultural
                                                                                                             9

activities, banking and outward tourism all work very well. The only problem is that a basis in

terms of goods and services sold to the rest of the world is missing. In east Germany, the

money that other countries earn abroad comes as gifts and loans from the west. Except for this

peculiarity, everything else is more or less equal.

         The manufacturing sector of the GDR had been reasonably successful before

unification. At an exchange rate that drove the wage cost to only 7% of the west German one,

the GDR had been able to maintain an export share of roughly 40% of its GDP, and about half

of the exports went to the west. In the first two years after unification output in the

manufacturing sector fell by more than 60% and since then it has only gradually recovered.

As of today (1999), employment in the manufacturing sector has remained at a level of only

one fourth of what it used to be in the GDR. It is true that output in that sector steadily rose

between 1991 and 1998 at an impressive annual rate of 4.7%, however that growth rate relates

to the very low level to which output had fallen after the breakdown of communism. It is

unclear whether, as of 1999, the deutschmark value of east German exports to the western

regions and countries had already surpassed the GDR level, but no statistics are known to the

author that could be used to clarify this issue.

         It is debatable how dangerous the situation depicted in figure 4 really is. A five percent

current account deficit in Poland may be more problematic than a 50% current account deficit

in east Germany. After all, the west German economy is strong enough to cover the necessary

expenses for the east, and Germany as a whole has a balanced current account with the rest of

the world despite the internal excess absorption.5 As long as the west Germans tolerate the

resource transfer, there is no real danger involved. Nevertheless, the public transfer is 4.5% of

west German GDP, and if east German public borrowing is added, the total public resource




5
    In 1989, the year before unification, Germany had a current account surplus of 107.1 bn deutschmarks, which
    was the second largest in the world.
                                                                                               10

transfer to east Germany is 5.6% of the west German GDP. This may seem a small number if

it manages to disappear in the foreseeable future, but less so should it continue forever.




4. ... and some economic indicators are more than alarming.

Unfortunately, at present there is not much reason for optimism, since the convergence

process seems to have come to a halt since 1996. There are various pieces of information

demonstrating this.

       One is the fact that east German GDP is currently growing at a smaller rate than west

German GDP. Initially, from 1989 through 1991, east German GDP had shrunk by more than

40%, which was more than the collapse of the US economy in the great depression (about one

third). Thereafter, and from a new statistical base, the economy grew first at a rate of about

8% -- 9%. From 1997, however, growth staggered, with annual growth rates of only 1%

through 2%. It is true that both the east and the west German economies were in recession in

recent years. But the east German economy suffered much more and according to the most

recent Ifo business polls it will not participate equally in the strong boom foreseen for the year

2000. The joint forecast of Germany’s six economic research institutes published in autumn

1999 foresees for the year 2000 a growth rate of 2.7% in west Germany, but only one of 2.4%

in east Germany. Figure 5 illustrates the development of the growth rates of the two parts of

Germany since 1992.
                                                                                                             11

                           Figure 5: Real growth in east and west Germany


                 Annual percentage change
         10,0

           8,0
                                              East Germany
           6,0

           4,0
                               West Germany
           2,0

           0,0
                  1992     1993     1994      1995     1996     1997      1998     1999     2000
          -2,0

          -4,0

Sources: Association of statistical offices of German Länder, working group on regional accounts 1999, Ifo
Institute.

Note: GDP growth in 1991 prices, figures from data base of the statistical offices of the German Länder; 1999
and 2000 estimation and projection by Ifo.



         Another piece of information is the level of equipment investment. Normally,

economic growth stems from the accumulation of capital. Capital is productive in itself and it

also carries technological knowledge. Thus, catching up with west Germany is not

conceivable without a long period during which the per capita investment in east Germany is

higher than in west Germany. As figure 2 showed, this condition indeed seems to have been

satisfied since unification despite the recent slowdown of the investment rate. However, the

impression may be deceptive.

         Figure 6, which was calculated from the Ifo investment database,6 breaks the

investment figure down to its components showing that the extra investment in the east has

concentrated on building investment rather than equipment. It is indeed the renovation of the




6
    The Ifo investment database is the only source providing data for west and east Germany separately; its data
    are used by the Federal Statistical Office for its east German investment statistics.
                                                                                                        12

city centers where most of the invested money has gone, and here per capita investment has

been up to 80% more than in the west. Investment in equipment, by contrast, performed

poorly. It was significantly above the west only in the three years 1994 through 1996, and

since 1998 it has dropped to only 90% with even lower values to be feared for 1999 and 2000.

This is truly alarming for the further convergence process, because it is equipment rather than

buildings which carries the technological progress and has a direct effect on labor productivity

and competitiveness. If per capita investment in equipment does not exceed that in the west, a

continued conversion process is hard to imagine.



 Figure 6: East German per capita investment in building and equipment relative to the west


                  West Germany = 100
           200
           180
           160                                    Investment in construction 163
           140                                  per head of working population
           120
           100
                                                Investment in equipment     90
             80       72                     per head of working population
             60       62
             40
             20
              0
               1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
Source: German statistical office (1999), Fachserie 18 (investment in construction), Ifo’s database for
investments in Germany (investment in equipment); German statistical office (1999) Fachserie 1, Reihe 4.1.1
(working population); cf. Müller (2000).

Note: Investment per head of working population (15-65 years of age).



        Indeed figure 7 demonstrates that the convergence of per capita output seems to have

come to a halt. Dividing GDP by the number of people of working age and relating this to the

respective western figure produces a value of only 56%, and this value has persisted since

about 1995. No upward trend is in sight.
                                                                                            13




                            Figure 7: Convergence of per capita output?



              West Germany = 100
       120

       100

        80

                                                                        56
        60

        40

        20

          0
                1991       1992      1993       1994       1995       1996   1997   1998
Sources: German Statistical Office (1999), Fachserie 18, Mikrozensus 1999

Note: GDP per head of working population (15–65 years of age).




5. There are alternative explanations for the halt to convergence ...

If seen against the usual convergence models, the halt to convergence is more than surprising

because, normally, an asymptotic adjustment towards the same structural variables is

predicted when there is free migration of the relevant factors of production and a free

exchange of technological knowledge. There are at least four complementary explanations for

why the normal model predictions do not apply to east Germany, and they may all be true.

        Figure 7 demonstrates the halt to convergence in terms of per capita output. Per capita

output is the product of the participation rate and the output per employee. The explanations

for a halt to convergence that are given below may apply to one or both of these factors.
                                                                                            14

i) Termination of the investment subsidy law

The first explanation for a halt to convergence is the termination of the investment subsidy

law (Fördergebietsgesetz) at the end of 1996. That law offered very generous investment

grants and depreciation allowances that came close to an immediate write off. From 1997 it

was replaced with a much less generous law which no longer foresaw special depreciation

allowances and offered smaller investment grants. The termination of the investment subsidy

law clearly explains why equipment investment fell after 1996, but it does not explain why it

fell below the western level and why the growth of per capita output had slowed down long

before the end of 1996. Thus other explanations have to be sought.



ii) Negative cost of capital

Paradoxically, one alternative explanation may be the investment subsidy law itself. The

investment incentives imbedded in that law were so large that they actually made the cost of

capital negative for most types of investment. As reported in Sinn (1995), for a typical

investment in industrial equipment, the cost of capital was -5.1%. Thus, a project whose pre-

tax losses would have consumed 5.1 % of the invested capital per annum enjoyed sufficiently

large subsidies to compete with a normal investment in the international capital market. The

economic implication of the negative cost of capital was dramatic because capital changed

from being a factor of production to being an economic good. Hosting capital became a

service which firms offered to a well-paying government.

       Firms reacted to this fundamental change of regime by operating at a point of their

production possibility frontier where they sacrificed labor productivity with regard to their

traditional output in order to make an abnormal increase in the capital intensity possible. In

the normal textbook world of economics, with positive factor prices and a free transfer of

technological knowledge, such a result would not have been possible, since firms would

always have operated at a point of their possibility frontier where the rate of substitution of
                                                                                                                   15

capital for labor is negative. However, the negative price of capital drove them to a point at

the production possibility frontier where the rate of substitution was positive and where a

higher capital intensity went along with a lower level of output per employee.




                         Figure 8: The implications of a negative cost of capital

                     Capital




                                                                                 l
                                                                                ita
                                                                            ap
                                                                           fc
                                                                           to
                                                                       os
                                                                     ec
                                                                    ti v
                                   No




                                                                ga
                                     rm




                                                               ne
                                       al
                                        is o
                                            co
                                             st




                                                                E
                                                           D                Production
                                                           (East)           possibility set
                                                       C                    (output = const.)
                                             th




                                                    B
                                            wi




                                                  (West)
                                          st




                                                                                A
                                        co
                                     Is o




                                                                                           Labor




         Figure 8 illustrates this result. With a normally sloped isocost line firms would choose

a point like B between A and C on the efficiency frontier. When the cost of capital is

negative, the “isocost” is positively sloped, and a solution such as D may emerge.7 As long as

D is between C and E, where E is the point where a ray from the origin is tangent, a higher

capital intensity will be accompanied by a lower labor productivity. Thus overcapitalization

can, in principle, explain why east German labor productivity remains lower than in west

Germany even when the economy is in a long-term equilibrium.



7
    A range where the isoquant is positively sloped is normally not considered because the fact that the firm has
    to pay for the factors of production excludes a solution in this range. Nevertheless it must exist if a solution to
                                                                                                                16

         There is empirical evidence for this prediction insofar as rapid modernization has

established new structures that have reacted to the fiscal incentives. Many east German

sectors now have a higher capital intensity than their west German counterparts but suffer

nevertheless from a lower labor productivity. Table 1 reports the relevant figures for all

sectors whose capital intensity is higher than in the west. It is striking to see that the three

sectors with the highest relative capital intensity have a labor productivity of just one half or

less than that of the west.



                       Table 1: Relative labor productivity and capital intensity
                               in the capital intensive east German sectors
                            (as compared to the west German counterparts)



       Sector                                   Capital Intensity (%)          Labor Productivity (%)
       Transport equipment                               108                            49
       Paper and paper products                          110                            74
       Chemicals                                         110                            59
       Stone, clay and glass                             111                            67
       Leather and leather products                      117                            75
       Wood and wood products                            119                            89
       Basic metals                                      127                            51
       Motor cars                                        155                            52
       Oil refineries                                    189                            25
Source: Gesamtwirtschaftliche und unternehmerische Anpassungsfortschritte in Ostdeutschland. Neunzehnter
Bericht, DIW, IWH and IfW, IfW discussion papers 346 and 347, Kiel 1999.

Note: The figure refers to all sectors whose capital intensities are above that of the respective west German ones.



         Klodt (1999) has recently argued that the low labor productivity results from an under-

utilization of capacity of east German firms. In his view, some of the excessively capital

intensive structures are “nowadays suffering from idle capacities.” This may also be an

explanation, but it has the disadvantage that it cannot easily be reconciled with the fact that

the relevant sectors all produce internationally traded commodities. Profit maximizing firms



   the firm’s decision problem exists. In fact, the positively sloped range is the graph of a production function
                                                                                              17

will fully utilize their capacities when they can sell their products to the world market.

However, when they design their plants they may divert labor away from producing ordinary

output in order to be able to “host” more capital and collect the money which the government

pays for this “service.”



iii) Dutch disease

A third explanation could be a Dutch disease type of problem. When a country has an

abundance of natural resources to sell to the rest of the world, it tends to suffer from a

revaluation of its currency and a resulting reduction in the international competitiveness of its

manufacturing sector. Resource exports crowd out commodity exports. Although east

Germany has no abundance of natural resources, it receives external funds as if it sold a

natural resource (see figure 3), and this could then, too, imply a crowding out of the

manufacturing sector. Of course, a nominal revaluation is impossible when there is one

currency, but a real revaluation could occur via an increase in the commodity prices and

wages.

         Unfortunately, this argument cannot easily be reconciled with the fact that commodity

prices in east Germany have remained 10% lower than those in west Germany and that the

resource transfer seemed to follow rather than anticipate the wage increase. Nevertheless the

Dutch disease hypothesis may be useful insofar as it helps explain why the high wages are

apparently consistent with an equilibrium of the east German economy where the output per

capita remains below the western level.



iv) Mezzogiorno




  where capital is an output good and labor an input good.
                                                                                                            18

When a cause for east Germany’s problem is sought, the Mezzogiorno effect ranks highest

among the explanations. Italy’s Mezzogiorno problem arguably results from collective wage

bargaining. Due to their economic dominance it used to be the unions and employers’

organizations of the north which fixed the wages for the whole of Italy, but wages that fitted

the north were too high for the south.8 Unemployment and economic stagnation in southern

Italy -- the Mezzogiorno -- resulted. This phenomenon is sufficiently important to devote

another section to its analysis.9



6. ... but wages seem to have been the dominant problem.

East Germany’s problem was very similar to that of southern Italy, since there, too, wages

were dictated from elsewhere.10 The crucial wage negotiations took place in 1991. They fixed

the whole time path of the eastern wages relative to those in the west. At that time, however,

privatization had just started, and there were no private entrepreneurs who could have

participated in the negotiations. What happened instead was that the west German employers’

associations negotiated about the east German wages. Their negotiation partners were the

newly founded east German trade unions which were advised by the western unions. To a

large extent the negotiations were proxy negotiations, where the parties involved settled labor

conditions for others. The dominant motive in these negotiations was to avoid any risk of

endangering west German jobs, and hence the negotiating parties agreed to fully adjust the

wages in as little as five years to those in the west. Including the revaluation effect that

resulted from the 1:1 currency conversion and taking account of a 15% wage drift in west

Germany this would have meant a twelve-fold increase in the wage rate, from 7% to 85% of

the west German level.



8
     As of 1999 this bargaining system has been changed so as to give the south more autonomy over the southern
     wages.
9
     Cf. also Boltho, Carlin, and Scaramozzino (1996) and Keller (1997).
10
     See Sinn and Sinn (1991, pp. 165 -168).
                                                                                                            19

          Figure 9 shows what has happened in reality; it refers to the average hourly wage cost

in the manufacturing industry.11 Obviously, relative wages in the east jumped from about 7%

to 37% within the unification year. This was the revaluation effect of the currency union plus

the result of some early negotiations. Thereafter the wage rate quickly increased to 72%, a

level which it had reached as early as 1995 and has maintained thereafter. This has been

primarily the result of the negotiations.



                    Figure 9: East Germany’s wage development since unification



       Monetary             Breakdown of
        union                 the EMS




                      Norway




                                                                                               Czech




Sources: OECD, Main Economic Indicators (several issues, hourly earnings in manufacturing); Federal
Statistical Office Germany, Fachserie 16, Reihe 5, (several issues, Tabelle 1.1: Index der durchschnittlichen
Bruttostundenverdienste der Arbeiter im Verarbeitenden Gewerbe); Economics of Transition Vol.4 (2), 1996,
table 6, p. 543 (Wages and salaries for Poland 1990-95); Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, (several issues,
external values of the Deutsche Mark); W. Breuer and D. Engels, Grundinformationen und Daten zur Sozialhilfe,
IGS Sozialforschung und Gesellschaftspolitik, Köln, 1999, p. 24 (German social assistance); Federal Statistical
Office Germany, Statistisches Jahrbuch (1999 and 1994, table 21.2, net income of 4-person households with
average income).


          The wage increase did not, however, continue to 85% as predicted: wages increased

ten-fold but not twelve-fold. The reason was that more and more firms left the employers’



11
     The figure refers to average wages only. See Franz and Steiner (1999) for an extensive report on the wage
                                                                                            20

organizations to escape the wage agreements. As of today, 85% of the firms, which employ

about 55% of the work force, have done so, and more will follow.

          The figure also shows the time paths of the manufacturing wage cost per hour in other

countries. Obviously, the east German wage cost surpassed the Irish, American and Australian

wage costs as early as 1991, and in 1993 it even became higher than the Italian level. Only the

Scandinavian and Austrian wage costs have not been matched.

          The thick gray line hovering around 45% indicates the uniform level of social aid in

Germany relative to the average west German wage income that has been available since the

time of unification (October 1990).12 The line is important since unification included a

“Social Union” which meant that the east Germans were, among other things, entitled to the

normal west German level of social assistance. In Germany, a family’s labor income is topped

up with social assistance payments so that a certain minimum aggregate income is reached

which depends on the number of children and other family conditions. No wage contracts are

feasible which do not keep a certain distance from this minimum income, because this income

is available without any work. The wage negotiators knew this. Apart from their motive to

protect their own west German firms and jobs they had to respect the minimum wage

implicitly defined by Germany’s social assistance level, but they were not unhappy about this.

          Given that wages are the most important production cost and given that labor is, next

to land, the only basic factor whose cost is determined at home, the rapid wage increase must

be seen as the major reason why the east German adjustment process has come to a halt. It

explains why the investment in equipment has been so low (and why the investment in

buildings has been so high) despite the negative cost of capital which the public subsidy

programs implied. The high wage level is a fundamental brake which had been imposed on

the east German economy right from the beginning and which many economists had



     distribution.
12
     For a family of four.
                                                                                            21

criticized.13 Now that the driving force of the investment subsidy program is no longer

available, it has brought the adjustment process to a halt. The east Germans simply priced

themselves out of the market.

          Of course, the high wage level did not imply that the firms’ output per employee went

down. To the contrary, the excessive increase in wages has destroyed the less productive

firms and has induced new firms to choose a very high capital intensity of production. Both

effects have tended to increase the output per employee. This is why despite the tenfold

increase in wages unit labor costs have risen only slightly since unification and are now just

20 – 30 % higher than in west Germany. However, the rapid wage increase also explains the

dramatic fall in output after unification and the difficulties of generating a self-sustained

growth process thereafter. It is a common wisdom nowadays that wages are the major reason

for why output per capita in east Germany has remained so low relative to that of west

Germany.




7. The conclusions for the welfare state and the wage negotiation process

      have to be drawn.

There would have been alternatives to the policy chosen because a market solution, too,

would eventually have equilibrated the factor prices in the east and the west. Commodity

trade, capital movements and the migration of people would all have contributed to this result,

and the market process would, in all likelihood, have been able to chose the right speed of

convergence in the presence of adjustment and migration costs.14 The German political

establishment, with its ignorance of economics, has not respected the laws of a market




13
     See, e.g., Akerlof et al. (1991) or Sinn and Sinn (1991).
14
     See Sinn (1999).
                                                                                              22

economy but has tried to artificially anticipate the factor price equalization. This has turned

out to be a serious and expensive mistake.

       What can be done today? It is in the logic of the German solution that more money

will be poured into the east German economy to patch up the consequences of the mistakes

that have been made. It is true that the resistance to such a solution is growing in the west, in

particular since the rapid aging of the society is making it more and more difficult to continue

the policy of borrowing the funds needed to finance the transfers to the east. German public

debt has grown from 900 billion deutschmarks to 2300 billion deutschmarks within just a

decade, and Germany was therefore unable, strictly speaking, to meet the Maastricht criteria.

However, east German voters will, in all likelihood, enforce a continuation of the transfer

policy. The frequent Länder elections of 1999 have shown very clearly that the east German

electorate does not accept the policy of fiscal consolidation that the new social democratic

government has advocated. The PDS, the former communist party, has outperformed the

social democrats in most Länder with the announcement that it will fight for more transfers

and reestablish the “right” kind of socialism after the “wrong” one had failed in the GDR. The

PDS is the east German tool to blackmail the west German taxpayers. Any party advocating

reasonable economic reforms will have to fear its power.

       Nevertheless, it is the task of the economist to define the necessary reforms. Arguably

they could include the following measures.




(i) A new system of social assistance

The German system of social assistance could be changed such that it will no longer result in

a lower bound on the wage distribution. This could be done by introducing something like the

American earned income tax credit; i.e., a system which subsidizes work rather than leisure
                                                                                           23

up to a certain income level. It may induce people to accept low paid jobs and reduce wages

and create such jobs. In principle, it may prove compatible with better living conditions for

the poor, who would receive a market income and social assistance payments in addition.



(ii) Opt-out clauses

The German system of collective bargaining could be made more flexible by allowing single

firms to pay lower wages if both the employees and the management wish to do so. Currently,

they cannot and this inflexibility has led to a massive wave of exits from the east German

employers’ associations, as was mentioned above.



(iii) Wage asset swaps

Wage asset swaps could be used to reduce the wage cost. Management could buy the

disclaimer of productivity-driven wage increases with company shares. The shares would be

given to the insider employees in exchange for wage moderation. “Outsiders” who are hired

after the negotiation would receive the lower wages, but no shares. Thereby wages could

effectively be differentiated between insiders and outsiders, and new jobs could be created

without insiders’ sacrifice and resistance.



(iv) Reducing the transfers

The intergovernmental transfers, which currently sum up to 140 billion a year, could

gradually be reduced to the necessary infrastructure adjustment and unavoidable social

assistance payments so as to minimize the Dutch disease effect. This would include the

abolishment of the system of investment subsidies, a re-examination of intergovernmental

grants, tougher debt limits and a reduction of east German pensions to the west German level.

       Such reforms may not only result in substantial savings on the part of the west German

taxpayers. They might also prepare the east German economy for the extremely difficult
                                                                                             24

period it will face from the year 2004, when the first five east European countries with their

63 million inhabitants will have joined the European Union. The east European enlargement

will, in all likelihood, result in a fierce low-wage competition from the new members through

commodity trade, capital outflows and a wave of mass migration. The east German economy

is Europe’s least competitive. It will have a hard time surviving between the front-lines.
                                                                                       25

                                       References


Akerlof, G., A. K. Rose, J. L. Yellen, and H. Hessenius (1991): “East Germany in from the
       Cold: The Economic Aftermath of Currency Union,” Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity No. 1, pp. 1-105.

Boltho, A., W. Carlin, and P. Scramozzino (1996): “Will East Germany Become a New
       Mezzogiorno?,” CEPR discussion paper 1256.

Barrel, R., and D. W. te Velde (1999): “Catching-up of East German Labour Productivity in
        the 90s,” Paper presented at the CESifo conference Ten Years after: German
        Unification Revisited, Berlin, 9-10 November 1999.

Franz, W., and V. Steiner (1999): “Wages in the East German Transition Process – Facts and
       Explanations,” Paper presented at the CESifo conference Ten Years after: German
       Unification Revisited, Berlin, 9-10 November 1999.

Keller, W. (1997): “From Socialist Showcase to Mezzogiorno? Lesson on the Role of
       Technical Change from East Germany’s Post-World War II Growth Performance,”
       NBER working paper 6079.

Klodt, H. (1999): “Industrial Policy and the East German Productivity Puzzle,” Paper
       presented at the CESifo conference Ten Years after: German Unification Revisited,
       Berlin, 9-10 November 1999.

Müller, A. (2000): “Der Aufholprozeß der ostdeutschen Wirtschaft stagniert,”           Ifo
       Schnelldienst No. 3, pp. 9 – 16..

Nierhaus, W. (1999): “Höhere Rentenanpassungen in Ostdeutschland erforderlich?,” Ifo
      Schnelldienst No. 19, pp. 20-24.

Paqué, K.-H. (1999): “Zehn Jahre Aufbau Ost: Eine Zwischenbilanz,” Ifo Schnelldienst No.
       34, pp. 13-19.

Seitz, H. (1999): “Where Have All the Flowers Gone? Die öffentlichen Finanzen in den neuen
        Ländern,” Ifo Schnelldienst No. 32-33, pp. 26-34

Sinn, G., and H.-W. Sinn (1991): Kaltstart. Volkswirtschaftliche Aspekte der deutschen
      Vereinigung, Mohr: Tübingen. English translation: Jumpstart. The Economic
      Unification of Germany, MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass., and London 1992.

Sinn, H.-W. (1995): “Staggering along: Wages Policy and Investment Support in East
      Germany,” Economics of Transition 3, pp. 403-426.

Sinn, H.-W. (1999): “EU Enlargement, Migration, and Lessons from German Unification,”
       CESifo working paper 182.
