NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EDUCATION FOR GROWTH: WHY AND FOR WHOM?

Alan B. Krueger
Mikael Lindahl

Working Paper 7591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7591
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

We thank Angus Deaton, Richard Freeman, Zvi Grili.ches, Gene Grossman, Larry Katz, Kjetil Storesletten,
and seminarparticipants at Berkeley, the London School of Economics, MIT, Princeton University, University
of Texas at Austin, Uppsala University, IUI, FIEF, SOFI, and the Tinbergen Institute for helpful discussions,
and Peter Skogman, Mark Spiegel and Bob Topel for providing data. Alan Krueger thanks the Princeton
University Industrial Relations Section for financial support; Mikael Lindahi thanks the Swedish Council for
Research in the Humanities and Social Science for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Alan B.Krueger and Mikael Lindahi.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.

Education for Growth: Why and For Whom?
Alan B. Krueger and Mikael Lindahi
NBER Working Paper No. 7591

March 2000
JEL No. J24, E20

ABSTRACT
This paper tries to reconcile evidence from the mi.croeconometric and empirical macro growth
literatures on the effect of schooling on income and GDP growth. Much microeconometric evidence suggest

that education is an important causal determinant of income for individuals within countries. At a national
level., however, recent studies have found that increases in educational attainment are unrelated to economic

growth. This finding appears to be a spurious result of the extremely high rate of measurement error in first-

differenced cross-country education data. After accounting for measurement error, the effect of changes in

educational attainment on income growth in cross-country data is at least as great as microeconometric
estimates of the rate of return to years of schooling. Another finding of the macro growth literature - that
economic growth depends positively on the initial stock of human capital -is shown to result from imposing

linearity and constant-coefficient assumptions on the estimates. These restrictions are often rejected by the
data, and once either assumption is relaxed the initial level of education has little effect on economic growth

for the average country.

Alan B. Krueger
Economics Department
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER

Mikael Lindahl
Economics Department
Stockholm University
Stockholm, Sweden

1. Introduction

Interest in the rate of return to investment in education has been sparked by two
independent developments in economic research in the 1990s. On the one hand, the micro labor

literature has produced several new estimates of the monetary return to schooling that exploit
natural experiments in which variability in workers' schooling attainment was generated by some

exogenous and arguably random force, such as quirks in compulsory schooling laws or students'

proximity to a college. On the other hand, the macro growth literature has investigated whether
the level of schooling in a cross-section of countries is related to the countries' subsequent (JDP

growth rate. This paper summarizes and tries to reconcile these two disparate but related lines
of research.
The next section reviews the theoretical and empirical foundations of the Mincerian human

capital earnings function. Our survey of the literature indicates that Mincer's (1974) formulation
of the log-linear earnings-education relationship fits the data rather well. Each additional year of

schooling appears to raise earnings by about 10 percent in the United States, although the rate of

return to education varies over time as well as across countries. There is surprisingly lithe
evidence that omitted variables (e.g., inherent ability) that might be correlated withearnings and
education cause simple OLS estimates of wage equations to significantly overstate the return to

education. Indeed, consistent with Griiches 's (1977) conclusion, much of the modemliterature
finds that the upward "ability bias" is of about the same order ofmagnitude as the downward bias

caused by measurement error in educational attainment.
Section 3 considers the empirical macro growth literature. First, we relate the Mincerian

wage equation to the macro growth model. The Mincer model implies that the change in a
country's avenge level of schooling should be the key determinant of income growth. The macro

2

growth literature, by contrast, typically specifies growth as a function of the initial level of
education. Moreover, we show that if the return to education changes over time (e.g., because
of exogenous skill-biased technological change), the macro growth models are unidentified. Much

of the empirical growth literature has eschewed the Mincer model because studies such as
Benhabib and Spiegel (1994) fmd that the change in education is not a determinant of economic

growth.' We show, however, that Benhabib and Spiegel's finding that increases in educationare
unrelated to economic growth results because there is virtually no signal in the education data they

use, conditional on the growth of capital.
In contrast to the micro education literature, the macro growth literature has devoted only
cursory attention to potential problems caused by measurement errors in education. Despite their
aggregate nature, available data on average schooling levels across countries are poorly measured,

in large part because they are often derived from enrollment flows. Thereliability of country-

level education data is no higher than the reliability of individual-level education data. For
example, the correlation between Barro and Lee's (1991) and Kyriacou's (1991) measures of
average education across 68 countries in 1985 is 0.86, and the correlation between the change in

schooling between 1965 and 1985 from these two sources is only 0.34. Additional estimates of
the reliability of country-level education data based on our analysis of comparable micro thta from

the World Values Survey for 34 countries suggests that measurement error is particularly
prevalent for secondary and higher schooling. The measurement errors in schooling are positively

correlated over time, but not as highly correlated as true years of schooling. We find that

'There are also notable exceptiom that have embraced the Mincer model, such as Hall and Jones (1998) and
Kienow and Rodriguez-Dare (1997).

3

measurement errors in education severely attenuate estimates of the effect of the change in
schooling on GDP growth. Nonetheless, we show that measurement errors in schooling are
unlikely to cause a spurious positive association between the initial level of schooling and GDP

growth across countries, conditional on the change in education. Thus, like Topel (1999), we
conclude that both the change and initial level of education are positively correlated with economic

growth.
Finally, we explore whether the significant effect of the initial level of schooling on growth

continues to hold if several restrictive assumptions in the growth equation are relaxed. For
example, we estimate a variable-coefficient model that allows the coefficient on education to vary
across countries (as is found in the micro data), and we relax the linearity assumption of the initial

level of education. These extensions show that the positive effect of the initial level of education

on economic growth is sensitive to econometric restrictions that are rejected by the data.

Our main conclusion is that while support for the micro Mincerian wage equation is
strong, the evidence of a positive effect of the stock of education on a country's growth rate is
tenuous. Even if one accepts the strong assumptions necessary to interpret the coefficient on the

initial level of education in cross-country growth regressions as identif'ing externalities from
education, the results most likely do not apply to the OECD countries, or to the average country
in the world: the positive effect of the initial level of education applies primarily to countries with

very low levels of education.

2. The Microeconomjcs of the Private Return to Education
Since at least the beginning of the century, economists and other social scientists have

4
sought to estimate the economic rewards individuals and society gain from completing higher
levels of schooling.2 It has long been recognized that workers who attended school longer may
possess other characteristics that would lead them to earn higher wages irrespective of their level

of education. If these other characteristics are not accounted for, then simple comparisons of

earnings across individuals with different levels of schooling would overstate the return to
education. Early attempts to control for this "ability bias" included the analysis of data on siblings

to difference-out unobserved family characteristics (e.g., Gorseline, 1932), and regression
analyses which included as control variables observed characteristics such as IQ and parental
education (e.g., Griiches and Mason, 1972). This literature is thorougffly surveyed in Griliches

(1977), Rosen (1977), Willis (1986), and Card (1999). We briefly review evidence on the
Mincerian earnings equation, emphasizing recent studies that exploit exogenous variations in
education in their estimation.

2.1 The Mincerian wage equation
Mincer (1974) showed that if the only cost of attending school an additional year is the

opportunity cost of students' time, and if the proportional increase in earnings caused by this

additional schooling is constant over the lifetime, then the log of earnings would be linearly
related to individuals' years of schooling, and the slope of this relationship could be interpreted
as the rate of return to investment in schooling . He augmented this model to include a quadratic
2Early references are Gorseline (1932), Walsh (1935), Miller (1955), and Wolfie and Smith (1956).
3This insight is also in Becker (1964) and Becker and Chiswick (1966), who specify the cost of investment in
human capital as a fraction of earnings that would have been received in the absence ofthe investment. There are,
of course, other theoretical models that yield a log-linear earnings-schooling relationship. For example, if the

5

term in work experience to allow for returns to on-the-job training, yielding the familiar

Mincerian wage equation:

(1) lnW=P0+p1S+p2x1÷p3x12+€.,
where In W is the natural log of the wage for individual i, Si is years of schooling, X isexperience, X2 is experience squared, and
coefficient on schooling,

is

a disturbance term. With Mincer's assumptions, the

equals the discount rate, because schooling decisions are made by

equating two present value earnings streams: one with a higher level of schooling and one with

a lower level. An attractive feature of Mincer's model is that time spent in school (asopposed

to degrees) is the key determinant of earnings, so data on years of schooling can be used to
estimate a comparable return to education in countries with very different educational systems.
Equation (1) has been estimated for most countries of the world by OLS, and the results
generally yield estimates of I31 ranging from .05 to .15, with slightly larger estimates for women

than men (see Psacharopoulos, 1994). The log-linear relationship also provides a good fit to the

data, as is illustrated by the plots for the U.S., Sweden, West Germany, and EastGermany in

Figure i. These figures display the coefficient on dummy variables indicating each year of
schooling, controlling for experience and gender, as well as the OLS estimate of the Mincerian
return. It is apparent that the semi-log specification provides a good description of the data even

production function relating earnings and human capital is log-linear, and individuals randomly choose theirschooling
level (e.g., optimization errors), then estimation of equation (1) would uncover the educational production function.

4The German figures are from Krueger and Pischke (1995). The American and Swedish figures are based on the
authors' calculations using the 1991 March Current Population Survey and 1991 Swedish Levelof Living Survey.
The regressions also include controls for a quadratic in experience and sex.

6
in countries with dramatically different economic and educational systems .
Much research has addressed the question of how to interpret the education slope in

equation (1). Does it reflect unobserved ability and other characteristics that are correlated with

education, or the true reward that the labor market places on education? Is education rewarded

because it is a signal of ability (Spence, 1973), or because it Increases productive capabilities
(Becker, 1964)? Is the social return to education higher or lower than the coefficient on education

in the Mincerian wage equation? Would all individuals reap the same proportionate increase in

their earnings from attending school an extra year, or does the return to education vary
systematically with individual characteristics? Definitive answers to these questions are not
available, although the weight of the evidence clearly suggests that education is not merely a
proxy for unobserved ability. For example, Griliches (1977) concludes that instead of finding the

expected positive ability bias in the return to education, 'The implied net bias is either nil or
negative" once measurement error in education is taken into account.
The more recent evidence from natural experiments also supports a conclusion that omitted

ability does not cause upward bias the return to education (see Card, 1999 for a survey). For
example, Angrist and Krueger (1991) observe that the combined effect of school start age cutoffs
and compulsory schooling laws produces a natural experiment, in which individuals who are born

on different days of the year start school at different ages, and then reach the compulsory
5Evaluating micro data for states over time in the U.S., Card and Krueger (1992) fmd that the earnings-schooling
relationship is flat until the education level reached by the 2nd percentile of the education distribution, and then
becomes log-linear. There is also some evidence of sheep-skin effects around college and high school completion
(e.g., Park, 1994). Although statistical tests often reject the log-linear relationship for a largesample, the figures
clearly show that the log-linear relationship provides a good approximation to the functional form. It should alsobe
noted that Murphy and Welch (1990) find that a quartic in experience provides a better fit to the data than a quadratic.

7

schooling age at different grade levels. If the date of the year individuals are born is unrelated
to their inherent abilities, then, in essence, variations in schooling associated with date of birth
provide a natural experiment for estimating the benefit of obtaining extra schooling in response
to compulsory schooling laws. Using a sample of nearly one million observations from the U.S.
Censuses, Angrist and Krueger fmd that men born in the beginning of the calendar year, who start

school at a relatively older age and can dropout in a lower grade, tend to obtain less schooling.

This pattern onlyholds for those with a high school education or less, consistent with the view
that compulsory schooling is responsible for the pattern. They further find that the pattern of

education by quarter-of-birth is mirrored by the pattern of earnings by quarter-of-birth: in
particular, individuals who are born early in the year tend to earn less, on average.6 Instrumental
variables (IV) estimates that are identified by variability in schooling associated with quarter-of-

birth suggest that the payoff to education is slightly higher than the OLS estimate.7 Angrist and

Krueger conclude that the upward bias in the return to schooling is about the same order of
magnitude as the downward bias due to measurement error in schooling.

Other studies have used a variety of other sources of arguably exogenous variability in
schooling to estimate the return to schooling. Harmon and Walker (1995), for example, more

directly examine the effect of compulsory schooling by studying the effect of changes in the
compulsory schooling age in the United Kingdom, while Card (1995a) exploits variations in

6Again, no such pattern holds for college graduates.

7Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995) argue that Angrist and Krueger's IV estimates are biased toward the OLS
estimates because of weak instruments. However, Staiger and Stock (1997), Donald and Newey (1997), Angrist,
Inibens and Krueger (1999), and Chamberlain and Imbens (1996) show that weak instruments do not account for the
central conclusion of Angrist and Krueger (1991).

8

schooling attainment owing to families' proximity to a college in the U.S. Duflo (1998) uses
variation in educational attainment related to school building programs across islands in Indonesia.

These three papers find that the IV estimates of the return to education that exploit a "natural
experiment" for variability in education exceed the corresponding OLS estimates, although the
difference between the IV and OLS estimates often is not statistically significant. Ashenfelter,
Harmon and Oosterbeek (1999) compile estimates from 27 studies, and find that the conventional

OLS return to schooling is .066, on average, whereas theaverage IV estimate is .093.
We interpret this evidence as suggesting that the return to an additional year of education

obtained for reasons like compulsory schooling or school-building projects is more likely to be
greater, than lower, than the conventionally-estimated return to schooling. Because the schooling
levels of individuals who are from more disadvantaged backgrounds tend to be those who are most

affected by the interventions examined in the literature, Lang (1993) and Card (1 995b) have

inferred that the return to an additional year of schooling is higher for individuals from
disadvantaged families than for those from advantaged families, and suggest that such a result
follows because disadvantaged individuals have higher discount rates.

Other related evidence for the U.S. suggests the payoff to investments in education are
higher for more disadvantaged individuals. First, while studies of the effect of school resources

on student outcomes yield mixed results, there is a tendency to find more beneficial effects of

school resources for disadvantaged students (see, for example, Summers and Wolfe, 1977,
Krueger, 1999 and Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 1998). Second, evidence suggests that pre-school
8Ashenfelter, 1-Jannon and Oosterbeek explore whether publication bias accounts for thetendancy of IV estimates
to exceed the OLS estimates. After adjusting for selection bias, however, they still fmd that thereturn is higher, on
average, in the IV estimates than in the OLS estimates (.081 versus .064).

9
programs have particularly large, long-term effects for disadvantaged children in terms of
reducing crime and welfare dependence, and raising incomes (see, Barnett, 1992). Third, several
studies have found that students from advantaged and disadvantaged backgrounds make equivalent

gains on standardized tests during the school year, but children from disadvantaged backgrounds

fall behind during the summer while children from advantaged backgrounds move ahead (see
Entwisle, Alexander, and Olson, 1997). And fourth, evidence suggests that college students from

more disadvantaged families benefit more from attending elite colleges than do students from
advantaged families (see Dale and Krueger, 1998).
It is unclear whether this evidence of a higher return to human capital for disadvantaged

students applies outside the U.S. But in all regions of the world, Psacharopolous (1994)
concludes that there is a higher return to primary schooling than to secondary or tertiary
schooling, which also suggests that disadvantaged children benefit more from additional human
capital investments.

2.2 Social versus Private Returns to Education
The social return to education can, of course, be higher or lower than the private return.
The social return can be higher because of externalities from education, which could occur, for

example, if higher education leads to technological progress that is not captured in the private
return to that education, or if more education produces positive externalities, such as a reduction

in crime and welfare participation, or more informed political decisions. The former is more
likely if human capital is expanded at higher levels of education while the latter is more likely if
it is expanded at lower levels. It is also possible that the social return to education is less than the

10

private return. For example, Spence (1973) and Machlup (1970) note that education could just
be a credential, which does not raise individuals' productivities. It is also possible that insome
developing countries, where the incidence of unemployment may rise with education (e.g., Blaug,

Layard and Woodhall, 1969) and where the return to physical capital may exceed the return to
human capital (e.g., Harberger, 1965), increases in education may reduce total output.
Most of the micro human capital literature focuses on the private rather than social return

to education, but the fmding of little ability bias in the Mincerian wage equation casts doubt on

at least some forms of credentialling arguments. The possibility of externalities to education
motivates much of the macro growth literature, to which we now turn.

3. Macro growth equations
Thirty years ago, Fritz Machlup (1970, p. 1) observed, "The literature on the subject of
education and economic growth is some two hundred years old, but only in the last ten years has
the flow of publications taken on the aspects of a flood." The number of cross-country regression

studies on education and growth has surged even higher in recent years. The literature is

voluminous, and a new journal has been devoted solely to economic growth. Rather than
exhaustively review the literature, we summarize the main models and findings, and explore the
impact of several econometric issues.
The macro growth literature yields three principally different conclusions from the micro

literature. First, the initial stock of human capital matters, not the change in human capital.
Second, secondary and post-secondary education matter more for growth than primary education.

Third, female education has an insignificant and sometimes negative effect on economicgrowth.

11

3.1 From the Mincer Model to the Macro Growth Model
To compare the Mincer model to the macro growth literature, first consider a Mincerian
wage equation for each country j and time period t:

=

(1') in

+

PljESkjt +

where we have suppressed the experience term for convenience. This equation can be aggregated
across individuals each year by taking the means of each of the variables, yielding what Heckman

and Klenow (1997) call the "Macro-Mincer" wage equation:

=

(2) ln

+

+

where y8, denotes the geometric mean wage and

is mean education. Heckman and Kienow

(1997) compare the coefficient on education from cross-country log GDP equations to the
coefficient on education from micro Mincer models. Once they control for life expectancy to
proxy for technology differences across countries, they fmd that the macro and micro regressions

yield similar estimates of the effect of education on income.9 They conclude from this exercise
that the "macro versus micro evidence for human capital externalities is not robust."
The macro Mincer equation can be differenced between year t and t- 1, giving:

=

(3) Am

'0 + PljtSjt -

+ Ac'

where A signifies the change in the variable from t-1 to t, '0 is the meanchange in the intercepts,
and A€

is

a composite error that includes the deviation between each country's intercept change

and the overall average. Differencing the equation removes the effect of any additive, permanent
9When they omit life expectancy, however, education has a much larger effect in themacro regression than micro
regression. Whether longer life expectancy is a valid proxy for technology differences, or a result ofhigher income,
is an open question (see Smith, 1999).

12

differences in technology. If the return to schooling is constant over time, we have:

(4) Mn =

p'0 +

p1as +

Notice that this fonnulation allows the time-invariant return to schooling to vary across countries.

If

does vary across countries, and a constant-coefficient model is estimated, then (f31-1)AS

will add to the error term.
Also notice that if the return to schooling varies over time, thenby adding and subtracting

from the right-hand-side of equation (3), we obtain:

(5) Mn =

Po +

÷

+

where ô is the change in the return to schooling (Al)1).

If the return to schooling has increased

(decreased) secularly over time, the initial level of education will enter positively (negatively) into
equation (5). An implicit assumption in much of the macro growth literature therefore is that the

return to education is either unchanged, or changed endogenously, by the stock of human capital.
Although the empirical literature for the U.S. clearly shows a fall in the return to education

in the 1970s and a sharp increase in the 1980s (e.g., Levy and Murnane, 1992), the findings for
other countries are mixed. For example, Psacharopolous (1994; Table 6) fmds that in the average

country the Mincerian return to education fell by 1.7 points over periods of various lenghths
(average of 12 years) since the late 1960s. By contrast, O'Neill (1995) finds that between 1967
and 1985 the return to education measured in terms of its contribution to GDP rose by 58

percent

in developed countries and by 64 percent in less developed countries.
The typical macro growth model estimated in the literature is motivated by the convergence

literature. This leads to interest in estimating parameters of an underlying model such as AY1 =

- l)(Y1Y*) + pj, where AY denotes the annualized change in log GDP per capita in country

13

j between t-1 and t, cc denotes country j's steady-state growth rate,

is the log of initial GDP

per-capita, Y'J is steady-state log GDP per capita, and 3 measures the speed of convergence to
steady-state income. The intuition for this equation is straightforward: countries that are below

their steady-state income level should grow quickly, and those that are above it should grow
slowly. A typical estimating equation is:

(6) AY = f3 +

+ 132S.l +

+

where AY is the change in log GDP per capita from year t-1 to t,

is average years of

schooling in the population in the initial year, E-j is the log of initial (}DP per capita, and 4
includes variables such as inflation, capital, or the 'rule of law index."0 Also note that

schooling

is sometimes specified in logaritimfic units in equation (6). Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995),
Benhabib and Spiegel (1994), and others conclude that the change in schooling has

an insignificant

effect if it is included in a GDP growth equation, even though this variable is predicted to matter

in the Mincer model and in some endogenous economic growth models (e.g., Lucas, 1988).
Equation (6) is typically estimated with data for a cross-section or pooled sample of countries

spanning a 5, 10, or 20 year period.
The first-differenced macro-Mincer equation (4) differs from the macro growth equation

in several respects. First, the macro growth models use the change in log GDP per capita as the

dependent variable, rather than the change in the mean of log earnings. If income has a log
normal distribution with a constant variance over time, and if labor's share is also constant, then

'°Henceforth we use the terms GDP per capita and GDP interchangeably.

14

aggregating GDP in this way would not matter." Without micro data for a large sample of
countries over time, the impact of aggregation is difficult to assess, and we do not pursue this
issue further. Second, and probably more importantly, the macro growth literature typically omits
the change in schooling. Third, because the macro models are motivated by issues of convergence

they include the initial level of GDP, capital, and correlates for steady-state income. Indeed, a
primary motivation for including human capital variables in these equations is to control for steady

state income, Y.

3.1.1 Interpretation
There are at least six ways to interpret the coefficient on the initial level of schooling in
equation (6).12 First, schooling may be a proxy for steady-state income. Countries with more

schooling would be expected to have a higher steady-state income, so conditional on GDP in the

initial year, we would expect more educated countries to grow faster (j32 >0). 13

If this were the

case, higher schooling levels would not change the steady-state growth rate, although it would

raise steady-state income. Second, schooling could change the steady-state growth rate by
enabling the work force to develop, implement and adopt new technologies (see Nelson and
Phelps, 1966 Welch, 1970 and Romer, 1990), again leading to the prediction

>0. Third,

countries with low initial stocks of human capital could have greater opportunities to grow by

ttHeckman and Kienow (1997) point out that half the variance of log income will be added to the GDP equation
if income is log normal.
22See Aghion and

Howitt (1998) and Temple (1999a) for excellent overviews of growth models.

'3Transitory measurement error in GDP will have the same effect.

15

implementing technology developed abroad. In this case, one would expect

<o Aghion and

Howjtt (1998) and Benhabib and Spiegel (1994) suggest, however, that for countries with below-

average productivity and income, this "catch-up" effect would be more prominent among those

with higher average educational attainment, yielding the prediction f32 >0 for this subset of
countries.

Fourth, a positive or negative coefficient on initial schooling may simply reflect an

exogenous change in the return to schooling, as shown in equation (5). Fifth, anticipated
increases in future economic growth could cause schooling to rise (i.e., reverse causality), as
argued by Bils and Klenow (1998). Sixth, the schooling variable may "pick up' the effect of the
change in education, which is typically omitted from the growth equation.

3.2 Bask Results and Effect of Measurement Error
Table 1 replicates and extends the "growth accounting" and "endogenous
growth"

regressions in Benhabib and Spiegel's (1994) influential paper.'4 Their analysis is based on
Kyriacous (1991) measure of average years of schooling for the work force in 1965 and 1985,
Summers and Heston's GDP and labor force data, and a measure of physical capital derived from

investment flows for a sample of 78 countries. Following Benhabib and Spiegel, the regression
in column (1) relates the annualized growth rate of GDP to the log change in years of schooling.

'4We were not able to exactly replicate Benhabib and Spiegel's results because we use a revised version of
Summers and Heston's GDP data. Nonetheless, our estimates are very close to theirs. Forexample, Benhabib and
Spiegel report coefficients of -.059 for the change in log education and .545 for the change in log capital when they
estimate the model in column 1 of Table 1; our estimates are -.072 and .523. Some of the other coefficients differ
because of scaling; for comparability with later results, we divided the dependent variable and variables measured in
changes by 20.

16

From this model, Benhabib and Spiegel conclude, "Our fmdings shed some doubt on the
traditional role given to human capital in the development process as a separate factor of
production." Instead, they conclude that the stock of education matters for growth (see colunm

2 and 5) by enabling countries with a high level of education to adopt and innovate technology
faster.

Topel argues that Benhabib and Spiegel's fmding of an insignificant and wrong-signed
effect of schooling changes on GDP growth is due to their log specification of education.'5 The

log-log specification follows if one assumes that schooling enters an aggregate Cobb-Douglas
production function linearly. Given the success of the Mincer model, however, we would agree
with Topel that it is more natural to specify human capital as an exponential function ofschooling

in a Cobb-Douglas production function, so the change in linear years of schooling would enter

the growth equation. In any event, the logarithmic specification of schooling does not fully
explain the perverse effect of educational improvements on growth in Benhabib and Spiegel's

analysis.'6 Results of estimating a linear education specification in column 4 still show a
statistically insignificant (though positive) effect of the linear change in schooling on economic
growth.
Columns 3 and 6 show that controlling for capital is key to Benhabib and Spiegel's finding

of an insignificant effect of the change in schooling variable. When physicalcapital is excluded

'5Mankiw, Romer and Well (1992; Table VI) estimate a similar specification.
"The log specification is part of the explanation, however, because if the model in column (3) is estimated without
the initial level of schooling, the change in log schooling has a negative and statistically significant effect, whereas
the change in the level of schooling has a positive and statistically significant effect if it is includedas a regressor in
this model instead.

17

from the growth equation, the change in schooling has a statistically significant and positive effect

in either the linear or log schooling specification. Why does controlling for capital have such a
large effect on education? As shown below, it appears that the insignificant effect of the change
in education is a result of the low signal in the education change variable. Indeed, we show below
that conditional on the other variables that Benhabib and Spiegel hold constant (especially capital),

the change in schooling conveys virtually no signal.'7
Notice also that the coefficient on capital is high in Table 1, around .50 with a t-ratio close

to 10. In a competitive, Cobb-Douglas economy, the coefficient on capital growth in a GDP
growth regression should equal capital's share of national income. Gollin (1998) estimates that

labor's share ranges from .65 to .80 in most countries, after allocating labor's portion of selfemployment and proprietors'income. Consequently, capital's share is probably no higher than

.20 to .35. Two reasons why the coefficient on capital could be biased upwards are: (1)
measured capital is derived from investment flows, and GDP is a direct function of investment,

so errors in the investment data will be positively correlated with the dependent variable; (2)

countries that experience rapid GDP growth may find it easier to raise investment, creating

simultaneity bias. These factors might explain why capital has such a large and significant
coefficient in the growth equations. If the coefficient on capital growth in column (5) of Table
1 is constrained to equal .20 or .35 -- a plausible range for capital's share -- the coefficient on the

schooling change rises to .09 or .06, and becomes statistically significant.

'7Pritchctt (1998) estimates essentially the same model as Renhabib and Spiegel (i.e., column 1 of Table 1), and
instruments for schooling growth using an alternative education series. However, if there is no variability in the
portion of measured schooling changes that represent true schooling changes conditional on capital, the instrumental
variables strategy is inconsistent. This can easily he seen by noting that there would beno variability due to true
education changes conditional on capital in the reduced form of the model.

18

3.2.1 The Extent of Measurement Error in International Education Data
We disregard errors that arise because years of schooling are an imperfect measure of

human capital, and focus instead on the more tractable problem of estimating the extent of
measurement error in cross-country data on average years of schooling. Benhabib and Spiegel's

measure of average years of schooling for the work force was derived by Kyriacou (1991) as
follows. First, survey-based estimates of average years of schooling for 42 countries in the mid
I 970s were regressed on the countries primary, secondary and tertiary school enrollment rates.

Coefficient estimates from this model were then used to predict years of schooling from
enrollment rates for all countries in 1965 and 1985. This method is likely to generate substantial
noise since the fitted regression may not hold for all countries and time periods, enrollment rates
are frequently rnismeasured, and the enrollment rates are not properly aligned with the workforce.

Changes in education derived from this measure are likely to be particularly noisy. Benhabib and

Spiegel use Kyriacou's education data for 1965, as well as the change between 1965 and 1985.
The widely-used Barro and Lee (1993) data set is an alternative source of education data.

For 40 percent of country-year cells, Barro and Lee measure average years of schooling by
survey- and census-based estimates reported by UNESCO. The remaining observations were
derived from historical enrollment flow data using a "perpetual inventory method.''8 The Barro-

Lee measure is undoubtedly an advance over existing international measures of educational
attainment, but errors in measurement are inevitable because the UNESCO enrollment rates are

of doubtful quality in many countries (see Behrman and Rosensweig, 1993 and 1994). For

'8Each countty has a survey- and census-based estimate in at least one year, which provides an anchor for the
enrollment flows.

19

example, UNESCO data are often based on beginning of the year enrollment. Additionally,
students educated abroad are miscounted in the flow data, which is probably a larger problem for

higher education. More fundamentally, secondary and tertiary schooling is defined differently
across countries in the UNESCO data, so years of secondary and higher schooling are likely to
be noisier than overall schooling. Notice also that because errors cumulate over time in Barro and

Lee's stock-flow calculations, the errors in education will be positively correlated over time.
As is well known, if an explanatory variable is measured with additive white noise errors,

then the coefficient on this variable will be attenuated toward zero in a bivariateregression, with

the attenuation factor, R, asymptotically equal to the ratio of the variance of the correctlymeasured variable to the variance of the observed variable (see, e.g., Griliches, 1986). A similar
result holds in a multiple regression (with correctly-measured covariates), only now the variances

are conditional on the other variables in the model. To estimate attenuation bias due to
measurement error, write a nation's measured years of schooling, S, as it's true schooling, SfK,

plus a measurement error denoted e: S =

S + ej. It is convenient to start with the assumption

that the measurement errors are "classical"; that is, errors that are uncorrelated with 5*, other

variables in the growth equation, and the equation error term. Now let S' and 52 denote two
imperfect measures of average years of schooling for each country, with measurementerrors &
and e2 respectively (where we suppress the j subscript).

If e' and e2 are uncorrelated, the fraction of the observed variability in 51 due to
measurement error can be estimated as R1 = cov(S',S2)/var(S'). R1 is often referred to as the

reliability ratio of 1, and has probability limit equal to var(S*)/lvar(S*)+var(e5}. Assuming
constant variances, the reliability of the data expressed in changes (R) will be lower than the

20

cross-sectional reliability if the serial correlation of the true variable is higher than the serial
correlation of the measurement errors because R51 = var(S*)/{var(S*) + var(e)(1-rj/(1-p,)},

where r is the serial correlation of the errors and p is the serial correlation of true schooling.

In practice, the reliability ratio for changes in S1 can be estimated by: RAS1 =
cov(AS'4S2)/var(aS'). Note that if the errors in 5' and S 2are positively correlated, the estimated

reliability ratios will be biased upward.

We can calculate the reliability of the Barro-Lee and Kyriacou data if we treat the two
variables as independent estimates of educational attainment. It is probably the case, however,

that the measurement errors in the two data sources are positively correlated because, to some
extent, they both rely on the same mismeasured enrollment data)9 Consequently, the reliability

ratios derived from comparing these two measures probably provide an upper bound on the
reliability of the data series.
Panel A of Table 2 presents estimates of the reliability ratio of the Kyriacou and Barro-Lee

education data. Appendix Table A. 1 reports the correlation and covariance matrices for the
measures. The reliability ratios were derived by regressing one measure of years of schooling on

the other.2° The cross-sectional data have considerable signal, with the reliability ratio ranging

'9Another complication is that the Kyriacou data pertain to the education of the work force, whereasthe Bano-Lee
data pertain to the entire population age 25 and older. If the regression slope relating true education of workers to
the true education of the population is one, the reliability ratios reported in the text are unbiased. Although we do
not know true education of workers and the population, in the Barro-Lee data set a regression of the average years
of schooling of men (who are very likely to work) on the average education of the populationyields a slope of .99,
suggesting that workers and the population may have close to a unit slope.

20Barro and Lee (1993) compare their education measure with alternative series by reporting correlation
coefficients. For example, they report a correlation of .89 with Kyriacou's education data and .93 with
Psacharopolous' s. Our cross-sectional correlations are not very different. They do not report correlations for changes
in education.

21

from .77 to .85 in the Barro-Lee data and exceeding .96 in the Kyriacou data. The reliability
ratios fall by 10 to 30 percent if we condition on the log of 1965 GDP per capita, which is a
common covariate. More disconcerting, when the data are measured in changes over the 20year
period, the reliability ntio for the data used by Benhabib and Spiegel falls to less than 20percent.

By way of comparison, note that Ashenfelter and Krueger (1994) find that the reliability of self-

reported years of education is .90 in micro data on workers, and that the reliability of selfreported differences in education between identical twins is .57.

These results suggest that if there were no other regressors in the model, the estimated
effect of schooling changes in Benhabib and Spiegel's results would be biased downward by 80

percent. But the bias is likely to be even greater because their regressions include additional
explanatory variables that absorb some of the true changes in schooling. The reliability ratio
conditional on the other variables in the model can be shown to equal R'51 =

(R51-R2)I(1-R2),

where R2 is the multiple coefficient of determination from a regression of the measured schooling

change variable on the other explanatory variables in the model. A regression of the change in

Kyriacou's education measure on the covariates in colunm (4) of Table 1 yields an R2 of 23
percent. If the covariates are correlated with the signal in education changes and not the noise,
then there is no variability in true schooling changes left over in the measured schooling changes
conditional on the other variables in the model. Instead of rejecting the traditional Mincerian role
of education on growth, a reasonable interpretation is that Benhabib and Spiegel's results shed no

light on the role of education changes on growth.

The Barro and Lee data convey more signal than Kyriacou's data when expressed in
changes. Indeed, nearly 60 percent of the variability in observed changes in years of education

22

in the Barro-Lee data represent true changes. This makes the Barro-Lee data preferable to use
to estimate the effect of educational improvements. Despite the greater reliability of the BarroLee data, there is still little signal left over in these data conditional on the other variables in the
model in column 4 of Table 1; a regression of the change in the Barro-Lee schooling measure on

the change in capital, change in population, and initial schooling yields an R2 of .28.
Consequently, conditional on these variables about 40 percent of the remaining variability in
schooling changes in the Barro-Lee data is true signal.

As mentioned, we suspect the estimated reliability ratios are biased upward because the

errors in the Kyriacou and Barro-Lee data are probably positively correlated. To derive a
measure of education with independent errors, we calculated average years of schooling from the

World Values Survey (WVS) for 34 countries. The WVS contains micro data from household
surveys that were conducted in nearly 40 countries in 1990 or 1991. The survey was designed
to be comparable across countries. In each country, individuals were asked to report the age at

which they left school. With an assumption of school start age, we can calculate the average
number of years that individuals spent in school. We also calculated average years of secondary

and higher schooling by counting years of schooling obtained after 8 years of schooling as
secondary and higher schooling. Notice that these measures will not be error free either. Errors
could arise, for example, because some individuals repeated gndes, because we have made an
erroneous assumption about school start age or the beginning of secondary schooling, or because

of sampling errors. But the errors in this measure should be independent of the errors in
Kyriacou' s and Barro and Lee's data. The appendix provides additional details of our calculations

with the WVS.

23

Panel B of Table 2 reports the reliability ratios for the Barro-Lee data and WVS data for

1990. The reliability ratio of .90 for the Barro-Lee data in 1990 is slightly higher than the
estimate for 1985 based Kyriacou' s data, but within one standard error. Thus, it appears that

correlation between the errors in Kyriacou's and Barro-Lee's data is not a serious problem.
Nonetheless, another advantage of the WVS data is that they can be used to calculate upper
secondary schooling using a constant (if imperfect) defmition across countries. As one might

expect given differences in the defmition of secondary schooling in the UNESCO data, the
reliability of the secondary and higher schooling (.72) is lower than the reliability of all years of
schooling.

Lastly, it should be noted that the measurement errors in schooling are highly serially
correlated in the Barro-Lee data. This can be seen from the fact that the correlation between the
1965 and 1985 schooling levels across countries is .97 in the Barro-Lee data, while less than 90

percent of the variations in the cross-sectional data across countries appear to represent true

signal. If the reliability ratios reported in Table 2 are correct, the only way the time-series
correlation in education could be so high is if the errors are serially correlated. The correlation
of the errors can be estimated as:

[cov(Sg5,SL6)_cov(5B ,S )]/[(1_RBt)var(s35)(1_R65)var(58L65)] 1/2,

where the superscript BL stands for Barro-Lee's data and K for Kyriacou's data. Using the

reliability ratios in Table 2, the estimated correlation of the errors in Barro-Lee's schooling
measure between 1965 and 1985 is .61. The correlation between true schooling in 1965 and 1985

24

is estimated at 9721

Since

the serial correlation of true schooling is higher than the serial

correlation of the errors, the reliability of the first-differenced education data is lower than the
reliability of the cross-sectional data.

3.3 Additional Growth Models
Measurement errors aside, one could question whether physical capital should be included

in a GDP growth equation because it is potentially an endogenous variable. Fast growing
countries have more access to capital (Blomstrom, Lipsey, and Zejan, 1993). Additionally,
considerations of the low signal in schooling changes conditional on capital growth, and the
mechanical correlation between measured capital and GDP (since capital is typically derived from

investment), lead us to prefer parsimonious models that omit capital. Barro (1997) also excludes

capital, so there is precedent for a parsimonious specification in the growth literature. We first

report models without controlling for capital, and then focus on the effect of capital in longdifference models in Section 3.6.

Table 3 reports "stylized" macro growth models without controlling for physical capital
for samples spanning 5, 10 or 20 year periods. The dependent variable is the annualized change

in the log of real GDP per capita per year based on Sununers and Heston's (1991) Penn World
Tables, Mark 5:6. Results are generally similar if GDP per worker is used instead. We use GDP
per capita because it reflects labor force participation decisions and because it has been the focus

of much of the previous literature. The schooling variable is Barro and Lee's measure of average

21We estimate the serial correlation between true schooling levels in 1985 and 1965 using the formula: P5. =
[cov(SB5,S)cov(SB,S1<)fcov(s8L,,sK)cov(sBLsK)] 1/2

25

years of schooling for the population age 25 and older. When the change in average schooling
is included as a regressor in these models, we divide it by the number of years in the time span

so the coefficients are comparable across columns. The equations were estimated by OLS, but

the standard errors reported in the table allow for a country-specific component in the error
term.22 We exclude other variables (e.g., rule of law index) that are sometimes included in macro

growth models to focus on education, and because those other variables are probably influenced

themselves by educationY
Our fmdings confirm the results in Topel (1999). The change in schooling has little effect

on GDP growth when the growth equation is estimated with high frequency changes (i.e., S

years). However, increases in average years of schooling have a positive and statistically
significant effect on economic growth over periods of 10 or 20 years. The magnitude of the
coefficient estimates on both the change and initial level of schooling over long periodsare large,

probably too large to represent the causal effect of schooling.
The fmding that the time span matters so much for the change in education suggests that
measurement error in schooling influences these estimates. Over short time periods, there is little
change in a nation's true mean schooling level, so the transitory component of measurement error

in schooling would be large relative to variability in the true change. Over longer periods, true
education levels are more likely to change, increasing the signal relative to the noise in measured

An alternative approach would be to estimate a restricted seemingly unrelated system or random effects model.
Absent measurement error, these estimators are more efficient. But because bias due to measurementerrors in the
explanatory variables is exacerbated with these estimators, we elected to estimate the parameters by OLS andreport
robust standard errors.
231f we control for the initial fertility rate, the education variable becomes much weaker and insignificant. See
Krueger and Lindahl (1999).

26

changes. Measurement error bias appears to be greater over the 5 and 10 year horizons, but it

is still substantial over 20 years. Since the change in schooling and initial level of GDP are
essentially uncorrelated, the coefficient on the 20-year change in schooling in column 8 is biased
downward by a factor of l-RAS, which is around 40 percent according to Table 2. Thus, adjusting

for measurement error would lead the coefficient on the change in education to increase from .18

to .30 = .18/(1-.4). This is an enormous return to investment in schooling, equal to three or four
times the private return to schooling estimated within most countries. The large coefficient on
schooling suggests the existence of quite large externalities from educational changes (Lucas,

1988) or simultaneous causality in which growth causes greater educational attainment. It is
plausible that simultaneity bias is greater over longer time intervals, so some combination of
varying measurement error bias and simultaneity bias could account for the time pattern of results

displayed in Table 3.
Like Benhabib and Spiegel, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) conclude that contemporaneous

changes in schooling do not contribute to economic growth. There are four reasons to doubt their

conclusion, however. First, Barro and Sala-i-Martin analyze a mixed sample that combines
changes over both 5-year (1985-90) and 10-year (1965-75 and 1975-85) periods; examining
changes over such short periods tends to exacerbate the downward bias due to measurement
errors. Second, they examine changes in average years of secondary and higher schooling. As
was shown in Table 2, the cross-sectional reliability of secondary and higher schooling is lower
than the reliability of all years of schooling, and the changes are likely to be less reliableas well.

Third, they include separate variables for changes in male and female years of secondary and

higher schooling. These two variables are highly correlated (r= .85), which would exacerbate

27
measurement error problems if the signal in the variables is more highly correlated than the noise.

If average years of secondary and higher schooling for men and women combined, or years of
secondary and higher schooling for either men or women, is used instead of all years of schooling

in the 10-year change model in column 6 of Table 3, the change in education has a sizable,
statistically significant effect. Fourth, they estimate a restricted Seemingly Unrelated Regression

(SUR) system, which exacerbates measurement error bias because asymptotically this estimator
is equivalent to a weighted average of an OLS and fixed-effects estimator.

Barro (1997) stresses the importance of male, secondary and higher education as a
determinant of GDP growth. In his analysis, female secondary and higher education is negatively

related to growth. We have explored the sensitivity of the estimates to using different measures
of education: namely, primary versus higher education, and male versus female education. When

we test for different effects of years of primary and secondary and higher schooling in the model
in colunm 6 of Table 3, we cannot reject that all years of schooling have the same effect on GDP

growth (p-value equals .40 for initial levels and .12 for changes). We also find insignificant
differences between primary and secondary schooling if we just use male schooling. We do find

significant differences if we further disaggregate schooling levels by gender, however. The initial

level of primary schooling has a positive effect for women and a negative effect for men, the
initial level of secondary school has a negative effect for women and a positive effect for men, the

change in primary schooling has a positive effect for women and a negative effect formen, and
the change in secondary schooling has a negative effect for women and a positive effect for men.
Caselli, Esquivel and Lefort (1996) also examine the differential effect of male and female

education on growth over five year intervals. They estimate a fixed effects variant of equation

28

(6), and instrument for initial education and GDP with their lags. Contrary to Barro, they find

that female education has a positive and statistically significant effect on growth, while male
education has a negative and statistically significant effect. This result appears to stem from the
introduction of fixed effects: if we estimate the model with fixed effects bitt withoutinstrumenting

for education, we find the same gender pattern, whereas if we estimate the model without fixed
effects and instrument with lags the results are similar to Barro 's. Although country fixed effects

arguably belong in the growth equation, it is particularly difficult to untangle any differential

effects of male and female education in such a specification because measurement error is

exacerbated.24 But Caselli, Esquivel and Lefort's findings are consistent with the microeconometric literature, which fmds education has a higher return for women thanmen.
We conclude that because schooling levels are highly correlated for men and women, one

needs to be cautious interpreting the effect of education in models that disaggregate educationby
gender and level of schooling. For this reason, and because the total number ofyears of education

is the variable specified in the Mincer model, we have a preference for using the average of all
years of schooling for men and women combined in our econometric analysis.

3.4 Initial Level of Education
The effect of the initial level of education on growth has been widely interpreted as an
indication of large externalities from the stock of a nation's human capital on growth. Benhabib

and Spiegel (1994; p. 160), for example, conclude, "The results suggest that the role of human

24Note that instrumenting with lagged education does not solve the measurement error problem because we fmd
that measurement errors in education are highly correlated over time.

29
capital is indeed one of facilitating adoption of technology from abroad and creation of appropriate

domestic technologies rather than entering on its own as a factor of production." And Barro
(1997, p. 19) observes, "On impact, an extra year of male upper-level schooling is therefore
estimated to raise the growth rate by a substantial 1.2 percentage points per year." Topel (1999),
however, argues that "the magnitude of the effect of education on growth is vastly too large to be

interpreted as a causal force." Indeed, Topel calculates that the present value of a one percentage
point faster growth rate from an additional year of schooling would be about four times the cost,
with a 5 percent real discount rate. He concludes that externalities from schooling
may exist, but

they are unlikely to be so large. One possibility -- which we explore and end up rejecting -- is
that level of schooling is spuriously reflecting the effect of the change in schooling on growth.

Countries with higher initial levels of schooling tended to have larger increases in
schooling over the next 10 or 20 years in Barro and Lee's data, which is remarkable given that
measurement error in schooling will induce a negative covariance between the change and initial
level of schooling. We initially suspected that the base level of schooling spuriously picks up the

effect of schooling increases, either because schooling changes are excluded from the growth
equation or because the included variable is noisy. The following calculations make clear that this

is unlikely, however.
To proceed, it is convenient to write the cross-country growth equation as:

(7) A Y =

+ 1S1 + 32S +

where asterisks signify the correctly measured initial and ending schooling variables, and

we have

30

suppressed the country j subscript.25 We have also ignored covariates, but they could easily be
'pre-regressed out" in what follows. If all that matters for growth is the change in schooling, we

would fmd ft = -132. A test of whether the initial level of schooling has an independent, positive
effect on growth conditional on the change in schooling turns on whether 131+132>0.

In practice, equation (7) is estimated with noisy measures of schooling that have serially

correlated errors, as previously documented. Under the assumption of serially correlated but
otherwise classical measurement errors, it can be shown that the limit of the coefficient on initial
schooling is:
o

(8)

plim b1 =
1 —r

2

n
"s cov(S-I,S)t
131 + ______
p
1 —r

2

var(S1)

where R1 and R51 are the reliability ratios for S1 and S, r is the correlation between

and S,

and A =cov(S*1 1,S*j/cov(S t45) is less than one if the measurement errors are positively
correlated. An analogous equation holds for b2. Some algebra establishes that the sum b1+b2 has

probability limit:

(9)

R (1 iTñ+ArOIJ—r)

plim(b1 +b2)=131 '

1,2

P2

R5(1 —1Jf'r)+Xr(*'—r)
1—r2

where 4i = var(Sjfvar(S1).
Notice that if the variance in the measurement errors and the variance in true schooling
are constant, then:

Notice that the scaling differs here from that in Table 1 and 3: namely, we do not divide any explanatory variable
by the number of years in the period in Table 4.

31

(10)

plun (b1 + b2) = (j3 +

R+Ar
______
1 +,'

where R5 is the time-invariant reliability ratio of the schooling data.26 Since (R5 + Xr)I(1 +
r)

is bounded by zero and one, in this case the sum of the coefficients is necessarily attenuated

toward zero, so we would underestimate the effect of the initial level of education. Hence,

measurement error in schooling is unlikely to drive the significance of the initial effect of
education.

Table 4 presents estimates of equation (7) over 5, 10 and 20 year periods. The bottom of

the table reports b1 + b2, as well as the measurement-error-corrected estimate of

b1 + b2.

We estimated the numerator of A using the covariance between the 1990 WVS data and lagged
Barro-Lee data (either 5, 10 or 20 year lags), and we estimated R5 from the WVS data as well.27
Over each time interval, the results indicate that the negative coefficient on initial education is not

as large in magnitude as the positive coefficient on second-period education, consistent with our

earlier finding that the initial level has a positive effect on growth conditional on the change in

education. Moreover, the correction for measurement error tends to raise b1 +b2 by .0004 to
.0021 log points.

Finally, as an alternative approach to the measurement error problem, in columns 7 and

26Griliches (1986) derives the corresponding formula if measurement errors are serially uncorrelated.
27th models that include initial GOP, we first remove the effect of initial GOP beforecalculating R511, R5 and A.
In the models without initial GOP, we assume R5,1 = R.

32

8 we use Kyriacou' s schooling measures as instruments for Barro and Lee's schooling data 28 If

the measurement errors in the two data sets are uncorrelated, one set of measures can be used as

an instrument for the other. Although the IV model can only be estimated for a subset of
countries, these results also suggest that measurement error in schooling is not responsible for the

positive effect of the initial level of schooling on economic growth.29 Moreover, if Barro and
Lee's data are used to instrument for Kyriacous data in this equation, the sum of the schooling
coefficients in column (8) nearly doubles.

3.5 Measurement Error in GDP
Another possibility is that transitory measurement errors in GDP explain why initial
schooling matters in the growth equation. Intuitively, this would work as follows: If a country
has a low level of education for its measured GDP, it is likely that its true GDP is less than its

measured GDP. If the error in GDP is transitory, then subsequent GDP growth will appear
particularly strong for such a country because the negative error in the GDP is unlikely to repeat

in the second period. One indication that this may contribute to the strong effect of the level of
education comes from including second period GDP instead of initial GDP in the growth equation.

In this situation, measurement errors in GDP would be expected to have the opposite effect on the

initial level of education. Md indeed, if second period GDP is included instead of initial GDP

28Sometimes the growth literature uses lagged variables as instruments. Since themeasurement errors are highly
serially correlated in education (and other variables), this is unlikely to completely solve measurement error problems.

291f the model in column (8) is estimated by OLS with the subsample of 67 countries, the results are virtually
identical to those for the full sample in column (6).

33

in the model in column (7) of Table 3, the coefficient on initial education becomes negative and
statistically insignificant.

For two reasons, however, we conclude that measurement error in GDP is unlikely to
drive the significant effect of the initial schooling variable. First, in Table 3 and Table 4 it is
clear that the initial level of education has a significant effect even when initial GDP is not held
constant. Second, using the WVS, we calculated the reliability of the Summers and Heston GDP

data for 1990. Specifically, to estimate the reliability of log GDP, R, we regressed the log of
real income per person in the WVS on the log of real GDP per capita in the Summers and Heston

data. The resulting coefficient was .92 (t-ratio= 12.3), indicating substantial signal. Both
measures were deflated by the same PPP measure in these calculations, which may inflate the
reliability estimate, but if we add log PPP as an additional explanatory variable to the regression
the reliability of the GDP data is .89 (t-ratio= 11.9). Although the WVS income data neglect non-

household income and these estimates are based on just 17 countries, the results indicate that
Summers and Heston s data convey a fair amount of signal, and that the errors in GDP are highly

serially correlated. If we assume that R is .92 and the serial correlation in the errors is .5, the
coefficient on initial education in the 10-year GDP growth equation would be biased upward by
about a third.3°

30With constant variances, the limit of the coefficient on initial log GDP is R( - (1-R)(1-r), where R, is the
reliability of log GDP, 3 is the population regression coefficient with correctly-measured GD!', and r is the serial
correlation in the measurement errors. To estimate the effect of measurement error in GD!' on the schooling
coefficient, we constrained the coefficient on initial GDP to equal {b + (l-R)(l-r)}/R, where b is the coefficient
on initial GD!' obtained by OLS without correcting for measurement error, and re-estimated the growthequation.

34

3.6 The Effect of Physical Capital
The level and growth rate of capital are natural control variables to include in the GDP
growth regressions. First, initial log GDP can be substituted for capital in a Solow growth model
only if capital s share is constant over time and across countries (e.g., a Cobb-Douglas production

function). Second, and more importantly for our purposes, capital-skill complementarity would

imply that some of the increased output attributed to higher education in Table 3 should be
attributed to increased capital (see, e.g., Goldin and Katz, 1997 on capital-skill complementarity).
As mentioned earlier, however, systematic correlation between measurement errors in capital and

GDP, as well as endogeneity of capital, are reasons to be wary about including the growth of

capital in a GDP equation. Here we examine the robustness of our results to controlling for
physical capital.
Column (1) of Tables reports an estimate of the same 20-year growth model as in column

9 of Table 3, augmented to include the growth of capital per worker. We use Klenow and
Rodriguez-Clare's (1997) capital data because they appear to have more signal than Benhabib and
Spiegel's capital data •31 The coefficient on the change in education falls by more than 50
percent

when capital growth is included, although it remains barely statistically significant at the .10 level.

In colunm (2) we add the initial log capital per worker, and in column(3) exclude the initial log
capital from the column (2) specification. Including initial log capital drives the coefficienton the
change in schooling to close to zero. Notice also that the log of initial capital per worker has little

31A regression of Benhabib and Spiegel's change in log capital on the corresponding variable from Klenow and
Rodriguez-dare yields a regression coefficient (and standard error) of .95 (.065). The reverse regression yields a
coefficient of .69 (.05). Hence, Kienow and Rodriguez-dare's measureappears to have a high signal-to-noise ratio.

35

effect in columns (2) and (3).32 The growth of capital per worker has an enormous effect on GDP

growth. With Cobb-Douglas technology and competitive factor markets, the coefficient on the
growth in capital in Table 5 would equal capital's share; instead, the coefficient is at least double

capital's share in most countries (see (3ollth, 1998). This finding is consistent with the errors in

capital being systematically related to GDP, since both are functions of investment. To explore
the sensitivity of the results, in column (4) we constrain the coefficient on the growth incapital
to equal 0.35, which is on the high end of the distribution of non-labor's share around the world.

These results indicate that both the change and initial level of schooling are associated with
economic growth.

Moreover, the coefficient on the change in education is similar to

microeconometric estimates.

As mentioned earlier, including capital could exacerbate the measurement error in
schooling. Indeed, we fmd that the reliability of Barro-Lee's 20-year change in schooling data
falls from .58 to .46 once we condition on the change in capital, suggesting that the coefficient
on the change in schooling in columns 1-3 of Table 5 should be roughly doubled.33 In column

(5), to try to overcome measurement error we estimate the growth equation by instrumental
variables, using Kyriacous schooling data as excluded instruments for the change and level of

schooling. This is the same estimation strategy previously used by Pritchett (1998), but we

321f the change in log capital per work is dropped from the model in column (3), then initiallog capital per worker
does have a statistically significant, negative effect, and the schooling coefficients are similar to those in column9
of Table 3.

33Temple (1999b) fmds that eliminating observations with large residuals causes the coefficient on thegrowth in
education in Benhabib and Spiegel's data to rise and become statistically significant, conditional on the growth in
capital. We find a similar result with Benhabib and Spiegel's data, although similarly eliminating outliers has little
effect on the results in Table 5 which use the Barro and Lee education data.

36

employ different schooling data as instruments, and use a different measure of capital.
Unfortunately, because there is so little signal in education conditional on capital, the IV results

yield a huge standard error (.167). Pritchett similarly fmds a large standard errors from his IV
estimates, although his point estimates are negativeYt One final point on these estimates is that,
to be companble to the Mincerian return to schooling, the coefficient on the change in education

should be divided by labor's share if the aggregate production function is Cobb-Douglas and
human capital is an exponential function of schooling. This would raise the cross-country estimate

of the return to schooling even further.
We draw four main lessons from this investigation of the role of capital. First, the change

in capital has an enormous effect in a GDP growth equation, probably because ofa mechanical
relationship between the errors in measuring capital and GDP or reverse causality. Second, the
impact of both the level and change in schooling on economic growth is sensitive to whether the
change in capital is included in the growth equation nc1 allowed to have a coefficient that greatly

exceeds capital's share. Third, controlling for capital exacerbates measurementerror problems

in schooling. Instrumental variables estimates designed to correct for measurement error in

schooling yield such a large standard error on the change in schooling that the results are
consistent with schooling changes having no effect on growth or a large effect on growth. Fourth,

when the coefficient on capital growth is constrained to equal a plausible value, changes in years

of schooling are positively related to economic growth. Overall, unless measurement error
problems in schooling and capital are overcome, we doubt the cross-country growth equations that

34Aside from the different data sources, the difference between our IV results and Pritchett's appears to result from
his use of log schooling changes. If we use log schooling changes, we also find negative point estimates.

37

control for capital growth will be very informative insofar as the benefit of education is
concerned.

4. Less Restrictive Macro Growth Model

The macro growth equations impose the restriction that all countries have the same
relationship between growth and initial education, and that the relationship is linear. The first

assumption is particularly worrisome because the micro evidence indicates that the return to
schooling varies considerably across countries, and even across regions within countries. For
example, institutional factors that compress the wage structure in some countries result in lower

returns to schooling in those countries (see, e.g., the essays in Freeman and Katz, 1995).
Moreover, one might expect externalities from education to be greater in countries where the
private return is depressed below the world market level. Thus, we first allow the effect of the

stock of education on growth to vary by country. Next, we examine the effect of the linearity

assumption. Both of these extensions to the standard growth specification suggest that the
constrained specification estimated in the literature should be viewed with caution; qualitatively

different results are obtained when the constraints are relaxed.

4.1 Heterogeneous Country Effects of Education
Consider the following variable-coefficient version of the macro growth equation:

(11) AY =

P0 + P1Sj.1

+

where we allow each country to have a separate schooling coefficient

(P1) and ignore other

covariates. If there is more than one observation per country, equation (11) can be estimated by

38

interacting education with a set of dummy variables indicating each country. It is instructive to

note that the coefficient on education (b1) estimated from the restricted OLS model with a
homogenous education slope can be written as a weighted avenge of the country-specific slopes:

(12)

=z

= •,, (S-S)2_—
E1,,_1

—S)2

where the weights are the country-specific contributions to the variance in schooling. Of

course,

if the assumptions of the constant-coefficient model hold (and the other Gauss-Markov
assumptions hold), the wj weights are the most efficient weights. But if a variable-coefficient

model is more appropriate, there is no a priori reason to prefer the OLS weights over other
weights. Indeed, it is rather odd to weight the country-specific slopes by the OLS weights if the
slopes differ across countries. Probably a more relevant single estimate would be the unweightedaverage coefficient, which represents the expected value of the education coefficient for countries

in the world. Lastly, notice that if equation (11) is augmented to include covariates thesimple
weighted avenge interpretation of the constant-coefficient model in (12) does not apply, but the
average of the country-specific coefficients is still informative.35

Table 6 summarizes estimates of a variable-coefficient model using 5-year and 10-year
changes in GDP. Panel A reports results of regressing GDP growth on average years of schooling

for the population age 25 and older, initial GDP and time dummies. Columns 1 and 3 report the

351f country fixed effects are included as covariates in equation (11), however, the OLSconstant coefficient can
still be decomposed as a weighted average of the country-specific coefficients even if thereare other covariates. But
we exclude country fixed effects so that these estimates are comparable to the earlier ones, and because including fixed
effects would exacerbate measurement error bias.

39

constant-coefficient model, whereas columns 2 and 4 report the mean of the country-specific
education coefficients. The constant education slope assumption is overwhelmingly rejected by

the data for each time period (p-value C 0.0001). Indeed, the R2 of the equations more than
doubles when the education slopes are unconstrained. Of more consequence, the average slope
coefficient is negative, though not statistically significant, in the variable-coefficient model. These

results cast doubt on the interpretation of initial education in the constrained macro growth
equation common in the literature.

Panel B of Table 6 reports results in which average years of secondary and higher

schooling for males is used instead of average years of all education for the entire adult
population. This variable has been emphasized as a key determinant of economic growth in
Barro' s work. Again, however, the results of the constant-coefficient model are qualitatively

different than those of the variable-coefficient model. Indeed, for the average country in the
sample, a greater initial level of secondary and higher education has a statistically significant,
negative association with economic growth over the ensuing 10 years.

The estimates reported in Table 6 exclude the change in education to focus on the effect

of the initial stock of education. We have, however, experimented with a variable-coefficient
model for the 10-year change in education variable. These estimates were quite fragile. For
example, if we regress annual GDP growth over ten years on a set of interactions between the 10-

year change in education and country dummies, the initial log of GDP per capita, and time
dummies, the average coefficient for the change in education interactions is negative. But if we
also include a set of interactions between initial education and country dummies in this model, the

average coefficient on the change in education swells to .18, and the avenge coefficient on initial

40

education is negative. Since the latter model uses three observations to estimate two parameters

for each country, we are reluctant to stress these results.

It is clear from Table 6 that education has a heterogenous effect on economic growth
across countries. What bearing does this result have on the convergence• literature? Lee, Pesaran

and Smith (1998) show that country heterogeneity in technological progress that is assumed
homogeneous across countries in a fixed-effects model with a lagged dependent variable will

generate a spurious correlation between the lagged dependent variable and the error term. A
similar result will follow if heterogeneous education coefficients are constrained to equal a
constant coefficient, so we would regard the convergence coefficient with some caution since it

depends on controlling for S. Nonetheless, it is worth emphasizing that we still obtain a
negative average coefficient on education if we drop initial GDP from the variable-coefficient
model. Because we are interested in understanding the role of education in economic growth, we

do not pursue the convergence issue further, but we think the results of the variable-coefficient
model reinforce Lee, Pesaran, and Smith's skeptical interpretation of the conventional estimate
of the convergence parameter.

4.2 The Importance of Linearity
It is common in the empirical growth literature to assume that initial education has a linear

effect on subsequent GDP growth. Although Mincer (1974) provides conditions under which
education has a linear relationship with log earnings, these conditions do not necessarily imply
that the level of initial education has a linear relationship with income growth. The impact of the

linearity assumption has not been rigorously tested in growth models. As a first approach to test

41

this assumption, we created a set of dummy variables which indicated whether each country's
initial average years of education fell in the 0-1 range, 1-2 range, 2-3 range, and so on. We then
included these dummies in lieu of linear education in the growth regression in colunm (4) of Table

3. Figure 2 displays the dummy coefficients (i.e., the unrestricted relationship) and the estimated
linear relationship between GDP growth and education. The education-CiDP growth relationship

appears upward sloping at low levels of education, then plateaus between 4 and 8 years of
education, and becomes downward sloping above 8 years of education.
The increment to GDP growth at each level of average education is shown on the bottom

of Figure 2 (i.e., change in the unrestricted relationship). Loosely speaking, the OLS regression

coefficient estimate for education in the linear specification can be thought ofas a weighted
average of the slope increments at each level of education.36 The OLS estimate places more

weight on the slope increment at a particular schooling level if: (1) there is a greater gap in
average years of schooling between countries above and below that schooling level; (2) the
schooling level is close to the median schooling level. Figure 3A displays the weights applied to

the increments by OLS for the linear specification in a model without other covariates. For
comparison, Figures 3B and 3C show histograms of years of schooling for all countries and for

OECD countries.
As in the previous subsection, the OLS weighting scheme is optimal if there is a constant
slope at each schooling level. But if the relationship is not linear over the range of schooling, the
OLS weights may distort the relationship, and other weighting schemes may be more appropriate.
36This discussion is only approximate for two reasons. First, average years of education is not a categorical
variable; we have transformed it to one. Second, if there are covariates, the relationship is more complicated. For
more details, see Yitzhaki (1996) and Angrist and Krueger (1999).

42

For example, it seems natural to weight the increments by the distribution of schooling for
countries in the world. Alternatively, we could weight by the OECD 's distribution of education.
The weighted slope is greater than the OLS slope if the distribution of education throughout the
world is used to weight the increments in Figure 2, whereas the average slope becomes negative

if the OECD distribution of education is used as weights.

An alternative, simpler approach to explore the impact of linearity is to estimate a
nonlinear function of education. Specifically, we included initial education and its square in the

model in colunm 4 of Table 3. The data seem to prefer a quadratic specification, as the square
term is statistically significant.37 More importantly, the relationship is inverted-U shaped, with
a peak at 7.5 years of education. Since the mean education level for OECD countries in 1990 was

8.4 years in Barro and Lee's data, the average OECD country is on the downward-sloping
segment of the education-growth profile. We similarly fmd an inverted-U shaped relationship

between education and GDP growth which peaks below the level of education of developed
countries when we examine 5 and 20 year changes in GDP, or male upper secondary schooling.38

These fmdings underscore W. Arthur Lewis's (1964) observation that, "it is not possible to draw

a simple straight line relating secondary education to economic growth.

37See Krueger and Lindahl (1999).

38Although these findings may appear surprising in light of the macro growth literature, they are consistent with
results in Barro (1997; Table 1.1, column 1). In particular, the interaction between maleupper-secondaiy education
and log GDP has a negative effect on growth, and the results imply the effect of schooling on growth becomes
negative for countries whose GDP exceeds the average by 1.9 log units.

43

5. Conclusion
The micro and macro literatures both emphasize the role of education in income growth.
An accumulation of research using individual-level education and income data since thebeginning

of the 20th century provides robust evidence of a substantial payoff to investment in education,
especially for those who traditionally complete low levels of schooling. From the micro evidence,

it is unclear whether the social return to schooling exceeds the private return, although available

evidence suggests that positive externalities in the form of reduced crime and reduced welfare
participation are more likely to be reaped from investments in disadvantaged than advantaged

groups (e.g., Heckman and Klenow, 1997). The macroeconomic evidence of externalities in
terms of technological progress from investments in higher education seems to us more fragile,
resulting from imposing constant-coefficient and linearity restrictions that are rejected by the data.

Our findings also help resolve an important inconsistency between the micro and macro
literatures on education: Contrary to Benhabib and Spiegel's (1994) and Barro andSala-i-Martin's

(1995) conclusions, the cross-country regressions indicate that the change in education is
positively associated with economic growth once measurement error in education is accounted for.

Indeed, after adjusting for measurement error, the change in average years of schooling often has
a greater effect in the cross-country regressions than in the within-country micro regressions. The

larger return to schooling found in the cross-country models suggests that reverse causality or
omitted variables create problems at the country level of analysis, or that increases in average
educational attainment generate nationwide externalities. Although the microeconometricevidence

in several countries suggests that within countries the causal effect of education on earnings can

be estimated reasonably well by taking education as exogenous, it does not follow that cross-

44

country differences in education can be taken as a cause of income as opposed to a result of
current income or anticipated income growth. Moreover, countries that improve their educational
systems are likely to concurrentiy change other policies that enhance growth, possibly producing

a different source of omitted-variable bias in cross-country analyses.

Education, as Harbison and Myers (1965) stress, "is both the seed and the flower of
economic development." It is difficult to separate the causal effect of education from the positive

income demand for education in cross-country data. Mankiw (1997) describes the presumed

exogeneity of school enrollment as the 'weak link" in the empirical growth literature. In our
opinion, this link is unlikely to be strengthened unless researchers can identify natural experiments

in schooling attainment similar to those that have been exploited in the microeconometric
literature, and unless measurement errors in the cross-country data are explicitly taken into
account in the econometric modelling. In view of the difficulties in obtaining accurate countrylevel data on changes in educational attainment, it might be preferrable to examine growth across

regions of countries with reliable data. Acemoglu and Angrist (1999), who look across U.S.
states, and Moretti (1998), who looks across U.S. citites, provide good starts down this path,
although they reach conflicting conclusions regarding any deviation between the social and private

returns to education.

45

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist, "How Large are the Social Returns to Education?
Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws," mimeo, MIT, September 17, 1999.

Aghion, Phillippe, and Howitt, Peter. Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1998.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Alan B. Krueger, "Jackknife Instrumental
Variables Estimation," Journal of Anolied Econometrics, January-February 1999.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, "Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?," Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, 106(4), November 1991, pp. 9791014.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, "Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics," in
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, (Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1999).

Ashenfelter, Orley A., Colm Hannon and Hessel Oosterbeek, mimeo., "Empirical Estimation of
the Schooling/Earnings Relationship — A Review," forthcoming Labour Economics, 1999.
Ashenfelter, Orley A. and Alan B. Krueger, "Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
from aNew Sample of Twins," American Economic Review, 84(5), December 1994, pp. 115773.

Barnett, W. Steven, 'Benefits of Compensatory Preschool Education," Journal of Human
Resources 27(2), Spring 1992, pp. 279-312.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995).
Barro, Robert J., Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Emnirical Study, Lionel
Robbins Lectures, (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997).
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, "International Comparisons of Educational Attainment,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 32(3), December 1993, pp. 363-394.
Behnnan, Jere and Mark Rosensweig, "Caveat Emptor: Cross-country Data on Education and the
Labor Force," Journal of Develoument Economics 44, June 1994, pp. 147-72.
Behrman, Jere and Mark Rosensweig, "Adult Schooling Stocks: Comparisons Among Aggregate
Data Series," mimeo., University of Pennsylvania, July 19, 1993.

46
Benhabib, J. and Spiegel, M., "The Role of Human Capital in Economic Development: Evidence
from Aggregate Cross-Country Data", Journal of Monetary Economics, 34(2), October 1994,
pp.143-74.
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, "Does Schooling Cause Growth or the Other Way Around?"
NBER Working Paper 6393, 1998.
Blaug, Mark, Richard Layard and Maureen Woodhall, The Causes of Graduate Unemployment
in India (London: Allen Lane, Penguin Press, 1969).
Blomstrom, M., R. Lipsey, and M. Zejan, "Is Fixed Investment the Key to Economic Growth,"
NBER Working Paper No. 4436, Cambridge, MA, 1993.
Bound, John, David Jaeger and Regina Baker, "Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation
When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory Variable is
Weak," Journal of the American statistical Association, 90(430), June 1995,pp. 443-50.
Card, David, "Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Returns to
Schooling," in L. Christofides, E. Grant, and R. Swidinsky, eds., Asoects of Labor Market
Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1995a), pp. 201-222.
Card, David, "Earnings, Schooling and Ability Revisited," in Solomon W. Polachek, cd.,
Research in Labor Economics. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1995b).
Card, David, "The Causal Effect of Schooling on Earnings," Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
cds., Handbook of Labor Economics (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999).
Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, "Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States", Journal of Political economy. 100(1),
February 1992, pp. 1-40.
Chamberlain, Gary and Guido Imbens, "Hierarchical Bayes Models with Many Instrumental
Variables," mimeo., Cambridge, MA, Harvard University, August 1996.
Dale, Stacy and Alan Krueger, "The Payoff to Attending a More Selective College: An
Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables," Princeton University, Industrial
Relation Section, Working Paper No. 409, 1998.
Donald, Steven and Whitney Newey, "Choosing the Number of Instruments," MIT, mimeo.,
1997.
Duflo, Esther, "Evaluating the Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of a School

47
Construction Program: An Analysis of the Indonesian experience," mimeo., MIT, February 1998.
Entwisle, Doris, Karl Alexander, Linda Olson, Children. Schools and Inequality (Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1997).
Freeman, Richard and Lawrence Katz, eds., Differences and changes in wage structures (Chicago
and London: University of Chicago Press, 1995), pp.25-66.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz, "The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity,"
NBER Working Paper No. 5657, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gollin, Douglas, "Getting Income Shares Right: Self Employment, Unincorporated Enterprise,
And the Cobb-Douglas Hypothesis," mimeo., Williams College, June 1998.
Gorseline, Donald E., The Effect of Schooling Upon Income (Bloomington, IN: University of
Indiana Press, 1932).
Griliehes, Zvi, "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,"
Econometrica, 45(1), January 1977, pp. 1-22.
Griliches, Zvi, "Economic Data Issues," in Zvi Griliches and Michael D. Intriligator, eds.,
Handbook of Econometrics (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986).
Griliches, Zvi and William M. Mason "Education, Income, and Ability," Journal of Political
Economy, 80(3), Part II, May/June 1972, pp. 574-S 103.
Hall, Robert and Charles I. Jones, "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
Worker than Others?" Forthcoming, Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 1998.
Harberger, Arnold, "Investment in Men Versus Investment in Machines: The Case of India," in
C. Arnold Anderson and Mary Jean Bowman, eds., Education and EconomicDevelopment
(Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co., 1965), pp. 11-50.
Harbison, Frederick, and Charles Myers, eds., Manpower and Education (New York: McGrawHill Book Company, 1965), p. xi.
Harmon, Coim and Ian Walker, "Estimates of the Economic return to Schooling for the United
kingdom," American Economic Review, 85(5), December 1995, pp. 1278-86.

Heckrnan, James and Peter Kienow, "Human Capital Policy," mimeo., University ofChicago,
December 1997.
Inglehart, Ronald, Codebook for World Values Survey (Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social

48

Research 1994).
Kienow, Peter, and Andrés Rodriguez-Clare, "The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
Has it Gone Too Far?' In Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), pp. 73-103.

Krueger, Alan B., 'Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions," Onarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1999.
Krueger, Alan B. and Mikael Lindahi, "Education for Growth in Sweden and the World,"
Swedish Economic Policy Review, Autumn 1999, vol. 6, pp. 289-339.
Krueger, Alan B. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke "A Comparative Analysis of East and West German
Labor Markets: Before and After Unification," in Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz, eds.,
Differences and changes in wage structures. (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
1995), pp. 405-45.
Kyriacou, G., "Level and Growth Effects of Human Capital", Working Paper, C.V. Starr Center,
New York University. 1991.

Lang, Kevin "Ability Bias, Discount Rate Bias and the Return to Education," mimeo., Boston
University, Department of Economics, 1993.
Lee, Kevin, M. flashem Pesaran, and Ron Smith, "Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach --

A Comment," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (1), February 1998, pp. 3 19-324.

Levy, Frank and Richard Murnane, "Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A Review
of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations," Journal of Economic Literature (30) (3),
September 1992, pp. 1333-81.
Lewis, W. Arthur, "Secondary Education and Economic Structure," Social and Economic
Studies, 10(2), 1964, pp. 219-232. Reprinted in Mark Gersovitz, ed., Selected Economic
Writin2s of W. Arthur Lewis (New York: New York University Press, 1983), pp. 509-522.
Lucas, Robert, "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary Economics
220), July 1988, pp. 3-42.
Machiup, Fritz, Education and Economic Growth (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press,
1970).

Mankiw, N.G., "Comment," in Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), pp. 103-106.

49
Mankiw, N.G., David Romer and D.M. Weil, "A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
Growth," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), May 1992, pp. 407-43 7.

Miller, Herman P., Income of the American Peonle (Washington, DC: United States Government
Printing Office, 1955).
Mincer, Jacob, Schooling. Earnings. and Exoerience (New York: Columbia University Press,
1974).

Moretti, Enrico, "Social returns to Education and Human Capital Externalities: Evidence from
Cities," mimeo, UC Berkeley, December 1998.
Murphy, Kevin M and Finis Welch, "Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles," Journal of Labor
Economics, 8(2), April 1990, Pp. 202-229.
Nelson, R. and E. Phelps, "Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion, and Economic
Growth," American Economic Review, 560, 1966, pp. 69-75.

O'Neill, Donal. "Education and Income Growth: Implications for Cross-Country Inequality,"
Journal of Political Economy, 103, no 6, December 1995, pp. 1289-1301.
Park, Jin Huem. "Returns to Schooling: A Peculiar Deviation from Linearity," Princeton
University, Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 335, October 1994.

Pritchett, Lant. "Where Has All the Education Gone?" Policy Research Working Paper No.
1581, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., June 1997.
Psacharopoulos, G., "Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update", World
Development, 22(9), September 1994, pp.1325-43.
Rivkin, Steven Eric Hanushek, and John Kain, "Teachers, Schools and Academic Achievement,"
mimeo., University of Rochester, July 1998.
Romer, Paul, "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 89 (
5), Part 2, October 1990, pp. S71-S102.
Rosen, Sherwin, "Human Capital: A Survey of Empirical Research," in R. Ehrenberg, ed.,
Research in Labor Economics, (Greenwich, Conn, JAI Press, vol. 1. 1977).

Smith, James. "Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health and
SES," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999.
Spence, A. Michael, "Job Market Signaling," Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, 87(3), August

50
1973, pp. 355-74.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, "Instrumental Variables Regressions with Weak
Instruments," Ecpnometrica, 65(3), May 1997, pp. 557-86.

Summers, R. and Alan Heston, "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950-1988," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2), May 1991, pp.
327-368.
Summers, Anita A. and Barbara L. Wolfe, "Do Schools Make a Difference?" American
Economic Review, 67(4) Sept. 1977, pp. 639-52.
Temple, Jonathan, "The New growth Evidence," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVII,
March 1999a,pp. 112-156.
Temple, Jonathan, "A Positive Effect of Human Capital on Growth," Economic Letters, October
1999b, 65(1), pp. 13 1-34.
Topel, Robert, "Labor Markets and Economic Growth," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card,
eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999).
UNESCO, Statistical Yearbook. 1967 (Paris: UNESCO, 1967).

Walsh, J.R. "Capital Concept Applied to Man," Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, XLIX,
Februrary 1935, pp. 255-85.
Welch, F., "Education in Production," Journal of Political Economy, 78(1), Jan.-Feb.1970, pp.
35-59.
Willis, Robert J., "Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital
Earnings Functions," in Ashenfelter, Orley A. and Richard Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986).
Wolfe, Dael and Joseph G. Smith, "The Occupational Value of Education for Superior HighSchool Graduates," Journal of Higher Education, 27(4), April 1956, 201-232.
Yitzhaki, Shlomo, "On Using Linear Regressions in Welfare Economics," Journal of Business
and Economics Statistics, 14, 1996, pp. 478-86.

Data Appendix
The second wave of the World Values Survey (WVS) was conducted in 42 countries between
1990 and 1993. The sampled countries represented almost 70% of the worldpopulation,
including several countries where micro data normally are unavailable. The survey was designed
by the World Values Study Group (1994), and conducted by local survey organizations (mainly
Gallup) in each of the surveyed countries. Inmost countries, a national random sample of adults
(over age 18) was surveyed. For 12 of the countries in our sample (Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
China, India, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, West Germany and U.K.),
sampling weights were available to make the survey representative of the country's population;
the other samples are self-weighting. A feature of the survey is that the questiolmaire was
designed to be similar in all countries to facilitate comparisons across countries. There are,
however, drawbacks to using the V/VS for our purposes. The primary purpose of the WVS was
to compare values and norms across different societies. Although questions about income and
education were included, they appear to have been a lower priority than the normative questions.
For example, family income was collected as a categorical variable in ten ranges, and some
countries failed to report the currency values associated with the ranges. We were able to derive
comparable data from the WVS on mean years of schooling for 34 countries and on mean
income for 17 countries.
Mean years of schooling is calculated from question V356 in the WVS, which asked, "At what
age did you or will you complete your formal education, either at school or at an institution of
higher education? Please exclude apprenticeships." The variable is typically bottom coded at 12
years of age and top coded at 21 years of age. Although there are some benefits of formulating
the question this way, for our purposes it also creates some problems. First, we do not know the
age at which respondents started their education. For this reason we have used data from
UNESCO (1967) on the typical school starting age in each country. Second, the top and bottom
coding is potentially a problem. For almost one third of the countries (Austria, Brazil, Denmark,
India, Norway, Poland, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey), however, a question was
asked concerning formal educational attainment. Since, as mentioned above, one of the benefits
with the V/VS is that the same questions are asked in all the countries, we used this variable
only to solve the bottom and top coding problem.' We have coded illiterate/no schooling as 0
years of schooling and incomplete primary schooling as 3 years. In the two countries where
graduate studies is a separate category, we have set this to 19. For the countries in which the
educational attainment variable does not exist, we setyears of schooling for those in the bottom-

'For South Korea and Switzerland, however, we exclusively used this variable to derive years of schooling
because the question about school leaving age is not asked in these countries For Turkey, school leaving age is only
coded as three possible ages, so we use both the educational attainment and school leaving age variable to derive
years of schooling.

coded category equal to the midpoint of 0 and the bottom coded years of schooling.2 Similarly,
we set years of schooling for the highest category equal to the midpoint of 18 and the top coded
years of schooling.
As mentioned, the family income variable in WVS is reported in 10 categories. We coded income
as the midpoints of the range in each category. This variable is also censored from below and above.
For simplicity, we set income for those who were bottom coded at the midpoint between zero and
the lower income limit. We handled top coding by fitting a Pareto distributionto family income
above each country's median income. Assuming that this distribution correctly characterizes the
highest category, we calculated the mean of the censored distribution. We converted the family
income variable to a dollar-value equivalent by multiplying the family income variable in each
country by the ratio of the purchasing power parity in dollars to the corresponding local currency
exchange, using Summers and Heston's (1991) data.

The logarithm of mean income per capita was calculated as the logarithm of the sum of family
income in common currency divided by the total number of individuals in all households in the
sample. The total number of individuals in each household is calculated as the sum of the number
of chilthen living at home and the number of adults present. (Two adults were assumed to be present
if the respondent was married; otherwise, one adult was assumed to be present.) Appendix Table
A2 reports the weighted mean years of schooling and log income per capita derived from the WVS.
The weights for these calculations were the sampling weights reported in the WVS. The sample size
used to calculate mean schooling is also reported.

2

East and West Germany the bottom code was 14, and for Finland it was 15. Because school start
age
was 7 in Finland and East Germany, and 6 in West Germany, we set years of schooling equal to 6 in West Gennany
and Finland and 5 in East Germany for those who were bottom coded.

Appendix Table Al: Correlation and Covariance Matrices for Barro-Lee and Kyriacou
Years of Schooling Data

A. Correlation Matrix
-' 65

SK85

ASBL

AS'

BL
'-' 65

1.00

cBL
LI

0.97

1.00

LI 65

0.91

0.92

1.00

QK
LI

0.81

0.86

0.88

1.00

ASBL

0.23

0.46

0.36

0.51

1.00

ASK

-0.12

-0.03

-0.17

0.33

0.34

1.00

ASBL

ASK

85

85

B. Covariance Matrix
BL

S 85
CBL
LI

65

6.65

85

7.07

8.01

5.66

6.29

5.88

5.27

6.19

5.38

6.41

ASBL

0.42

0.93

0.62

0.92

0.51

ASK

-0.39

-0.10

-0.50

1.02

0.30

Q BL
LI

QK
LI

65

OK
LI

85

1.52

Notes: Sample size is 68. A superscript BL refers to the Barro-Lee data and a superscript
K refers to the Kyriacou data. The subscript indicates the year. Unlike the other tables, the
change in schooling is not annualized.

Appendix Table A2: International Data Derived from the World Values
Survey
Country

Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Brazil
Canada
Czechoslovakia
Chile
China
Denmark
East Germany

Finland
France
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
India
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Spain
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
U.K.(excl. N.I.)
USA
West Germany

Mean years
of schooling
(Std. deviation)

Log family
income per capita

10.23 (4.88)
8.69 (4.88)
11.53 (3.29)
11.29 (3.83)
4.04 (3.04)
12.60 (3.19)
11.78 (2.86)
10.48 (4.37)
10.32 (3.51)
12.50 (3.66)
9.12 (3.90)
12.61 (3.81)
11.12 (3.62)
9.79 (3.57)
12.16 (3.74)
10.20 (2.81)
2.97 (4.48)
7.88 (4.90)
12.29 (2.85)
8.44 (5.47)
11.89 (3.65)
13.43 (4.46)
10.11 (3.56)
6.12 (4.79)
10.50 (4.36)
12.35 (3.67)
8.61 (4.49)
12.00 (3.58)
12.79 (3.40)
8.63 (2.61)

-8.78
8.92

6.13 (4.65)
11.20 (2.50)
13.26 (2.96)
9.78 (3.34)

Survey
Year

Sample
Size

766
1,296
2,328
877

1991

1990
1990

---

1990
1991-92

9.48
-7.81
--

1990

1,154
1,483
1,190
1,137

1990

1990

745
862

1990

1990
--

1990

9.00
-7.91
--

1990

1,175
534
830

1990

1990
1990
1990

895
575
847

7.07
9.02
9.10
-9.17
9.20
--

1990
1990
1990

1,908
1,616
855

1990

835
876

8.41

1990

--

-8.24
--

-8.09
9.17
9.49
9.19

1990
1990
1989
1993

1991
1990
1990

1990
1988-89
1990-91

1990
1990
1990

1,063
803
823
933
1,551
2,991
1,040

848
1,154
805
1,288
1,477
1,770

Note: Sample size pertains to the number of observations used to calculate years of
schooling.

Table 1: Replication and Extension of Benhabib and Spiegel (1994)
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in Log GDP, 1965-85
Lo Schooling

Variable
A Log S

Linear
(5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.072

.178

.614

---

---

---

(.058)

(.112)

(.162)

.026

---

---

---

.039
(.024)
.003
(.001)

.151

(.034)
.004
(.001)

(6)

Log 65

---

.010
(.004)

(.005)

AS

---

---

---

65

---

---

---

.012
(.023)
---

-.009

-.012

-.015

-.008

-.014

-.014

(.002)

(.002)

(.003)

(.002)

(.002)

(.004)

.523

.461

---

---

(.052)

.521
(.051)

.465

(.048)

(.052)

.175

.232

.110

.335

(.164)

(.160)

(.160)

(.167)

.694

.720

.688

.726

LogY
A Log Capital
A Log Work Force

R2

--.291

--.271

Notes: All change variables were divided by 20, including the dependent variable. Sample
size is 78 countries. Standard errors are in parentheses. All equations also include an
intercept. S is Kyriacou's measure of schooling in 1965; A Log S is the change in log
schooling between 1965 and 1985, divided by 20; and Y is GDP per capita in 1965.
Mean of the dependent variable is .039; standard deviation of dependent variable is .020.

Table 2. Reliability of Various Measures of Years of Schooling
A. Estimated Reliability Ratios for Barro-Lee and Kyriacou Data
Reliability of
Barro-Lee Data

Reliability of
Kyriacou Data

.851

.964

(.049)

(.055)

Average years of
schooling, 1985

.773

(.055)

.966
(.069)

Change in years of
schooling, 1965-85

.577
(.199)

.195
(.067)

Average years of
schooling, 1965

B. Estimated Reliability Ratios for Barro-Lee and World Values Survey Data

Average years of
schooling, 1990

Averageyearsof
secondaryand

Reliability of
Barro-Lee Data

Reliablity
of WVS Data

.903

(.115)

.727
(.093)

.719

.512

(.167)

(.119)

higher Schooling,
1990

Notes: The estimated reliability ratios are the slope coefficients from a bivariate regression
of one measure of schooling on the other. For example, the .851 entry in the first row is the
slope coefficient from a regression in which the dependent variable is Kyriacou's schooling
variable and the independent variable is Barro-Lee's schooling variable. The .964 ratio inthe
second column is estimated from the reverse regression. In panel B, thereliability ratios are
estimated by comparing the Barro-Lee and WVS data. In the WVS data set, secondary and
higher schooling is defined as years of schooling attained after 8 years of schooling.
Sample size for panel A is 68 countries. Sample size for panel B is 34 countries. Standard

errors are reported in parentheses.

Table 3: The Effect of Schooling on Growth
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in Log GDP per Capita
5-year changes

1 0-year changes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

.004

---

.004
(.001)

.031

.039

(.015)

(.014)

-.005

.004

-.006

(.003)

(.002)

R2

.197

N

607

St.1

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

.003
(.001)

---

.004

.005

---

.005

(.001)

(.001)

---

.075
(.026)

.086
(.024)

---

-.003

.004

-.005

(.003)

(.003)

(.001)

.161

.207

.242

607

607

292

(.001)
AS

LogYi

---

20-year changes

(.001)
.184
(.057)

(.051)

(.003)

-.010
(.003)

-.00!
(.002)

-.013
(.003)

.229

.284

.184

.103

.281

292

292

97

.182

Notes: First six columns include time dummies. Equations were estimated by OLS. The standarderrors in the first six columns allow
for correlated errors for the same country in different time periods. Maximum number of countries is 110. Columns 1-3 consist of
changes for 1960-65, 1965-70, 1970-75, 1975-80, 1980-85, 1985-90. Columns 4-6 consist of changes for 1960-70, 1970-80, 1980-90.
Columns 7-9 consist of changes for 1965-8 5. Log '4' and St-i are the log GDPper capita and level of schooling in the initial year of
each period. AS is the change in schooling between t-1 and t divided by the number ofyears in the period. Data are from Summers
and 1-leston and Barro and Lee. Mean (and standard deviation) of annualized per capita GDP growth is .021 (.03 3) for columns
1-3,
.022 (.026) for columns 4-6, and .022 (.020) for columns 7-9.

Table 4: The Effect of Measurement Error on the Sum of Schooling Coefficients
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change Log GDP per Capita
OLS
5-year changes
(1)
(2)
st_i

S
LogY1..j

IV

-.004

-.004

(.003)

(.003)

10-year changes
(3)
(4)
-.005
-.005
(.002)
(.002)

.007
(.003)

.008

.008

(.003)

---

-.006

(.002)

.009
(.002)

---

-.005

(.003)

20-year changes
(5)
(6)
-.005
-.004
(.003)
(.003)

20-year changes
(7)
(8)
-.020
-.023
(.010)
(.011)

.007

.020

.028

(.003)

.009
(.003)

(.009)

(.010)

---

-.013

---

-.020

(.003)

(.003)

(.006)

.0026
(.0005)

.0042
(.0009)

.0023
(.0005)

.0037
(.0009)

.0020
(.0008)

.0052
(.0011)

.0001

Meas. Error
Corrected b1+b2

.0030

.0052

.0028

.0047

.0041

.0067

---

12

.197

.207

.272

.284

.159

.281

---

N

607

607

292

292

97

97

67

b1+b2

(.0015)

.0055
(.0024)

67

Notes: All regressions also include time dummies and an intercept. The standard errors in the first four columns allow for correlated errors within
countries over time. The time periods covered are the same as in Table 4. Tn columns 7 and 8, Kyriacou's education data are used as instruments
for Barro and Lee's education data. All other columns only use Barro and Lee's education data. See text for description of the measurement error
correction. Mean (and standard deviation) of dependent variable are .021 (.033) for columns 1-2, .022 (.026) for columns 3-4, .022 (.020) for
columns 5-6, and .019 (.0 19) for columns 7-8.

Table 5: The Effect of Schooling and Capital on Economic Growth
Dependent Variable: Annualized Change in Log GDP per Capita, 1965-85
OLS
(1)

(2)

.066
(.039)

(.032)

.004

.00 13

(.001)

(.0008)

LogY65

-.009
(.003)

-.026
(.003)

A Log Capital
per Worker

.598

.795

(.062)

(.058)

---

.016
(.002)

AS

Log Capital per
Worker 1960

.017

IV
(3)

.015
(.042)

.0005
(.0010)

(4)

(5)

.083

.069

(.043)

(.167)

.002

-.00 1

(.001)

(.002)

---

---

---

597

.648
(.073)

•35*

.002

.001

(.002)

-.002
(.002)

(.119)

(.004)

R2

.63

.76

.58

.12

.55

Sample Size

92

92

92

92

66

Notes: Change variables have been divided by the number ofyears spanned
by the change (20 years for schooling and log GDP, 25 years for capital).
Schooling data used in the regressions are from Barro and Lee. The
instrumental variables model in column 6 uses Kyriacou's schooling data as
excluded instruments for the level and change in Barro-Lee's schooling
variables. Capital data are from Klenow and Rodriguez-Dare (1997), and
pertain to 1960-85. The coefficient on the change in log capital in column 4 is
constrained to equal .35, which is roughly capitals share.

Table 6: Mean Estimates from a Random coefficient Specification

Dependent Variable: Annualized Change Log GDP per Capita
5-Year Changes
Constant
Coefficient

(I)

10-Year Changes

Mean VariableCoefficient Estimate
(2)

Constant
Coefficient
(3)

Mean VariableCoefficient Estimate

(4)

A. All Years of Schooling

Coefficient Estimate
for st_I

p-value
R2

.0040

(.0007)

-.0033
(.0036)

.0033
(.0008)

-.0064
(.0059)

---

.000

---

.000

.481

.242

.690

.197

B. Male Secondary and Higher Schooling
Coefficient Estimate for
Male Secondary+ st_I

.0088
(.0017)

-.0 196

.008!

-.0353

(.0114)

(.0020)

(.0179)

p-value

---

.0000

---

.0000

R2

.190

.469

.242

.658

Notes: All regressions control for initial Log GDP per capita and time dummies. The number of countries is 110 for the5-year
change equations and 108 for the 10-year change models. The p-value is for test of equality of country-specific education
coefficients in the variable coefficient model. Sample size is 607 in columns 1-2 and 292 in columns 3-4.

A. US

S. S9.den
5.5

10

5

Ia
Ia

9.5

4.5

-4

4,

19

17

II

3.5 —

IS

10

12

11

Years of Schooling

12

14

15

10

17

19

19

¶5

19

Years of Schooling

0. Wets Oetn'any

0. Beet 0,.t..,y

9

a.
7.5

S
-J

7.5 -

7. ____________________________________________________________________
S
10
11
12
I 14 IS II 17 15
1

Years of Sctiooling

a
10

11

12

13

14

15

10

17

Years of Schooling

Figure 1: Unrestricted Schooling-Log Wage Relationship and
Mincer Earnings Specification

Figure 2
Linear and Unrestricted Schooling-GDP Growth
Relationship, and Change in Unrestricted Relationship

.04

-

Linear
.03

.02
-C

Unrestricted

0
C)
C-

.01

C
CD

-D

II)

N

0

=

Change in
Unrestricted

C
C

.01

-.02 I

0

1

2

I

34

I
S

I

6

7

8

Years of SchooJjng

9

10 11 12

Figure 3
OLS Weighting Function and Education Histograms
.15

.1

.05

9

'0

Ii

12

A. OLS Weighting Function

-Is

.1

.05

B. World Distribution of Education

.15

.1

.05

0

1

C. OECD Distribution of Education

