NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TAXATION OF EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION

Brian J. Hall
Jeffrey B. Liebman

Working Paper 7596
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7596
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

This paper was prepared for the NBER's Tax Policy and the Economy. We thank James Poterba (the editor)
for helpful suggestions and compensation consultants Robert Greenbergand Scott Olsen (of Towers Perrin)
and Fred Cook (of Frederic W. Cook and Company) for helpful insights and background information. We
thank Paul Gompers and Andrew Metrick for providing us with the data on the share ownership of large
institutional investors, David Heilman whose Harvard undergraduate thesis first provoked us to think about
these issues, and Austan Goolsbee, Gerald Auten, and Kevin Murphy for comments on an earlier draft. Gabrie.I
Leon, Humayun Khalid and Katya Rosenblatt provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey B. Liebman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.

The Taxation of Executive Compensation
Brian J. Hall and Jeffrey B. Liebman
NBER Working Paper No. 7596

March 2000
JEL No.G34, H2, J33

ABSTRACT
Over the past 20 years, there has been a dramatic increase in the share of executive compensation

paid through stock options. In this paper, we examine the extent to which tax policy has influenced
the composition of executive compensation, and discuss the implications of rising stock-based pay

for tax policy. We begin by describing the tax rules for executive pay in detail and analyzing how
changes in various tax rates affect the tax advantages of stock options relative to salary and bonus.
Our empirical analysis leads to three conclusions. First, there is little evidence that tax changes have played
a major role in the dramatic explosion in executive stock option pay since 1980. Although the tax advantage
of options has approximately doubled since the early 1980s, options currently have only a slight tax advantage
relative to cash - approximately $4 per $100 of pre-tax compensation to the executive. A more convincing

story for the dramatic explosion in stock options involves changes in corporate governance and the market for

corporate control. For example, there is a strong correlation between the fraction of shares held by large
institutional investors and the fraction of executive pay in the form of stock options, a result that holds both
longitudinally and cross-sectionally. Second, we find evidence that the million dollar rule (which limited the
corporate deductibility of non-performance-related executive compensation to $1 million) led firms to adjust
the composition of their pay away from salary and toward "performance related pay," although our estimates

suggest that substitution was minor. We find no evidence that the regulation decreased the level of total
compensation. Third, we examine whether there is evidence for significant shifting of the timing of option
exercises in response to changes in tax rates. After replicating the Goolsbee (1999) result regarding taxshifting with our data for the 1993 tax reform, we show that no such shifting occurred in either of the two tax

reforms of the 1980s. Moreover, we find evidence that much of the unusually large level of option exercises

in 1992 was the result of the rising stock market rather than the change in marginal tax rates.

Brian J. Hall
Harvard Business School
Harvard University, Baker 185
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
bhall.@hbs.edu

Jeffrey B. Liebman
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_liebman@harvard.edu

1.

Introduction
Over the past 15 years, there has been a major change in the way that American

executives, particularly CEOs, are paid. For many executives, annual stock option grants are
now greater than cash compensation (salary and bonus). Annual changes in CEO wealth from
revaluations of stock and stock option holdings completely swamp cash compensation, and
provide substantial pay-to-performance sensitivity. All of this is a dramatic change from the
early 1980s when the median stock option grant to top executives was zero.
In this paper, we examine the extent to which tax policy has influenced the composition
of executive compensation, and discuss the implications of rising stock-based pay for tax policy.
Because top executives manage assets worth billions of dollars, their compensation arrangements
and the incentives they face are of substantial importance to the performance of the U.S.

economy. Because top executives have very high incomes, their responsiveness to taxation has
important revenue and efficiency implications.

We conduct a broad analysis of the taxation of executives. We begin by studying how tax
rates affect the degree to which options are favored relative to cash and how the tax advantage of
options has changed over time in response to changes in corporate, personal, and capital gains

tax rates. Although the tax advantage of options has approximately doubled since the early
1980s, options currently have only a slight tax advantage relative to cash — approximately $4 per

$100 of pre-tax compensation.
We then analyze what we believe to be the three central policy questions regarding the
taxation of executive pay. First, we examine the extent to which the stock option explosion has

been influenced by the many changes in tax rates over the past 20 years. The evidence suggests
that changes in taxation have likely had a very modest influence on the option explosion.
Instead, changes in corporate governance, especially in the role of large institutional investors,
appear to have provided the main impetus for the increase in stock-based pay.
Second, we examine the effectiveness of tax policies aimed at curbing what is deemed by

some to be excessive levels of executive compensation. Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue
Code (the "million dollar rule") was enacted in 1993, which put a $1 million limit on the
deductibility (against corporate profits) of non-performance related executive pay. Although we
find evidence that this rule led to a shift in the composition of pay — away from salary and
toward more performance-related bonuses and stock options — our evidence suggests that the

1

magnitude of this substitution was small: We find no evidence that the million dollar rule
decreased total executive compensation.
Third, we analyze the degree to which the tax code is efficient in raising tax revenue from top

executives. The stock option explosion has led to a new and important way for executives to

lowdttheir taxes in response to changes in tax rates: by timing their stock option gains. For
example, in 1993, it was widely reported in the press that well-known CEOs such as Disney's
Michael Eisner pushed their option gains into 1992 in order to avoid paying the higher personal

income tax rates implemented in 1993. In an important paper, Goolsbee (1999) argues that the
tax shifting between 1992 and 1993 was enormous, and the direct result of the increase in

marginal tax rates during this period. After replicating Goolsbee's evidence regarding taxshifting with our data for the 1993 tax reform, we show that no such shifting occurred in

response to either of the two tax reforms of the 1 980s. Moreover, our evidence indicates that the
stock market run-up in 1991 and 1992 was more import than the change in marginal tax rates in

causing the large option gains observed in 1992.
This paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we discuss trends in the level and
performance sensitivity of executive compensation. In section three, we describe the tax and
accounting rules concerning executive compensation. In section four, we analyze how taxes
affect the degree to which options are favored relative to cash. In section five, we examine how
the tax advantage of options has changed over time. In section six, we provide evidence on the

effect of taxation on the composition of executive compensation. Section seven contains
empirical analysis of the million dollar rule. Section eight contains evidence on tax shifting and

option gains. Section nine concludes.

2. Trends in To.p Executive Pay
In this section, we document how top executive pay has changed over time, and discuss how

this change has caused the sensitivity of CEO wealth to firm market value to increase
substantially. There has been a large increase in the level of CEO pay since 1980 and this
growth has been driven by the dramatic increase in stock option grants during this time (Hall and
Liebman, 1998). Although salary and bonuses nearly doubled over the period in inflation
adjusted terms, the mean value of stock option grants increased by 683 percent. The percentage
increase in the median stock option award can not be calculated because the median stock option

2

grant was zero in 1980. The median CEO did not receive an annual stock option grant until
1985. Today, nearly all top executives of large companies receive stock options and the average
stock option grant is now larger for most top executives than salary and bonus combined.
The (inflation adjusted) growth rate of CEO pay since 1980 -- measured narrowly (cash pay
per year) or broadly (cash plus option grants grew at almost 9
grew at an annual rate of 5
percent

percent per year) or very broadly (total compensation, including stock and stock option
appreciation, grew at 11.5 percent per year) --has been large relative to virtually all other

groups. Indeed, the growth rate of CEO pay since 1980 has been high even relative to the pay
increases of other high-income earners. For example, the cutoff point for being in the top 0.5
percent of adjusted gross income (AGI) increased by about 3.7 percent per year, about half the
rate for direct CEO compensation (excluding stock and option appreciation). The only workers

who appear to have had faster compensation growth than CEOs are other "superstars." The
annual pay of professional baseball players increased by approximately 9.8 percent per year,
while that of professional basketball players rose by 13.9 percent per year.
The increase in. stock options has led to a large increase in the equity holdings of top

executives, and this in turn has led to a dramatic increase in the responsiveness of executive

wealth to firm performance. Nearly all of the pay-to-performance sensitivity of executive
compensation comes from equity holdings; for a given increase in shareholder value, changes in
the value of an executives stock and stock options are more than 50 times larger than changes in

salary and bonus (flail and Liebman, 1998).
As a concrete example, the estimates in Hall and Liebman (1998) imply that a 10 percent
increase in firm value (of the median company in our sample) leads the company to increase the

CEO's salary and bonus by about $25,000. However, this same 10 percent increase in
shareholder value translates into $1.25 million increase in the value of the CEO's stock and stock
option holdings.1
The dramatic rise in the link between CEO wealth and firm performance can be seen in

figure 1, which shows how two measures of this link have increasedsince 1980.2 The first
1 Stock option grants are also very sensitive to changes in firm performance, mostly because many grants are
at-the money options are
multi-year plans that hold the yearly number of options constant, and the same number of
worth more when the stock price is higher and vice-versa. If stock option grant sensitivity is also included, then
about 91 percent of pay-to-performance sensitivity comes from stock and stock option revaluations, 7 percent comes
from stock option grant changes, and less than 2 percent comes from changes in salary and bonus. (Hall, 1999).
2 Both measures include only the link created by CEO holdings of stock and stock options,and ignore the smaller

3

measure, the Jensen and Murphy (1990) sharing rate (shown on the left scale), is the change in

CEO wealth for a $1,000 change in firm value. The second measure is the change in CEO
wealth for a 10 percent change in firm value (see Baker and Hall, 1998). Since both measures
are strongly affected by firm size (the former has a negative correlation and the latter has a
positiv&dorrelation), the pay-to-performance changes over time are estimated with regression

(quantile) analysis that controls for changes in the distribution of firm sizes sample over time.
The figure, therefore, shows the increase in the pay-to-performance measures over timefor a

constant size firm, in this case a $1 billion firm (in constant 1998 dollars). The strikingfact is
that both measures of the pay-to-performance link have increased by nearly a factorof 10 since
1980. These pay-to-performance increases are even larger than those we reported in our earlier
paper that analyzed the period 1980 to 1994 because of the large increase in stock option grants
combined with the strong stock market performance in the 1994 to 1998 period.

3. Tax and Accounting Rules
Stock options give an executive the right but not the obligation to buy a share of the
company's stock at a pre-specified price — the "exercise" or "strike" price." Typically, options
can not be exercised immediately. That is, they vest (become owned by the executive, who can

then exercise if he or she wishes) slowly over time. Common vesting periods are in the three- to
five-year range, and options usually vest linearly (e.g. a four year option vests at 25 percent at
the end of each year). An executive typically loses any unvested options upon departure.
Although options may be exercised as soon as they vest, they do not have to beexercised until

they expire or mature. Almost 85 percent of stock option plans have a termof exactly ten years,
with virtually all of the remainder being in the five to ten year range. About 95 percent of
options are granted "at the money" or at "fair market value," which means that the exercise price
at grant date is set equal to the stock price at grant date. The remaining 5 percent areeither
"discount" options (so called "in the money" options, where the exercise price is below the stock
price at grant date) or "premium" options (so called "out of the money" options, where the
exercise price is above the stock price at grant date). The holders of options typically do not
have dividend rights or voting rights, even on vested options.3

amount of pay-to-performance sensitivity that operates through changes in salary, bonus and stock option grants.
3 See Murphy (1999) for details about stock options, and Miller and Scholes (1982) on taxincentives.

4

3.1 Tax Rules and Stock Option Compensation
Unlike salary and bonus, stock option grants are typically an untaxed event at the time of
grant. For the most widely used options — Non-Qualified Stock Options (NQSOs) — executives

are taxed at the personal income tax rate on option profits (the difference between that stock

price and the exercise price times the number of options) when the options are exercised. The
company receives a parallel deduction against corporate income at that point. If the executive
continues to hold the shares after exercise, any subsequent appreciation is taxed at the capital
gains rate in the usual way. In 1993, an additional feature was added to the tax code (Internal
Revenue Code Section 162(M) that disallowed a corporate deduction for any executive pay
above $1 million that is not "performance based." While this rule affects executive salaries,
most bonuses qualify as performance based and standard stock options automatically qualify.
Therefore, this provision gives companies with highly paid executives an incentive to give more
pay in the form of bonuses and stock options, a subject we return to in section 7. A summary
description of the tax (and accounting) treatment of cash and option compensation is in Table I.
A far less common type of option, which is estimated to account for about 5 percent of option

grants, is the Incentive Stock Option (ISO). While ISOs are similar to NQSOs in terms of their
design, they are crucially different in two respects. First, they have an annual cap of $100,000

per executive. Second, the tax treatment of ISOs is different. ISOs are completely untaxed at
grant or exercise. It is only at sale that the executive is taxed, and even then the executive is
taxed at the lower capital gains tax rate. The disadvantage is that the corporation never gets to
take a parallel tax deduction against corporate profits. Thus, ISOs become more attractive as the
personal tax rate increases and as the corporate tax rate and the capital gains tax rates fall.
Two other related types of compensation, restricted stock and stock appreciation rights

are worth brief discussion. Both, however, are far less common than standard stock options.
Restricted stock is payment in the form of restricted shares, the restriction being that the shares

vest over time as with options. Unlike options, the shares typically have voting and dividend
rights. With regard to taxation, the executive is taxed at the personal rate on the value of the
restricted stock as the vesting restrictions lapse. However, the executive may choose to be taxed
at the grant date, in which case all subsequent appreciation is taxed at the capital gains rate. The
dividends paid to the executive are taxed at the ordinary rate in the usual way. The company

5

generally receives a parallel deduction equal to the amount of the executive's income when the
executive is taxed. Unlike stock options, restricted stock is not generally considered to be
"performance based" and is therefore subject to the million dollar rule (unless the vesting of the
restricted stock is performance based, which is sometimes the case).
Stock' appreciation rights (SARs) are rights that replicate the payoffs of stock options

with a cash transfer. Thus, SARs are simpler than options in that there is no requirement to buy

and resell the stock in order to "cash out," SARs generally have the same tax treatment as
NQSOs, both to the individual and to the corporation. SARs are relatively rare, however,
because they have disadvantageous accounting treatment (described in the next section) relative

to stock options, and their main relative advantage vis-à-vis options has been essentially
replicated through broker-assisted cashless option exercises — whereby a broker makes a

"nanosecond" loan to the executive (to purchase and resell the stock) when the executive wants

to "cash in" on option profits. The tax and accounting treatment of ISOs, restricted stock and
SARs is summarized in Table 2.
3.2

The Accounting Treatment of Options

Unlike cash compensation, which is expensed against earnings, there is generally no
expense recognition (at grant, exercise, or sale) for options, whether they be NQSOs or ISOs. As

a result, compensation consultants often point out that stock options are the only form of

compensation that are free in an accounting sense, but still deductible for tax purposes. Stock
options do, however, lead to expense recognition if they are "discounted" ("in the money" at
grant date) or if the exercise price and number of options are not known at grant date. For
discount options, the difference between the stock price and the market price is expensed over

the vesting period. For options with variable terms (e.g. a variable exercise price, vesting that is
tied to performance), the options are marked to market and expensed during the time between

grant and exercise. Practitioners claim that the accounting treatment of options plays an
important role in the design of option program. Thus, plans that have "bad accounting" but are
thought by many to have attractive incentive features, are often not even seriously considered by

companies. Examples of such potentially attractive plans include indexed options (where a CEO
profits only if his finn's share price grows relative to some market or industry benchmark) and
option grants that are explicitly performance related, both of which would lead to expenses
against earnings.

6

Unlike options, restricted stock and SARS do not generally receive favorable accounting

treatment. Restricted stock is generally expensed over the period in which the restrictions lapse
(usually the vesting period). The magnitude of the expense is the difference between the current

stock price and the executive's cost (if any). SARs are marked to market each period and the
difference between the stock price and the exercise price is expensed over the outstandingperiod
of SARs.

4.

The Taxation of Executive Pay: Cash versus Options
Stock-based compensation performs two roles in executive compensation arrangements.

First, it helps align the incentives of the executive with the interests of the firm's shareholders.
Second, it often enables the firm to compensate the CEO in a way that is more advantageous
from a tax standpoint than paying the executive in salary and bonus.

4.1 Agency Theory and Executive Compensation in the Presence of Taxation
In standard agency theory models (Jensen and Meckling, 1976), agency costs are the result of
the separation of ownership and control. Managers do not have the same incentives as the
owners. The optimal incentive contract for managers balances the benefits of high-powered
incentives (linking the fortunes of owners and managers through stock and stock options for
example) with the costs of loading too much risk on risk-averse managers.
The effect of taxation on the optimal contract (more precisely the share of compensation that
is performance related) is ambiguous (even in the absence of deductibility and deferral) because

there are offsetting effects. First, by reducing the share of corporate profits received by
shareholders, taxes diminish the importance to the shareholders of motivating the CEO. Taken
alone, this effect would imply that taxes would be expected to reduce the use of performance-

based compensation. Second, because the government shares in the income received by the
CEO, the variance of the CEO's income is reduced, raising his utility, and lowering the cost to
the firm of providing any given set of incentives. Third, because taxes will lead executives to
provide less effort for any given level of incentive based pay, the level of compensation that
must be provided to compensate the CEO for effort is reduced, for a given amount of incentive.
These last two factors make it cheaper for the firm to offer contracts to the CEO with large

incentive components when tax rates are higher, and should therefore increase the use of
incentive based pay. Since the net impact of taxation on the level of incentive-based pay is

7

ambiguous, agency theory provides no strong predictions about how taxation should affect the
optimal composition of option versus cash compensation.

4.2

The Tax Advantages of Deferral

While agency theory yields ambiguous predictions about the impact of taxes on the use of
options, therdare direct tax advantages of options since options provide executives with a way to

defer compensation and thereby lower their taxes. However, because options also lead to a
deferral of corporate tax deductibility, the tax advantages from a combined (executive and
corporate) perspective are not so straightforward. In this section, we analyze and measure the
tax advantages of stock options relative to salary and bonus compensation. We also analyze the

tax advantages of NQSOs relative to ISOs. In particular, we show how the tax advantages of
options change as personal, corporate and capital gains taxes change. We then show how the tax
advantages of options have changed over time in response to changing tax rates.
The crucial tax difference between standard options (NQSOs) and cash payment is that
option payouts are deferred, and the two forms of compensation earn different rates of return

over the deferral period. Any analysis of the relative tax advantages of two compensation
instruments must consider the tax consequences both to the employer and to the employee —
what Scholes and Wolfson (1992) call the global contracting perspective. Thus, in order to make

valid comparisons between the two, we compare the tax burden to the executive, while holding

constant the post-tax cost to the company. By keeping post-tax employer costs (in NPV terms)
constant, any package that is preferred by the employee is tax advantaged in the global
contracting sense.
Under this methodology, a comparison of the tax advantages of options and cash involves

comparing a pre-tax cash payment of P with an option payment that has the equivalent post tax
NPV to the company. For NQSOs, it is straightforward to show that a pie-tax payment of P to
an executive has exactly the same cost to the company as putting aside P for the purposes of
paying stock option payouts later. That is, if a company pays an executive P today, it will have
the same amount of money in N years as if it had put aside P today, let it accumulate at the rate
of return earned by the firm, and then paid it out (as compensation in the form of option gains4)

with any appreciation in year N.

4 This analysis is not unique to options. Any form of deferred compensation that enables executives to invest inside
the firm at a higher post-tax return or without paying capital gains taxes would have similar effects.

8

Assume that the pre-tax profit rate is r, and the corporate tax rate is Tc. Then, if the
company pays P today, it receives a deduction today of P Tc, which yields
(1)

PT[l +r(1_Tc)]N

in N years, since the benefits of the tax deduction are invested in the company and receive the

after-tax corporate rate of return. Conversely, if the company puts P aside today, then it grows at
the after-tax corporate rate of return in N years to give a tax deduction of
(2)

P[l +r(ITc)INTc

which is the exact same value. Note that the equivalence of these two tax deductions is
analogous to the tax-benefit equivalence of front-loaded and back-loaded IRAs.

An executive's payoff in N years from option profits is equal to P compounded at the
after-tax corporate rate times 1 — T, where T is the personal tax rate. Thus, the combined
payoffs in N years of the corporate deduction and the executive's post-tax payoff is:
(3)

P[1+rUTc)]NT +P[l+r(1Tj]N(1_Tp)

where the first term is the payoff from the corporate deduction and the second term is the

executive's payoff.
The payoff to salary and bonus in N years is more complicated since an assumption must
be made about how the executive invests the original cash compensation. Forexample, if the

executive invests in an instrument with taxable interest (e.g. bonds), then the Nyear payoff from
an investment of P accumulates at the post-corporate-tax, post-personal-tax rate of return and is:

(4)

P(1 —Tn) [1 +r(1 —T)(l—T)] N

However, if an executive invests in (non-dividend paying) equities, the investment accumulates

at the higher post-corporate-tax rate of return, with the offsetting disadvantage that the capital

gains are taxed at the capital-gains rate in year N. So the executive receives

9

(5)

p [1 +r(1—Tc)] N(1

where Tcg

Tp)Tcg [P(1-T)

[1 +r(1_Tc)}N_P(1_Tp)]

is the capital gains tax rate.5

Thus, putting the equations together, if an executive is paid cash, P, and investsyin bonds and 1-

yin equities, the N year payoff (including the payoff to the corporation from thetax deduction)
is:

(6) P[1 +r(1-Tc)fTc+ y{P[1 +r(1 T)(1T)]N(l —T)} +
(1-y)

{

P

[1 +r(l-Tc)] N (1

Tp)Tcg [PUT) [1 +r(1T)]p (hT)]}

The tax advantage of options versus salary and bonus, therefore, is the difference between the
combined (corporate and executive) payoffs in equation (3) and the combinedpayoffs in
equation (6).
4.3

The Tax Advantage of Options

We now turn to analysis of how changes in various tax rates affect the tax advantages of

options relative to cash compensation. We focus on the case in which the cash earnedby
executives is invested entirely in equities since equities are tax-favoredrelative to bonds. The
important conclusions of this analysis are not substantively different if we instead assume that a
portion of an executive's holdings are invested in bonds.

4.3.1 The Tax Advantage of Options: Changing the Corporate Tax Rate
Stock options are tax advantaged relative to cash simply because option payouts arc
deferred, allowing the executive to invest at the pre-personal tax rate of return (with no capital
gains tax at the end) rather than investing at the after-tax rate of return or paying the capital gains

tax. Since the advantage of being able to defer taxes is large when the corporate tax rate is low,
the tax advantage of options is larger when the corporate rate is low.

5 In practice, executives hold a combination of equities and bond-like instruments with taxable interest. Because
equities are tax favored, in the next section we simplify the analysis by assuming that executives hold
only equities.
Alternatively, we could have assumed that executives hold only less risky bonds since bonds more closely match the
risk profile of a stream of tax savings. None of our empirical results aresubstantively affected by this
simplification.

10

To illustrate this point, we define the tax advantage of options to be the dollar amount by
which total after-tax option payoffs (to the corporation and the executive) exceed the total
payoffs from salary, as defined by the difference of equations (3) and (6) assuming that P (the
payment to the executive), is equal to $100 and yequals 0 (cash compensation is invested in

equities). We use a ten-year horizon since most options have a ten-year term. We then cIculate
how the tax advantage of options changes as the corporate tax rate varies from zero to 100
percent, holding the personal tax rate and the capital gains rate fixed at 40 percent and 20 percent
respectively (which approximates current rates).

The top panel of Figure 2 shows the tax advantage of options relative to cash —
the NPV of the total tax advantage of options for a $100 payment to the CEO — as

precisely,

the corporate

tax rate changes. As expected, the tax advantage of options declines as corporate tax rates
increase. At a zero corporate tax rate, the tax advantage of options has an NPV of $7. This
value is about $3.5 at a corporate rate of 40 percent. When the corporate tax rate is 100 percent,
the tax advantage of options completely disappears since the benefits of deferred compensation
fall to zero since the after-tax return on equities (and therefore the discount rate) falls to zero.
The tax advantage of options is the NPV of the tax savings from avoiding the capital gains tax on
ten years of appreciation, which is why it is relatively modest even at the 40 percent corporate
rate.

4.3.2 The Tax Advantage of Options: Changing the Personal Tax Rate
Using the same assumptions as above (but this time holding the corporate rate at 40
percent, the capital gains rate at 20 percent and varying the personal rate), the tax advantage of
options declines as personal tax rates rises, as shown in the middlepanel of Figure 2. The tax
advantage of options is higher at low personal tax rates because the post-tax base that gives rise
to capital gains is higher and the advantage of avoiding the capital gains taxes is greater. The tax
advantage of options therefore declines linearly as the personal tax rate rises. At a 100 percent
personal tax rate, the executive receives nothing in eithercase, and by construction, the

company's tax deduction benefit is the same in NPV terms, so the tax advantage of options falls
to zero also.6

6 This is one place where ignoring bond investments has substantive implications. In particular, in the all-bond
case the tax advantage of options is nonmonotonic —. it rises and then falls -- as
personal tax rates rise.
11

4.3.3 The Tax Advantage of Options: Changing the Capital Gains Tax Rate
The tax advantage of options for various capital gains rates is depicted in the bottom
panel of Figure 2 under the same assumptions (this time holding both the personal rate and the
corporate rate at 40 percent, while varying the capital gains rate). The tax advantage of avoiding
the capital gains tax increases as the capital gains tax rate rises.
5.

How has the Tax Advantage of Options Changed over Time?
The analysis so far has illustrated how the tax advantage of options varies with the

changes in tax rates. In this section, we show how the tax advantage of options has changed over
time as tax rates have changed.
5.1

Top Marginal Tax Rates Over Time

The evolution of the top marginal tax rates -- personal, corporate and capital gains -- from
1980 to 1998 is shown in Figure 3. In all cases, the top rate (the rate for taxpayers with the
highest incomes) is shown, which is not always the highest rate since various anomalies (such as
clawbacks of exemptions) sometimes lead to marginal tax rates that are higher than those for the

highest income taxpayers.
The top personal tax rate was 70 percent in 1980, faIling to 50 percent in 1982 and 28

percent in 1988 following the 1986 tax act. The top marginal tax rate has since risen to 39.6
percent, but is effectively 42.5 percent since there is a 2.9 percent Medicare surcharge (paid half

by theemployer and half by the employee) that has no upper limit. The top corporate tax rate
has had only one significant change since 1980, falling from 46 percent before the 1986 tax act

to 34 percent following the act in 1988. The top corporate tax rate was increased to 35 percent in
1993. The top capital gains rate has fluctuated between 28 percent (approximately) and 20
percent since 1980, and is currently at 20 percent.
5.2

The Evolution of the Tax Advantage of NQSOs

The tax advantage of options relative to cash, defined in the same way as in section 4,

from 1980 to 1998 is shown in Figure 4. The calculations are done using the same assumptions
as before (i.e. N is ten years and cash is invested in equities) and the statutory top marginal tax
rates shown in Figure 3 are used. Due to the fall in corporate and personal tax rates, the tax
7 During the early 1980s, ihe maximum tax on earned income limited the marginal tax rate on the earnings of high
earners, so many executives did not face a decline in personal tax rates between 1981 and 1982. The empirical

12

advantage of options increased sharply after the Tax Reform Act of 1986. This increase in tax
advantage has largely been reversed in the 1990s as top personal tax rates havecrept back up and
the capital gains rate has been reduced.

Two key facts emerge from this analysis. First, there is currently only a moderate tax
advantage to standard non-qualified stock options — on the order of $4 per $100 of compensation:

This is because the tax advantages to the executive of deferring taxes are largely offset by the tax
disadvantages to the company of not being able to deduct option expenses from taxable profits

until the executive exercises the options. Second, although the 1986 tax act substantially
increased the tax advantage of options, more than half of this increase has been reversed in the
1990s.
5.3

The Tax (Dis)Advantage of ISOs

So far the analysis has focused on the tax advantages of NQSOs since they are so much

more prevalent than ISOs, which account for only about 5 percent of option grants. The relative
scarcity of ISOs can be explained both by their tax status and by theirper executive cap of
$100,000 per year.

Under what conditions are ISOs tax preferred to NQSOs? For a transfer P to an
executive, the ISO is always tax preferred by the executive (since thecapital gains rate is lower
than the personal rate) while the NQSO is always tax preferred from the company's perspective
(since an ISO is not deductible). The key issue, however, is the relative advantages of the two

types of options from a global contracting perspective. Because ISOs are not deductible, the
company is indifferent between setting aside Pin the form of NQSOs today and setting asdie P
(1 - T) in the form of IS Os. (Since the NPV of the tax deduction for
NQSOs is P T, the NPV of

thePpaymentis P—PTorP(l-T))
Equalizing the post-tax cost of NQSOs and ISOs, we need only look at thepayoff of the
executive to determine the condition under which each is preferred. The payoff of NQSOs in N
years is:

(7)

P [1 +r(l—T3] (l—T)

The same payoff for ISOs is:
results in this paper are robust to assuming that executives faced a marginal tax rate of 50percent in 1980 and 1981.
13

(8)

P (1 — T) [1

+ r (hTj] N (lTcg)

IS Os, therefore, are tax advantaged if:

(9)

TpTcg> TcTcTcg
Intuitively, ISOs are tax advantaged only if their advantage (the difference between the

personal rate and the capital gains rate) is large enough to offset theircost (the disadvantage of

not deducting at the corporate rate). Note, however, that the condition is not a simple
comparison between the corporate rate the personal rate minus the capital gains rate (T Ta).

Figure 5 shows how the tax advantage of NQSOs relative to

ISOs, has changed since

1980 as tax rates have changed. Unlike the

very modest changes (around 3 to 4 percent) in the
relative tax advantages between options and cash shown in Figure 4, the relative tax advantage

between NQSOs and ISOs has seen enormous swings. When the top personal rate was 70
percent in 1980, ISOs were tax-favored by a margin of

greater than 6 percent. However, by 1982
(following the 1981 tax acts that dramatically lowered the personal tax rate), ISOs became taxdisadvantaged by about 5 percent. By 1988 (following the 1986 tax act), ISOs became tax-

disadvantaged by about 18 percent, a dramatic swing. The raising of personal rates coupled
with a decrease in the capital gains rate has since reduced the tax disadvantage of ISOs to about

$4 per $100 of pre-tax compensation. Although hard data on ISOs are hard to come by,
practitioners (mostly compensation consultants) claim that ISOs were more popular prior to 1982

when they were tax advantaged. Although ISOs are less disadvantageous from a tax standpoint
relative to NQSOs than they were in the late 1980s, they are still disadvantageous, so it is not
surprising that they have not made a significant resurgence in recent years.
6.

Explaining the Increase in Option-based Compensation
In this section, we analyze whether changes in tax rates affect the composition of

executive compensation, and consider the relative importance of tax factors and corporate

governance factors in explaining the increasing share of compensation paid in the formof stock

14

options. The numerous changes in tax rates that have occurredsince 1980 provide an
opportunity to assess whether executive compensation arrangements respond to tax incentives in
the way that the tax avoidance model suggests. We test this model using a panel data set of
CEOs in large publicly-traded U.S. corporations. Our identification of the tax effects relies on
time-series variation in personal, corporate, and capital gains tax rates along with cross-sectional
variation in corporate tax rates.
6.1

Data

We use a 15-year panel data set of CEOs in the largest publicly-traded U.S. corporations,

which is described in Hall and Liebman (1998). The data set covers the years from 1980 through
1994, and combines CEO compensation information from

corporate proxies and 10-K filings

with stock price and stock return information from CRSP, and accounting data from Compustat,

In addition, some compensation data from the l970s were collected in order to construct
measures of the value of stock options held by the CEOs in the firstperiod of the sample.8
The feature that distinguishes our data from most other CEO data sets is that with our
panel of yearly proxy data on option grants, option gains, and total options held, we are able to

calculate the total value of all stock options held by the CEO at a point of time. More
importantly, since we have the details about the stock options held (number, exercise price, time

to maturity, etc.), we can precisely calculate the change in thevalue of a CEO's stock option
holdings for a given change in firm value.
6.2

Identification Issues

The numerous tax changes over our sample period and the specific ways in which
changes in personal, corporate, and capital gains rates arepredicted to affect the composition of
CEO compensation give us unusually rich sources of identification. However, because many of
the changes in tax rates would be expected to affect all of the CEOs in our sample in a similar

way, we will need to pay particular attention to separating out the tax effects from
underlying
time-trends and other factors that changed over time. Controlling for underlying trends is
particularly important in this study because we are focusing on an outcome -- the use of stock
options — that has increased rapidly over the past two decades, and that

many practitioners

We are grateful to David Yermack for providing us withsome of the data for the 1984 to 1991 period
See Yermack [1995] for a discussion of these data.

15

believe was importantly affected by non-tax considerations. Thus the tax effects we are trying to

explain are deviations from a rising trend.
We take two steps to try to separate out the tax effects from the underlying trend. First,
we include key non-tax factors that could potentially explain the increasing reliance on

performance-based compensation. It has been suggested that the dramatic increase in incentivebased pay is the result of the remarkably poor shareholder returns during the 1970s, which

spurred the LBO and takeover movements of the 1980's. According to this story (Kaplan, 1997),
shareholders became much more powerful via the rise of institutional investors, even as the LBO
and takeover movements waned. Because the influence of institutional investors is thought to be
one of the most important mechanisms of strong corporate governance, we use the share of each

company's stock owned by institutional investors (defined as institutions with more than $100
million under management) as an explanatory variable.9 The percentage of shares owned by
large institutional investors increased from about 20 percent to almost 50 percent in 1994, an

upward trend that closely matches the sharp rise in the share of compensation in the form of
options. Indeed, in our sample, the annual average (over all of the firms in our sample) share of
stock owned by institutional investors has a correlation of 0.9 with the annual average share of

compensation paid in options.
In addition, we include two other variables that proxy for stronger corporate governance.

The first is the size of the board. Evidence suggests that boards with smaller numbers of
directors reduce the influence of the CEO and better represent shareholder interests (Yermack,

1995). Board size fell by approximately 15 percent between 1980 and 1994. The second
variable is the fraction of the firm's board members who are inside directors or gray directors
(non-insiders who have business dealings with the company). Firms with fewer outsiders are
less likely to act in the shareholders interests, and we would predict that they would be lesslikely
to have performance-based compensation for their CEOs. The average percentage of inside and
gray directors has decreased from about 45 percent in 1980 to about 35 percent in 1994.
Second, we allow for cross-sectional variation in corporate tax rates. Corporate marginal
tax rates vary because firms may be eligible for tax-loss-carrybacks and carryforwards,
investment tax credits, and the alternative minimum tax (see Auerbach, 1986; Auerbach and
Altshuler, 1.990; Auerbach and Poterba, 1987; Majd and Myers, 1987). Because these cross9. This variable is described in Gompers and Metrick (1998),

16

sectional differences imply that different firms should respond differently to a given

change in
tax rates, they potentially provide us with a way to isolate the tax effects. Firm-specific

corporate marginal tax rates are notoriously difficult to calculate

from publicly-available data.
We use a trichotomous variable that equals zero if the firm has tax loss-carry forwards
and
negative earnings in a given year, equals 0.5 times the statutory corporate rate if the firm has

only one of those conditions, and equals the statutory rate if the firm has neither loss
carryforwards nor negative earnings.'0
The cross-sectional variation in the corporate tax rate may not be exogenous. Firms that
perform poorly could face low marginal tax rates and also be particularly likely or

unlikely to
provide performance-based pay. Because most of our specifications use fixed effects, the

correlation we must be concerned about is between

changes in firm performance and changes in
compensation. We deal with this by controlling forlagged firm stock market performance in
our
regressions. This should eliminate spurious correlation between tax rates and compensation that
is jointly caused by firm performance.
6.3

Results

The dependent variable in our regressions is the fraction of a CEO's total annual
compensation (measured as the B]ack-Scholes value of

stock options grants plus salary and
bonus) that comes from stock options grants. We choose this reduced-form specification
because our interest is in the
composition of CEO compensation. However, the factors that
affect the composition of compensation might also affect the levels, and it will be
important to
keep this in mind in interpreting our results.
Optimal contracting theory generally makes predictions about the incentives provided
by
the total amount of firm stock and stock
options owned by the CEO. We chose to model the
flow of option grants rather than the ultimate performance sensitivity of the CEO's
compensation
and stock and stock option holdings because we have in mind an adjustment-cost model in
which
it takes time for a CEO's holdings of stock and stock options to reach the
optimal level.'' In our
10 Graham (1996) presents evidence that the trichotomous
variable performs nearly as well as his recommended
simulated marginal tax rate. Piesko (1999) compares
marginal tax rates calculated from Compustat daLa with actual
marginal tax rates from firm tax returns. He finds that
simple binary variables are more reliable measures of the
marginal tax rate than are either the Graham or trichotomous
variable. We obtain substantively similar results when
we switch from the trichotomous variable to the binary variables
recommend by Plesko.
See Core and Guay (1999) for evidence that firms adjust in this way.

17

regressions, we include two measures of the current

performance sensitivity of the CEO's wealth

to firm performance as explanatory variables to reflect the distance of the CEO's

contract from

the optimal contract.
Table 3 presents results in which the tax effects

are identified solely by variation in tax

rates over time. The fraction of aimual

compensation paid in stock options is regressed on tax
variables, corporate governance variables, contract-theory variables, and variables reflecting

stock market returns. Both of the regressions in this table include firm fixed effects. In

column

I, the fraction in annual compensation paid in stock

options is regressed on the log difference in
payoff (the combined payoff to both the firm and the
CEO) from receiving compensation in
stock options rather than salary and bonus, where the payoff calculations are based
on statutory
marginal tax rates. This variable is defined as the log difference between equation 3 and
equation
6 in section 4. The coefficient on the tax variable is large and statistically significant
at the 95
percent level. The point estimate implies that a one percent increase in the payoff difference

between stock options and salary and bonus results in a 2.4 percentage point increase in

the share

of compensation paid in stock options.

The corporate governance variables all have the predicted sign. Firms with a
higher
fraction of their shares owned by institutional investors, use more performance_based
pay (stock
options). Firms with large corporate boards, or a large share of inside directors, are less
likely to
use stock options.
The two contract theory variables are the dollar change in CEO wealth

per $1,000 change
in firm value (Jensen and Murphy, 1990) and the dollar change in CEO wealth
per 10 percent
change in firm value (Hall and Liebman, 1998). As discussed in Baker and Hall (1998), these

two wealth sensitivity measures reflect two different concepts of how closely aligned the
manager's incentives are with the interests of the shareholders.

In the regression they are meant

to measure how far the CEO's existing contract and

ownership of stock and stock options is from
the optimal level. The negative coefficients on the two variables suggests that firms that
are

below their optimal pay-to-performance sensitivity are more likely to give more stock
the current period.

options in

The second column replaces the tax variable motivated by deferral advantages with the

three statutory rates. The corporate after-tax share has a positive coefficient, as

we would

expect, because the tax advantage of stock options increases as the corporate rate falls. The

18

coefficient on the personal tax rate is small and

not statistically significant. The sign of the
coefficient on the capital gains rate is the opposite of that predicted by tax avoidance
theory.
Note that these results rely on time series variation alone. This is not a
very convincing
test. Since the log difference in payoffs mostly rises over the time period covered in our
sample
as does the share of compensation paid in options, it ispossible that the tax variable is simply
reflecting other factors that were changing over this time period that we have not included in our
regression. Therefore, it is important to look at specifications that rely on cross-sectional
variation in the tax variables.
Table 4 contains specifications that rely on cross-sectional variation in corporate tax
rates. The first column repeats the specification from column (I) of Table 3, but uses the

trichotomous measures of firm corporate tax rates in place of the statutory rate in

calculating
each firm's log difference in payoff from paying compensation in options rather than in
salary
and bonus. As in the previous table, we find the positive coefficient on the log difference in
payoff, just as the theory suggest. However, the coefficient estimate is now much smaller,

suggesting that a one percent increase in the log difference inpayoff produces a one-tenth of a
percentage point increase in the share of compensation paid in options.
Introducing cross-sectional variation in the dependent variable does not eliminate the
potentially spurious correlation over time between the tax variable and the share of compensation

paid in options. The second column of table 4 isolates the pooled cross-sectional variation in
corporate tax rates by adding time dummies and dropping the firm fixed effects. In this
specification, the coefficient on the tax variable is indistinguishable from zero. The coefficient
on the institutional variable continues to be large and statistically significant. The third column

includes both firm fixed effects and time dummies, which tests for a relationship between with infirm changes in the dependent variable and within-firm

changes in each explanatory variable. In
this specification, the coefficient on the tax variable is again indistinguishable from

zero. The

coefficients on the corporate governance variables are also statistically insignificant.
The third column contains a specification that treats the Tax Reform Act of 1986

(TRA86) as a natural experiment. For firms and CEOs facing the statutory corporate tax rate,
TRA86 increased the relative payoff to paying compensation in options by 1.7

percent. For a

firm facing a zero marginal tax rate, it reduced the relative payoff by 4.5 percent. The reduction
occurred because TRA8G reduced the personal tax rate, making salary and bonus more attractive,

19

while the decreased corporate rate had no effect on zero-tax rate firms. Thus,

we would expect

firms facing zero or low marginal tax rates to reduce their use of options after

TRA86, while
firms facing the statutory rate would be expected to increase them, Few firms face
zero marginal
tax rates year after year. Therefore, we try to distinguish between firms that often face low
tax
rates and firms that nearly always face the statutory rate. We define low tax firms as ones whose
average marginal tax rate over the 1984 to 1986 period was below 0.24.12 Then
we ran a
difference-in-differences regression to see if high tax firms increased their use of options
more
than low tax firms. The interaction between
post TRA86 and high corporate tax rates is the key
variable. The estimated coefficient on this variable is positive, but small and not
statistically
different from zero at the 95 percent level.
It is important to note that in this specification as well, the main corporate

variable, the share of the firm's shares owned

governance

by institutional investors, performs as theory
would predict. The variable appears to be quite robust. Table 5 presents regressions of the
of compensation paid in stock options on the fraction of the firm's shares owned

share

by institutional

investors. Since we have already established that these variables have a

strong longitudinal
relationship, the regressions here are designed to focus on the cross-sectional relationship

between these two variables. The first and third columns present regressions
from 1994, and find a coefficient of roughly 0.2 (column 1 contains no other

using data only

covariates, while
column 3 includes all of the other non-tax covariates from the regressions in tables
3 an 4).
Since the median share of a firm's stock owned by institutional investors in
our sample rises
from 19 percent in 1980 to 49 percent in 1994, this coefficient would imply that this factor
alone
can explain 6 percentage points of the 23 percentage point increase in the median share of

compensation paid in options that occurred over this time period. Of course, this variable is only
one measure of the strengthening of
corporate governance, so the total impact of improved
corporate governance could be greater. The second and fourth columns of the table use the
entire 1980-1994 sample, and include time dummies to isolate the cross-sectional

correlations.

Again, there is evidence of a strong cross-sectional

relationship between the two variables,
although the coefficients are slightly smaller, perhaps reflecting a weaker corporate
governance

12 This cutoff was chosen after inspecting the distribution
of tax rates, and essentially separates firms thatare
always at or near the statutory rate from ones that are sometimes
below it.

20

role in the earlier period. In sum, there is a strong relationship, in both longitudinal and crosssectional data, between the institutional investor variable and the options percentage variable.'3
7.

The Million Dollar Rule
In 1993 section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code was enacted, limiting the

deductibility of executive compensation in excess of one million dollars, unless the

compensation was performance related. Proponents of this legislation argued that it would slow
the growth of executive pay and tighten the link between firm performance and executive
compensation.

The new provision became effective for tax year 1994 and applies to the CEO and the
other four most highly compensated executives in each company. Pay that is performance
related such as stock-option grants and bonuses paid for meeting clear performance goals, is not

affected by this regulation, provided that it has been approved by shareholders. Thus, the main
impact of the provision is to limit the deductibility of salary in excess of a million dollars.

Woodlock and Antenucci (1997) studied the proxy statements of 376 firms and documented that
most firms responded to the new law by qualifying top executivepay as performance related.
Perry and Zenner (1999) identified 25 firms that reduced salaries from above $1 million to below
$1 million and found that 23 of the firms cited section 162(m) as their reason fordoing so.
In this section of the paper we investigate whether this provision has affected the levelor
structure of executive pay, using the Execucomp data base, which contains information on the

highest paid executives in each of the firms in the S&P 500; S&P Midcap 400 and S&P

SmallCap 600. Between 1993 and 1998 the median salary of the Execucomp executives rose
from $230,000 to $306,000. The median value of total compensation (salary, bonus, and option
grants) rose from $470,000 to $882,000. Limiting the sample to CEOs indicates that the total
compensation of the median CEO rose from $1.1 million to $1.8 million over the period, while
the median salary rose from $441,000 to $550,000. Thus executive compensation clearly
continued to rise at a rapid rate after the implementation of the million dollar rule, though

perhaps at a slower rate than it otherwise would have.

13 The one specification in which the fraction owned by institutional investors is not significant is in column 2 of
table 4, a regression that includes both fixed effects and time effects.

21

If the regulation affects behavior, it should have the largest impact

on firms whose
executives are receiving salaries that are above the limit or just below it. Thus,
we might expect
to see firms whose executives are
receiving relatively high salaries to rely more heavily on
performance-based pay and less heavily on salary in the years following the
regulation. Perry
and Zenner (l999)ancl Livingston (1999) both find that this is the case. This
trend can be clearly
identified in the Execucomp data set. For example, over the 1993 to 1998 period the median
annualized growth rate of salary for executives whose 1993 salary was below $500,000

previous year was 8.5 percent. For executives with

in the

salary between $500,000 and $700,000 it

was 6.4 percent, for executives between $700,000 and $850,000 it was 5.0

percent, for
executives between $750,000 and $1 million it was 3.1 percent, and for executives above $1
million it was 0.0 percent.'4
The observation that executives at lower levels of salary had higher

growth rates is not
very strong evidence of an impact of section 162(m), however, because it is possible that lowsalary executives would have had higher growth rates even in the absence of the

provision. To
Execucomp data from both before and after the law
change. Ideally, we wou]d want to have data from many years before the change to examine
whether there is an underlying
pattern of faster salary growth for low-salary executives.
explore whether this is the case, we use

Unfortunately, the Execucomp data begin in 1992 and therefore provide us with
only the 19921993 growth rate in compensation to use as a baseline)5

We run regressions pooling data from 1992-1993 through 1997-1998 of the
percentage change in different forms of compensation

annual

on a variable, MILLION, that is designed

to measure the likelihood that an executive's

compensation will be affected by section l62(m).
We define MILLION as the minimum of! and of the executive's salary divided
by $1 million in
the previous year. Thus, any executive with salary at or above $! million would
receive a value
of 1, while an executive with a salary of $500,000 would be coded as a 0.5.16
We include this
variable by itself and also interacted with
a dummy variable (AFTER) that equals 1 for years
1994 and after. Thus the MILLION variable is designed to pick
up any underlying relationship
14 Of the 3137 executives for whom we have

complete data between 1993 and 1998, 2708 had 1993 salaries below

$500,000, while only 35 had 1993 salaries above $1 million.

15 The Hall-Liebman data set contains only
a combined salary and bonus variable, making it impossible to use it to
analyze this issue.
16 We also ran the regressions (not reported)
allowing for a non-linear relationship between MILLIONand
compensation growth and obtained substantively similar results.

22

between the level of salary and the

growth rate of salary, while the interacted one will identify
any differential growth rate of salary by income in the period after section
l62(m) took effect.
We also include a full set of
year dummies, the natural logarithm of the firm's market value, and
the firm's annual rate of return
over the two previous years as control variables. To reduce the
sensitivity of our results to outliers, we
run quantile regressions and robust regressionsl
Table 6 contains our results. The first four columns are for all
top executives, while the
last four columns focus on CEOs. Columns I and 2 present estimates
from robust regression for
the percentage change in salary and the percentage change in total
compensation (salary, bonus,
stock grants, and stock option
grants). In the salary growth regressions for all executives, the
coefficient on MILLION is negative and
significant, indicating that there is an underlying
relationship between the level of executive compensation and its subsequent growth
rate. The
coefficient on
is negative as well, suggesting that the negative relationship
between the level of salary and its
subsequent growth rate intensified slightly after 1994. The
relatively small magnitude suggests that an executive with a $1 million dollar
salary would see
his salary grow at an annual rate that would be about 0.6
percent slower than an executive
earning $500,000.
In the second column the coefficient

on MILLJON*yp is essentially zero, suggesting

that any decrease in salary brought about by section 1 62(m)

stock option grants. The results are similar for the median

was offset by increases in bonus and

regressions. There is some evidence
of a very small slowdown in growth of salary for executives likely
to be affected by section
l62(m), but no sign of a change in total
compensation. Taken together, this provides evidence of
a very small substitution of "performancerelated
pay" for salary.
The last four columns run identical tests but limit the sample to CEOs.
The interaction of
MILLION*AFTER continues to be small and
negative in the salary regressions. In contrast, the
impact of 162(m) on total compensation
appears to be positive and fairly substantial (about 15
percentage points per year) in these regressions. That is, the increase in bonus and stock
options
following the million dollar rule more than offset
the very small decline in salary.
All of these conclusions should be
interpreted somewhat cautiously because our data provide
us with only one pre-1993 control
year. Nevertheless, the data are consistent with section
l62(m) having led to a very minor slow down in
salary growth, and one that is dramatically
smaller than what one would conclude without controlling for
underlying differential salary

23

growth rates at different levels of salary. Since total compensation for CEOs did not decline, and
perhaps increased, there is evidence of a minor substitution of performance-relatedpay for salary
in response to the regulation.

8.

Executive Compensation and The Elasticity of Taxable Income
Even if taxes have only a minor impact on executive compensation, the structure of

executive compensation is important for tax policy because high-income taxpayers are sources of
significant revenue and are the focus of important debates about the efficiency cost of taxation.

Goolsbee (1999) has recently argued that executive decisions to exerciseoptions are
highly responsive to intertemporal differences in tax rates created by tax reforms. He claims that
much of the apparent decline in taxable income for high income taxpayers between 1992 and
1993 documented by Feldstein and Feenberg (1996) can be explained by executives shifting
option gains into 1992 in order to avoid the higher marginal tax rates that went into effect in

1993. By extension, he imp]ies that the high elasticities of taxable income with respect to
personal tax rates estimated by comparing the pre- and post-tax reform taxable income of high
income individuals reflect intertemporal shifting of income and not permanent effects of

taxation. If this is true, then the deadweight loss of taxation is lower, as is the cost of
progressivity.

While Goolsbee presents comprehensive evidence that option gains were unusually high

in 1992, his identification of the impact of tax rates on the timing ofoption gains depends on
correctly specifying a counterfactual level of options that would have been exercised in the

absence of the tax change. He simply assumes a linear time trend. Thepurpose of Goolsbee's
time trend is presumably to account for the increasing use of options overtime. However, since
options typically require a vesting period of at least a couple of years, a much more direct
measure of expected option gains can be constructed, based on the total value of vested options

held by the CEO. Since options typically have vesting periods that exceed two years, this total
can be treated as exogenous, since it will not be affected by the tax changes.

More generally, the value of options held by the CEO is likely to have amajor effect on

his exercise decisions. If his options are out of the money, he will not have gains to realize. If
there has been a recent run-up in the market, an optimizing CEO may exercise an unusually large

24

amount of options in order to diversify his overall portfolio, and if
about to expire, they will be exercised in the current

in-the-money options are

year.

Our evidence suggests that much of the apparent tax

shifting can instead be attributed to
stock market performance and the timing of past option grants. Using
our 15-year panel, we
replicate 000slbee's (1999) result for the 1993 period, but show that the impact of
taxes is not
present in other time periods. Moreover,
even the result for the 1993 period disappears when
appropriate controls for past option grants and stock price appreciation
are included.
The top three rows of Table 7 present data on the taxable incomes of CEOs
in the HallLiebrnan sample. For these results our panel has been narrowed to include
only CEOs whose
firm's fiscal years correspond with tax years. In addition, we
create a balanced panel for each of
the three tax-reform periods
by excluding any firm for which there are not complete data for the
period surrounding the reform.

The fourth row of the table shows that the 1993 tax act raised the

top marginal personal
percent effective for tax year 1993, with a further increase
occurring in 1994 due to the uncapping of the
Medicare payroll tax. The top row of the table
shows that taxable income was higher in 1992 than for
any other year in our sample (all data are
in 1994 dollars). Option
gains were particularly high in 1992— more than double their 1991
level and 68 percent higher than their 1994 level. These
patterns are consistent with Goolsbee's
claim that taxpayers responded to the anticipated increase in
marginal tax rates by shifting gains
into 1992.

income tax rate from 31.0 to 39.6

The evidence from the other two tax reforms is less clear,

suggesting that there might be
determining the timing of option gains. ERTA 1981 reduced the top
marginal tax rate from 70 percent in 1980 to 50
percent in 1982. However, there is no sign that
option gains were reduced in 1980 and 1981 and then increased in 1982.'
There was a big
increase in option gains in 1983 however. Similarly, the highest
year of stock option gains in the
period around 1986 was 1987, a strange year to take gains since
taxpayers would have known
that the personal rate would be 10
percentage points lower if they waited until the
18
following
year.
factors other than tax rates

17 As we explained above, for executives
covered by the maximum tax on earned income, there was not a decline in
tax rates between 1981 and 1982.
18 It is possible that the large stock market decline in October 1997
have prompted some people to exercise
options earlier than they otherwise would have. However, an increasemay
in option exercises
typically follow stock

25

What all the peak years of option gains have in common is that
strong stock market performance. The fifth row of table 7 shows the

they follow years of

average stock market return
during the previous year for the firms in our sample. The large value of
option gains in 1983
followed a 35.5 percent increase in the stock market. The 1992 boom
in option gains followed a
46.6 percent increase in thdstock market; the more modest 1987
peak in option gains followed a
19 percent gain (and a 43 percent gain two years before)
Strong stock market performance raises the
value of options available to exercise. The
sixth row of the table shows the
mean value of options held by CEO5 at the beginning of the
year. All three of the peak years of option
gains correspond with peak years in terms of the value
of options available for exercise. Since stock market appreciation
during the year also increases
the value of options available to exercise later in that year, we need
to account for current year
stock market appreciation as well.
Table 8 contains Goolsbee-style

regressions for each of the tax reforms. The first two
columns reprint the results from Goolsbee (1999). The third and fourth column
replicate his
results in our sample. In particular,
with a specification similar to his, we are able to replicate his
finding that the current after tax share has a positive coefficient and the
following year's after-tax
share has a coefficient of
roughly negative one. Columns (5) through (8) show that this pattern
was unique to the 1993 tax reform. Indeed, in the TRA86 regressions the
coefficient on the
following year's tax rate is positive and
significant. Columns (9) and (10) pool all three reforms
and fail to replicate the pattern that would reflect intertemporal
shifting. 19
It is possible that the ease with which one can shift the
timing of option gains is
asymmetric. It may be harder to shift option gains forward in time since
some options expire and
therefore must be exercised
now. In addition, options were a much smaller portion of
compensation in the early 1980s, so perhaps the ERTA 81 results are not
surprising.
Nonetheless, these results cast doubt
on the proposition that this is the channel through which
spurious estimates of the elasticity of taxable
income have occurred for previous tax reforms, and
they suggest that we should look harder for
alternative explanations for the timing of option
gains.

market increases, not declines.
19 The results also fail to suggest large

permanent effects of marginal tax rates on taxable income.

26

Table 9 attempts to predict options gains using the lagged and
market value and the value of the

current increase in a firm's
options held by the CEO at the start of the year. The two stock

market variables strongly predict option gains, while the value of options held has

sign in all of the specifications and is

the correct

significant in the pooled sample even though it is highly
correlated with the two stock market return variables. In contrast, the
tax-timing explanation
fails, even in thel993 period.

It is important to realize that ourresults do not invalidate 000lsbee's

critique of claims
that aggregate revenue data from 1992 and 1993 prove that elasticities of taxable
income are
large. We have simply given an alternative explanation for why taxable incomes
were unusually
high in 1992. However, our results do cast doubt on the conclusion that
large timing shifts are
ubiquitous and capable of explaining away the more careful estimates of taxable income
elasticities that have been performed
using micro data (e.g., Feldstein, 1995; Auten and Carroll,
1995).

One further point is in order. It is sometimes argued that the combination of
of options and the booming stock market

increased use
explains why federal tax revenues have been so much

higher than expected during the 1990s.

However, while large option gains increase revenue from
the personal income tax, they produce offsetting deductions for
corporations. The net impact on
revenue is only the difference in the two marginal tax rates times the option gain. While
the gap
between the personal rate and the effective
corporate rate is non-trivia], the impact of large
option exercises on total revenue is
substantially smaller than the amount by which the exercises
inflate personal tax revenue and reduce corporate tax revenue.
9.

Conclusion
We have described the tax rules for executive pay in detail and analyzed how

changes in
various tax rates affect the tax advantages of stock options relative to
salary and bonus. We find
that there is a moderate tax advantage to options —
currently about $4 per $100 in pre-tax
executive pay — and that changes in the tax advantage of
options over time have had at most a

modest impact on the composition of

pay. Corporate governance factors, particularly the role of
large investors, appear to be more important in
explaining the dramatic increase in option pay.
In addition, our evidence suggests that more direct attempts to use tax
policy to influence
executive compensation have had little effect. We find that the million dollar rule led
companies

27

to substitute performancebed

pay for salary. But our evidence suggests that this substitution
was quite modest, and there is no evidence that thetotal level of pay was reduced.
Overall,
although the stock-option explosion has dramatically increased the link between
pay and
performance, this change is due almost entirely to nontax factors.

28

References
Auerbach, Alan J., "The Dynamic Effects of Tax Law Asymmetries," Review of Economic
Studies, Volume 53, 1986, pp 45 1-405.
Auerbach, Alan J. and James Poterba, "Tax Loss
Carryforwards and Corporate Tax Incentives,"
in M. Feldstein, editorjTj Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation
University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1987.
Baker, George P and Brian J. Hall, "CEO Incentives and Firm Size," NBER Working Paper
6868, December 1998.
Core, John and Wayne Guay, (1999), "The Use of Equity Grants to Manage Optimal Equity
Incentive Levels," Draft.
Core, John E., Hothausen, Robert W., David F.
Larcker, (1999), "Corporate Governance, Chief
Executive Officer Compensation and Firm Performance," Journal of Financial Economics,
51, pp 371-406.
Ellig, Bruce R., CEO Pay: A Historical Perspective, CEO
13.

Pay: A Comprehensive Look, pp. 8-

Feenberg, D.. and J. Poterba (1993), "Income Inequality and the Incomes of Very High Income
Taxpayers," Tax Policy and Economy, v. 7, Poterba ed, MIT Press, Cambridge.

Feldstein, M. (1995), "The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of
the 1986 Tax Reform Act," Journal of Political Economy, ,(103:3), pp 55 1-72.

Feldstein, M. and D. Feenberg (1996), "The Effect of Increased Tax rates on Taxable Income
and Economic Efficiency: A Preliminary Analysis of the 1993 Tax Rate Increases" in Tax
Policy and the Economy, v. 10. Poterba, ed. Pp. 89-117. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Gompers, Paul A. and Andrew Metrick, (1998), "Institutional
Investors and Equity Prices,"
NBER Working Paper Series, No. 6723.
Goolsbee, Austan, (1999), "What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
Compensation," Working Paper.
Graham, John R., (1996), "Proxies for the Corporate Marginal Tax Rate," Journal of Financial
Economics 42, pp. 187-221.
Graham, John R., and Michael Lemmon, (1998), "Measuring Corporate Tax Rates and Tax
Incentives: A New Approach," Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 11. 54-65.

Hall, Brian J., (1999), "The Design of Multi-Year Stock Option Plans," Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance, 12, No. 2, pp 97-106.

29

Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebmari, "Are
CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?"
Quarterly
Journal of Economics CXII, no.3, pp. 653-691, August 1998.

Jensen, Michael C. and William M.
Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal
of Financial Economics, 111(1976), 305360.
Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy, "Performance Pay and
Top-Management Incentives,"
Journal of Political Economy XC VIII (1990), 225-264..

Kaplan, Steven N., (1997), "The Evolution of U.S. Corporate Governance:
We Are All Henry
Kravis Now," Draft.
Livingstone, Jane R., "Executive Compensation
Contracting and Responses to Increased Tax
Costs," Louisiana State University, June 1999.
Miller Merton H. and Myron S. Scholes, Executive Compensation,
Taxes, and Incentives,
Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, edited by William
F. Sharpe and
Cathryn M. Cootner, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.

Perry, Todd, and Marc Zenner,(l999), "Pay for Performance? Government
Regulations and the
Structure of Compensation Contracts,"
Working Paper.
Plesko, George A. (1999) "An Evaluation of Alternative Measures of
Corporate Tax Rates."
Working Paper.
Scholes, Myron and Mark Wolfsen (1992), Taxes and Business Strategy,
Princeton, New Jersey:
Prentice Hall, Chapter 10, pp 179-195.
Woodilock, Peter, and Joseph W.
Antenucci, "Update: Corporate Responses to Executive
Compensation Deductibility Limits," Tax Notes, October 13, 1997,
pages 221-226.

Yermack, David, (1995) "Do Corporations Award CEO Stock Options
Effectively?" Journal of
Financial Economics, 34, 237-269.

30

Table 1
Tax and Accounting Treatment of Executive Compensation:
Cash Payments versus Standard Executive Options.

Description

Taxation at Personal
level

Salary and
Bonus

NonQualified
Stock
Options

(NSO)
'C

Cash payments made to
CEO

Taxed as ordinary income.

Taxation at Corporate
level
Fully deductible. Since

1993, any pay over $1
million is not deductible
unless it is performance
based.
Options grant the executive The granting of an option is A parallel tax deduction at
the right, but not the
typically an untaxed event, the corporate level is
obligation, to buy shares of Upon exercise, option
generally allowed upon
stock at an exercise price
profits are taxed at the
exercise (for the amount of
(typically the current stock
ordinary rate. If the
option profits). Options
price at the date of grant).
executive continues to hold automatically qualify as
The options typically vest
onto the shares, the
performance-based pay and
over a 3-5 year period. The executive is taxed in the
therefore are not subject to
typical maturity is 10 years usual way (at the capitalthe $1-million cap.
but the manager may
gains rate) on any further
exercise early. Some
appreciation of the share
options are discount options price,
(the exercise price is lower
than the stock price at the

grant date). Premium
options are the reverse (the
exercise price is greater
than the stock price at grant
date.

Accounting Treatment
Expensed against earnings in the
usual way.

There is no expense recognition (at
grant, exercise or sale) for options
if, as is usually the case, the
options are not discounted (in the
money at grant date) and the
exercise price and number of
options is known at grant date.
For discount options, the
difference between the stock price
and the market price is expensed
over the vesting period. For
options with variable terms (e.g. a
variable exercise price, vesting that
is tied to performance), the options
are marked to market and
expensed during the time between
grant and exercise.

Note: We thank compensation consultants Scott Greenberg and Scott Olsen (both of Towers Perrin) and Frederic Cook (of Frederic W. Cook and
Associates) for helpful conversations in understanding the tax and accounting rules.

Table 2
Tax and Accounting Treatment of Executive Compensation:
Incentive Stock Options (ISOs), Restricted Stock, and Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs)

Description
Incentive
Stock
Options

Taxation at Personal level

Taxation at Corporate

Accounting Treatment

level
ISOs are identical to NQSOs
in their design. However, they
have an annual cap of
$100,000 (on the amount that
vests). The tax treatment of
ISOs also differs.

If the usual conditions are met,
there is no tax at grant or
exercise. At sale, all option
profits and subsequent capital
appreciation are taxed at the
capital-gains rate.

If the usual conditions are
met, there is generally no
corporate tax deduction at
grant, exercise or sale.

Restricted
Stock

Similar to stock options, but
shares (which vest slowly)
rather than options are granted
to the executive. Unlike
options, the shares typically
have voting and dividend
rights,

The company generally
receives a parallel deduction
equal to the amount of the
executive's income when the
executive is taxed.
Restricted stock is generally
subject to the million dollar
cap.

Restricted stock is generally
expensed over the vesting
period. The amount
expensed is the difference
between the current stock
price and the executive's
cost (if any).

Stock
Appreciation
Rights

Rights that replicate the profits
of stock options. Rarely used
since stock options have more
favorable accounting treatment
(and options provide the same
benefit of cashless exercise
through broker loans.)

The individual is taxed at the
ordinary rate as the restrictions
lapse. However, the manager
may choose to be taxed at
grant date, in which case all
subsequent appreciation is
taxed at the capital gains rate.
Dividends are taxed at the
ordinary rate.
Generally have the same tax
treatment as NQSOs.

Generally have the same tax
treatment as NQSOs

Unlike options, SARs are
marked to market each
period, and the difference
between the stock price and
the exercise price is
expensed over the
outstanding period of SARs.

As with NQSOs, there is
generally no expense
recognition for ISOs (ever).

.

Note: We thank compensation consultants Scott Greenberg and Scott Olsen (both of Towers Perrin) and Frederic Cook (of Frederic W. Cook and
Associates) for helpful conversations in understanding the tax and accounting rules.

Table 3
Compensation Regressions that Rely on Variation in Tax Rates over Time

dentViblShf
(2)
LN difference in payoff 1

LN (i-statutory personal rate)
LN (i-statutory cap. gains, rate)
LN (1-statutory corporate rate)
Corporate Governance Variables
Fraction of firm's shares owned
by institutional investors
Size of the firm's board of directors.
Fraction of directors who are inside or grey.
Contract Theory Variables
ACEO W per $1,000A in FV 2

ACEOWper lO%SinFV3
Volatility4
LN(Fjrm market value)

Stock Market Return variables
Lagged annual firm stock market return
Lagged annual S&P500 return
Regression Diagnostics
Total sample size
Firms

2.393 (0.349)

-0.015 (0.034)
0.330 (0.171)
0.399 (0.148)
0.043 (.029)

0.052 (0.028)

-0.002 (.001)
-0.082 (.033)

-0.003 (0.001)
-0.092 (0.030)

-0.26 1 (0.095)
-5.83 (1.89)
5.21 (4.24)
0.019 (0.006)

-0.247 (0.087)
-5.54 (2.01)
2.61 (3.69)
0.019 (0.006)

0.006 (0.009)
-0.035 (0.023)

0.003 (0.008)
-0.029 (0.023)

5179
427

5179
427

I Log difference in payoff is the log difference in combined firm and CEO after-tax
share between paying
compensation in options and paying salary.
2 This variable is the dollar change in CEO
wealth per $1,000 dollar change infirm market value (see Jensen and
Murphy, 1990).
3 This variable in the dollar charge in CEO
wealth per 10 percent change in firm value (see Hall and Liebman,
1998).
4 Standard deviation of firm market value in trillions.

Table 4
Compensation Regressions that Rely on Cross-sectjon Variation in

Corporate Tax Rates

ab le is Fra ction of M IC
(2)
LN difference in payoff

Post T86

0.099 (0.041)

-0.038 (0.036)

(3)

(4)

-0.005 (0.044)

High Corporate T Rate

-0.005 (0.0 13)
0.018 (0.017)
0.024 (0.016)

Post TRA86* High Corporate Tax
Rate
Corporate Governance Variables

Fraction of fi's shares owned
by institutional investors

Size of the firm's bod of directors.
Fraction of directors who are
Inside, or grey.

Contract Theory Variables
ACEO W per $I,000A in FV2
CEO W per 10%A in FV3
Volatility4

LN(Fj market value)
Stock Market Return variables
Lagged annual firm stock market
Return
Lagged annual S&P500 return
Regression Diagnostics
Total sample size

fideffect

o. 109 (0.027)

0.114(0.015)

-0.009 (0.030)

0.087 (0.034)

-0.004 (0.001)
-0.124 (0.033)

-0.001 (0.001)
-0.003 (0.018)

-0.002 (0.001)
-0.041 (0.034)

0.001 (0.002)
0.001 (0.039)

-0.238 (0.094)
-5.60 (1.78)
2.48 (4.24)
0.033 (.006)

-0.167 (0.053)
-5.92 (1.05)
1.62 (0.34)
0.008 (0.003)

-0.257 (0.096)
-5.94 (1.96)
1.12 (4.28)
0.009 (0.006)

-0.021 (0.147)
-1.47 (0.486)
1.06 (0.609)
0.012 (0.007)

-0.002 (0.009)

0.011(0.010)

0.006 (0.009)

-0.0 12 (0.013)

-0.056 (0.023)

-0.053 (0.05 1)

-0.039 (0.049)

-0.154 (0.040)

5179

5179

5179

2534

Yes

Yes

No

All three specifications use trichotomous
we are using 1986 as a natural experiment. corporate tax rates. The sample in column 3 uses only the years 1984 to 1988 since
2 This variable is the dollar change in CEO
wealth per $1,000 dollar change in firm
3 This variable in the dollar charge in CEO wealth
market value (See Jensen & Murphy, 1990).
per 10 percent change in firm value (See Hall and
4 Standard deviation of firm market value in trillions.
Liebman, 1998).

Thoss

Table 5
Large Institutional Investors and Stock

Option Compensation

-5 ection a! Relation ship betw I

hependent variable is the share of compensation paid in options
Coefficient on fraction

of firm's shares owned
by institutional investors

Sample Period
Contract

Theory and Stock Market Covariates

(1)

.217 (.067)

1994

No

(2)

.145 (.014)

1980-1994

No

(3)

(4)

.177 (.069)

.120 (.015)

1994

1980-1994

Yes

Yes

Table 6
The Effect of the Million Dollar Rule on Salary and Total

MILLION3

MILLI0N*
AFTER4

N

Robust
regression

All To Executives
Robust
Quantile
regression
Regression

%Ajn

%Aintotal %Ain

salary
-0.060
(0.005)
-0.011
(0.005)

comp2
-0.357
(0.032)
0.026
(0.033)

salary
-0.063
(0.006)
-0.021
(0.006)

Quantije
Regression

Robust
regression

%Aintotaj

%Ain

comp
-0.241
(0.027)
-0.015
(0.029)

salary
-0.087
(0.0 10)

-0.016
(0.0 10)

Compensation

Robust
regression

CEOs oni
Quantije I
Regression

%Aintotal %Ain
comp
-0.231
(0.073)
0.149
(0.076)

salary
-0.103
(0.011)
-0.034
(0.011)

Quantile

Regression

%Aintotalcomp
-0.245
(0.056)
0.158
(0.057)

35,950
35,950
35,950
35,950
7,571
7,589
Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include
7,57j
7,589
year dummies, stock market return and the log of market value.

2 Total compensation includes
salary, bonus, restricted stock and stock option grants.
3 MILLION is defined as the M1N
(1, salary in previous years divided by $i million).
4 AER is an indicator variablc equal
In zcro before the regulation took placc and
one af[er the regulation was in place (after 1993).

Table 7
Tax Reform, Stock Market Performance, and the Timing of Option Gains

ERTA8I

TRA86

l993TaxAct
92
93

80

81

82

83

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

0.874

0.831

0.872

0.990

1.197

1.448

1.655

1.632

1.656

2.095

1.875

2.678

2.324

1.964

Mean CEO Salary 0.648

0.672

0.679

0.724

0.837

0.9 17 0.959

1.058

1.052

1.028

1.020

1.070

1.209

1.262

0.098

0.099

0.252

0.240

0.345 0.593

0.390

0.414

0.618

0.547

1.250

0.743

0.378

69

50

50

50

50

38.5

28

28

28

31

31

39.6

42.5

24.5

11.9

35.5

7.6

42.8

19.1

0.7

17.9

23.2

-0.1

46.6

20.6

15.4

.706

.686

1.166

1.160

1.776 2.229

2.377

2.345

2.880

2.688

4.552

4.299

5.113

.139

.144

.216

.207

.194

.164

.176

.215

.203

.275

.173

.074

272

272

272

MeanCRO
Taxable Income
(million)

and Bonus
(millions)

Mean CEO Option 0.163
Gains (millions)
Top Federal
Personal MTR

70

25.8
Average stock
market return for
firms in the
sample in previous
year (%)
Mean value of
.460
options held at
beginning of year
.354
Valueof option
gainslValue of
options held

.266

279
279
279
279
295
295
295
295
295
272
272
is
Sample Hall-Lichman firms with December fiscal years who had complete data for one of the three tax reform

Sample size

periods studied.

94

Thdent

Table 8
Attempts to Replicate the Tax-shifting Result in Other Time Periods

Gools bee

Gooslbee

Regression Regression
(1)

Ln(l-tax(t÷l))
Time

Ln (market
value)
Years

Adjusted R2

(0.134)
-0.867
(.118)
.135
(.008)

(2)

(0.127)
-0.764
(0.112)
0.076
(0.008)
0.66 1

1993

Reform

(0.537)
-1.214
(0.491)
-.005
(.049)

(0.015)

Van able is the Log of Tax able Income
1993

Reform

(0.542)
-0.917
(0.499)
-0.364
(0.049)
0.489
(0.058)

TRA 86
(5)

(0.210)
0.478
(0.157)
0.04 1

(0.028)

TRAS6 ERTA 81 ERTA 81

Entire

Entire

19801994

1980-1994
(10)

0.026

-0.068
(0.065)
0.183

(6)

(7)

(8)

(0.209)
0.722
(0.174)
0.008
(0.028)
0.237
(0.039)

(0.090)
-0.103
(0.072)
0.094
(0.025)

(0.091)
0.043
(0.072)
0.035
(0.026)
0.334
(0.042)

(.067)
0.176
(0.068)
0.056
(0.003)

(0.066)

0.027
(0.003)
0.395
(0.017)

1991-

1991-

1990-

1990-

1995

1985-

1995

1985-

1994

1980-

1994

1980-

1989

1980-

1989

1983

1980-

1983

1994

1994

0.80

0.81

0.63

0.68

0.72

essions contain fi
errors in parentheses.

0.77

0.61

0.63

0.69

also contaIns

0.76

not

si

in the table.

Standard

Table 9
Alternative Explanations for the Timing of Option Exercises

The dependent variable is the log of taxable income.
1993 Reform

ERTAS1

1980-1994

(0.136)

-oi
(0.048)

oi
(0.057)

0.573
(0.156)

0.125
(0.053)

0.150
(0.066)

0.418
(0.061)

0.177
(0.039)

0.338
(0.046)

0.418
(0.163)

0.298
(0.044)

0.268
(0.045)

0.2 14
(0.03 1)

0.258
(0.023)

0.162
(0.041)

0.206
(0.008)

0.031
(0.029)

0.128
(0.021)

0.004
(0.003)

0.008
(0.003)

0.001
(0.002)

0.009
(0.001)

1980-1983
0.82
1036

1980-1994
0.68
3812

(0.324)

Ln(l-tax(t÷1))

-0.134
(0.33 6)

Ln(marketvalue)
Firm's stock market return (t)
Firm's stock market return (t-l)
Ln (value of options held by CEO at start of
year)

Endre

TRA86

Years
1990-1994
1985-1989
Adjusted R2
0.64
0.71
Observations
1349
1427
All regressions contain firm fixed effects. Standard errors in
parentheses.

Figure 1

Pay to Performance: The Link Between CEO Wealth and Shareholder Value Since 1980

12

$1,200,000

a)

C

(a

10

$1,000,000 E

63

a,

C

CD

E
0
C

C

a

.c
C,

0
0
0

C

8

$800,000

te

i-CD

we,

0i
430
0'D

6

$600,000

CD

&

-c CD

'a

a

o8.>II)

0
4

$400,000

0
LU

C-)

I
0

2

$200,000

0

=
0
80

82

84

$0
86

90

88

92

94

96

98

Year
The analysis controls for the changing composition of firm size over time. Thus, these estimates show the pay to performance link for a
similarly sized company over time, in this case a company with a market value of $ I billion.

Figure 2

Tax Advantage of Options: NPV of tax advantage of paying $100 in options (NQSOs) rather than in cash

Holds constant the personal rate at 40 percent and the
capital gains rate at 20 percent.
0.00
7.00

0.00

1

II

5.00
4.00

I

2.00

52 00
100
0.00
20

30

40

00
40
Top Co,ponI. Tn Rob

70

40

00

100

Holds constant corporate rate at4O percent and.capital
gains rate at 20 percent
700
0.00
5.00

4.00

I

2.00

S
2.00

I 00
0.00

'0

20

20

40

50

00

70

00

Top P.,.ob.iI Too fbI.

00

100

Holds constant the personaland corporate tax rates,
each at4O percent
10

20

20

1'
10

20

30

40

00

00

To pC.pII.I O.l,.To. 'ml.

70

00

00

130

Figure 3

Top Marginal Tax Rates Since 1980
80

70

60

50

S

20

10

0

—

- 1 - 1ii

808182538435-86878889909192939495969795
Year

Figure 4

Tax Advantage of Options: 1980 to 1998
NPV of Tax Advantage of $100 in Options (NQSOs) Rather Than Cash
7

6

Cl,

C

o5
a.

0
'4-

0
a,
C,
Cu

C

t<3
Cu

>

*
Cu

I'40

>
0
z
I

0

- I———--—i——

80

81

—-

82

83

—

84

85

1

86 87

I

__1________•——_1——-——

88

89
Year

90

91

I

92 93

———r————.———1———————-—1——

94

95

96

97

98

Figure 5

Tax Advantage of NQSOs Relative to ISOs Over Time
NPV of Tax Advantage of $100 Payment to Executive: NQSOs minus SOs
20.00

-______________ ___________________ ____________________ __________

—

15.00
€0

0
Cl,
0

-

——I—

80

81

82

I

i

83

84

—I

—

I

85

86

87

I

88

89

I

90

91

I

92

93

I

94

I

95

I

96

97

98

Year

-5.00 —

-10.00

-•-

____ _____________

______ ________

_________________________

