                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW EFFECTIVE IS REDISTRIBUTION UNDER THE
                        SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFIT FORMULA?


                                           Alan L. Gustman
                                         Thomas L. Steinmeier


                                          Working Paper 7597
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7597

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




This paper is funded by a grant from the Social Security Administration to the Michigan Retirement Research
Center, with subcontracts to the National Bureau of Economic Research and Dartmouth College. It is part
of the NBER programs in Labor Studies and Aging. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors, and
not of the Social Security Administration, the Michigan Retirement Research Center, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. We would like to thank Olivia Mitchell, Jon Skinner and David Weir for their
helpful comments, and Doug Staiger and Steve Venti for useful discussions.

© 2000 by Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
How Effective is Redistribution Under the Social Security Benefit Formula?
Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier
NBER Working Paper No. 7597
March 2000
JEL No. H55, J14, J26, D31

                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper uses earnings histories obtained from the Social Security Administration and
linked to the survey responses for participants in the Health and Retirement Study to investigate
redistribution under the current social security benefit formula. We find that as advertised, at the
level of the individual respondent, the benefit formula is progressive. When individuals are arrayed
by indexed lifetime earnings, own benefits are significantly redistributed from those with high
lifetime earnings to those with low lifetime earnings. However, much of this apparent redistribution
is from men to women, and when examined at the level of the family, from primary to secondary
earners. When families are arrayed according the total lifetime earnings, and spouse and survivor
benefits are taken into account, the extent of redistribution from families with high lifetime earnings
to families with low lifetime earnings is roughly halved. Much of the remaining redistribution is
from families where both spouses spend much of their potential work lives in the labor market, to
families where a spouse, often with high earnings potential, chooses to spend a significant number
of years outside of the labor force. When families are arrayed by their earnings potential, that is
earnings during years when both spouses are engaged in substantial work, there is very little
redistribution from families with high to low earnings capacity.
       Accordingly, at least for families on the verge of retirement today, introducing a simple
system of privatized or other individual accounts, i.e., a system that ignored issues of redistribution,
would have no major effect on the distribution of social security benefits net of taxes among families
with different earnings capacities. Moreover, although privatized or other individual accounts would
reduce redistribution from two earner to one earner families, the extent of that redistribution is
greatly exaggerated when one compares benefits among individuals arrayed according to lifetime
earnings.



Alan L. Gustman                                                Thomas L. Steinmeier
Department of Economics                                        Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                              Texas Tech University
Hanover, N.H. 03755                                            Lubbock, TX 79409
and NBER                                                       Thomas.Steinmeier@TTU.edu
alan.l.gustman@dartmouth.edu
                                              I. Introduction.

        This paper examines how a system with a progressive formula specified according to

individual earnings, supplemented by a policy designed to redistribute benefits from dual earner toward

single earner families, affects the distribution of benefits among families with different lifetime earnings

or earning capacities. The conventional wisdom is that the social security benefit formula is highly

redistributive, favoring low over high earners. It certainly is true that the structure of the benefit formula

is highly progressive, replacing, up to maximum covered earnings, a much higher share of earnings for

individuals with low than high earnings. The focus on the individual may be misplaced, however.

From a public policy perspective, the proper accounting unit for evaluating redistribution is the family.

        The distribution of family earnings will differ from the distribution of individual earnings. The

relation of the earnings distributions for individuals and for families will depend on the correlation of the

wage and labor supply for each spouse and between spouses. If wives have lower wages than

husbands, then we can expect less redistribution among families than among individuals, since some of

the redistribution at the individual level will be from husbands with greater lifetime earnings to their wives

with lower lifetime earnings.

         A second factor which mitigates the degree of redistribution is that in addition to benefits based

on own earnings, social security often pays additional spouse or survivor benefits to low earning

spouses. The amount of these benefits depend on the earnings of the spouse, and are greater the

greater the difference between the lifetime earnings of the two spouses.1 The evidence suggests spouse


        1
        Spouse and survivor benefits almost always accrue to the woman in the household. For
example, in 1998, there were 2.5 million women and 24,000 men who were dual beneficiaries receiving

                                                       1
and survivor benefits are larger in families with high earnings. If husbands with high earnings are married

to spouses with considerably lower lifetime earnings, spouse and survivor benefits will be more

important in high income families. This, in turn, implies that social security will foster less redistribution

among households than among individuals (Steuerle and Bakija, 1994).

        Low lifetime earnings may arise because individuals have low wage rates, or because they work

few hours or years. Families with similar earnings capacities can supply different amounts of labor over

their lifetimes, and the current policy effectively subsidizes families with a spouse who, although working

at least ten years to qualify for benefits, remains home for many years rather than working in the

market.2 To determine the extent to which families that supply less time to the labor market benefit

disproportionately under the current system, we will examine redistribution among families when they

are arrayed by their earnings capacities as well as by their realized lifetime earnings.

        This paper documents the sources and characteristics of redistribution from these various

features of the social security benefit formula, and from the relation between individual and family

earnings. The next section discusses the workings of the social security benefit calculation in more

detail, and Section III discusses the data used in the study. The principal data source is social security

earnings records in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), and this is supplemented by the


spouse benefits (Social Security Administration, 1999, Table 5.G3). Similarly, 4.8 million women and
36,000 men received nondisabled widows’ or widowers’ benefits in 1998 (Social Security
Administration, Table 5.F8).
        2
          In Gustman and Steinmeier (2000), we find that the social security benefit formula fosters
redistribution to immigrants, and provides the highest returns to immigrant families who have been in the
U.S. for ten years and who have high yearly earnings. Something similar is going on here among those
who qualify for social security benefits, allowing families with a member who has been in the labor force
for relatively few years to enjoy a higher benefit-tax ratio.

                                                       2
respondents’ reports of their work histories. Section IV considers years of work and earnings in those

years for respondents falling into different lifetime earnings categories. The lifetime earnings used is

Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME), the same measure as is used by the Social Security

Administration. Especially in the low AIME categories, low lifetime earnings can arise either because

the respondent worked relatively few years or because annual earnings were low. The next section

calculates redistribution measures for individual and for families, and groups the results according to

both individual lifetime earnings and family lifetime earnings. Section VI considers what the

redistribution looks like when we group families according to a measure of the potential earnings that

the families could have earned if both spouses had worked most or all of their adult years.3

        The calculations we will make are directly relevant to the debate about the effects of privatizing

some or all of the Social Security System. It is often argued that privatization would undermine the

redistribution fostered by the progressive social security benefit formula.

For example, in commenting on our analysis of outcomes under a particular proposal for a voluntary

privatization system (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1998), David Cutler (1998, p. 358) argues:

        “We typically think that giving people choice is optimal since people can decide what is
        best for them. Thus the economic bias is to believe that, if people want to opt out of
        social security, they should be allowed to do so. In the context of social security
        privatization, however, this analysis is not right. Allowing people to opt out of social
        security to avoid adverse redistribution is not efficient; it just destroys what society was
        trying to accomplish. If rich people and two-worker families opt out of social security,


        3
          Some lawmakers strongly advocate the payment of spouse and survivor benefits to encourage
one parent to remain at home with young children. To equalize the treatment of one and two earner
households under social security, other lawmakers have proposed various plans that would split the
credit for earnings in any year evenly between both household members, while eliminating spouse and
survivor benefits.

                                                      3
        for example, we will no longer be able to redistribute from rich to poor or from dual
        earners to single earners. One of the purposes of social security will have been
        defeated. This is a cost of privatization of which we must be aware.”

        Our analysis will determine just how much redistribution the current system fosters. This

information is required by policy makers to decide whether they are still happy with the redistribution

that is being fostered by a set of rules established many years ago, when the typical household had a

single earner. The calculations will also provide a benchmark to help understand the effects of various

reforms. Any large change in the system is going to require an accounting of winners and losers, which

in turn depends on the extent of redistribution under the current system. In addition, a major

determinant of whether, if given the choice, individuals would choose to participate in a system of

privatized or other individual social security accounts over the current system, or to vote for a privatized

system, is whether or not they benefit from redistribution under the current system.

        There are a number of new and related papers on social security redistribution which use

different data sets and focus on somewhat different calculations from those in our study. Liebman

(1999), in a paper completed contemporaneously with our own, modifies data from the Survey of

Income and Program Participation, using cohorts born from 1925 to 1929 and 1945 to 1949. As in

our paper, Liebman has available matched earnings records from the Social Security Administration.

He creates a simulation model and uses the model to analyze redistribution due to social security, and to

project redistribution under the current social security rules and into the future, with life tables and tax

and benefit values for 2075. Coronado, Fullerton and Glass (1999a and b) construct covered earnings

histories from PSID data, and construct a simulation model which they use to analyze the effects on the




                                                      4
distribution of benefits and taxes of various schemes to reform social security.4 One of their concerns is

with earnings capacity, so they focus on benefit and tax distribution by total family potential lifetime

income. While potential lifetime income is computed on the assumption that both spouses work full

time throughout their potential work lives, benefits and taxes are computed from the earnings histories in

the PSID data and projections are based on the actual work histories. Feldstein and Liebman (1999)

use the data for the 1925 to 1929 birth cohort from SIPP, the same data as in Liebman (1999), to

analyze redistribution under proposed privatization reforms.




                                     II. A Conceptual Framework.

A. How the Social Security Benefit Formula Works.

        For each individual, the Social Security Administration calculates a measure of lifetime earnings

which is an average of the high 35 years of earnings, with zeros used if the individual has not worked 35

years. A progressive benefit formula is then applied so that those who have low computed lifetime

earnings have a higher benefits, relative to earnings, than do those with high earnings. Specifically, the

formula for 2000 specifies benefits that are 90 percent of the first $6,372 of annual earnings, 32 percent

of the next $32,052, and 15 percent of remaining earnings. The earnings measure is typically expressed


        4
         To be included in the sample, Coronado, Fullerton and Glass require that the respondent
remain in the PSID sample for the entire period. Although the effects of attrition bias are not clear, this
is a very selective sample since low earners and the divorced are more likely to be lost. In contrast,
when social security earnings records are available for a representative sample as in the HRS, attrition
over the period is not an issue. To be sure, selection bias in matching the social security records for
survey respondents is an issue. However, studies to date do not show any important systematic
relationship between observables and the availability of a matched social security record in the HRS
(Gustman and Steinmeier, 1999; Haider and Solon, 1999; and Olson, forthcoming).

                                                      5
as a monthly amount, the Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME), and the benefit amount is called

the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA). By applying a progressive benefit formula to each individual’s

own AIME, benefits are redistributed to those individuals with low covered earnings over their lifetimes.




        Benefits to spouses and survivors affect the relationship between benefits and earnings, both at

the level of the individual and at the level of the family. Spouses are entitled to roughly half of their

partner’s benefits, and survivors are entitled to an amount roughly equal to the benefits that would have

been payable to the deceased spouse.5 Divorced individuals can collect benefits as though they were

still married as long as the marriage lasted longer than 10 years. In all cases, an individual is paid first

the benefit that he or she would collect on the basis of his or her own earnings record. If the spouse or

survivor benefits would be more, the individual is considered a “dual beneficiary,” and an additional

payment is made to raise the benefits to the level of spouse or survivor benefits they are entitled to.6

        As a result of these rules, only the high earner in a household generates spouse and survivor

benefits for their spouse. In addition, the more a secondary earner makes, the less spouse and survivor

benefits are worth to the family. Thus spouse and survivor benefits are of greatest value to one earner

couples, which often are families where the earnings of the working spouse are relatively high. For such

        5
          The exact payments to each spouse also depend on when the benefits are claimed. These
rules are described in The Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin.
        6
          There are exceptions when a spouse was employed in a job not covered by social security, in
particular as a state and local government worker who did not contribute to the system. There also are
other exceptions governing the benefits of individuals who have pensions from uncovered employment.
The Social Security System also provides benefits to the disabled and to surviving minor children. This
paper is concerned with old age and survivors benefits, and does not address the issue of the
distribution of disability or other benefits than retirement, spouse an survivor benefits.

                                                       6
families, while the progressive benefit formula would appear to work to the advantage of a secondary

earner, the availability of spouse and survivor benefits largely negates this advantage. Even if the

secondary worker did not work, he or she would often collect nearly the same amount of benefits

anyway as spouse or survivor benefits.

B. Individual Versus Family Earnings.

        However benefits are calculated, whether they include only the basic benefit or spouse and

survivor benefits, measures of redistribution will differ depending on whether they are calculated over

individuals or over families. Thus it is worthwhile to briefly discuss how earnings in the family relate to

earnings by individuals.

        Lifetime income for each individual is the sum over the working life of the individual’s wage rate

in each year times the fraction of that year worked. Some of the individual earners are husbands and

some are wives. Typically, the earnings of wives are lower than those of their husbands, because the

wage rate is lower, because the fraction of each year worked is lower, and because the number of

years worked are lower. As a result, redistribution fostered by the Social Security System, when

measured among individuals, will to some extent involve redistribution from husbands with higher

earnings to wives with lower earnings.

        Thus when we ask how well social security redistributes benefits among families according to

their incomes, and how the redistribution among families relates to the redistribution among individuals,

it will be important to consider how individuals aggregate into family units. Lifetime family incomes are

simply the sum of the lifetime individual incomes of the two spouses. As Smith (1979) carefully

explains, the relationships between the distributions of individual and family earnings will depend on the

                                                     7
correlation between the wage offers to husbands and their wives, which we expect to be positive as

long as schooling is correlated between husbands and wives, and on the variation of labor supply with

own and with spouse’s earnings. If wives work less in households where husbands have high earnings,

that will narrow the distribution of family earnings relative to the earnings distribution of individual

earnings.

        Our aim in the empirical section is to determine the extent of redistribution fostered by the

current Social Security System on the basis of each individual’s earnings, and then to see how the

extent of redistribution changes when we instead look at redistribution on the basis of total family

earnings and finally at redistribution on the basis of potential family earnings, which is what the family

could earn if both partners worked full time.




                                                III. The Data.

        The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is a longitudinal, nationally representative study of

older Americans. The survey began in 1992 with an initial cohort of 12,652 individuals from 7,607

households, with at least one household member born from 1931 to 1941. Social security earnings

histories were linked for 9472 respondents, or about 75 percent of the respondents to the survey. 7 Of

the respondents with linked earnings histories, there were 7370 who were born between 1931 and

1941, for whom the HRS is representative. In the HRS nomenclature, these respondents are said to be


        7
           In wave 1, 72 percent of respondents gave permission to link social security earnings histories
to their interview record. That was raised to 80 percent as a result of additional attempts in waves 2
and 3 to obtain permissions. Records were actually linked for 95 percent of those who gave
permissions.

                                                       8
“age eligible.” The remaining respondents are included in the survey because they were married to age

eligible respondents, but by themselves they do not form a representative sample of those age groups.

        There are a number of caveats we should mention at the outset of the empirical analysis. First,

the HRS samples a cohort born from 1931 to1941. Members of that cohort exhibit higher levels of

women’s labor force participation than are found in cohorts born before them, but lower levels of

participation than are found for cohorts born after 1941. Thus the redistribution fostered by the Social

Security System will differ for the cohorts who follow the HRS.

        The analysis uses the current benefit law and the tax schedules in place at the time wages were

earned. The rules governing social security will certainly be subject to change as policy makers attempt

to introduce financial balance into a system that is insolvent in the long run. But the HRS cohort is old

enough that while its members may experience some reduction in social security benefits, the scope for

such a reduction is narrowing as the cohort ages. For example, even if there were a compromise that

raised the normal retirement age, as time passes, such a compromise is less and less likely to be applied

to those born before 1941. Since most of the social security taxes levied on the HRS cohort have

already been paid, payroll tax increases enacted in the future also will have limited effect on the

members of this cohort.8

        Third, in this paper, when calculating the current value of yearly social security benefits, we use


        8
          We are aware that changes in social security to be adopted in the future may reduce benefits
or raise taxes for younger cohorts, equivalent to twenty percent of their benefits or more. Without
knowing how revisions will be shaped, and if some degree of privatization will be introduced, we have
no way of knowing how redistribution will be changed by any remedy that is adopted in the future.
Thus we focus on outcomes that are consistent with current social security benefit formulas and taxes,
for a generation that is on the verge of retirement.

                                                     9
the mortality tables from the Social Security Administration which are age and gender specific, but do

not distinguish the effects of income or race on mortality. We recognize that differences in mortality

related to income reduce any redistribution fostered by the social security benefit formula. Members of

families with high incomes live longer than members of families with low incomes (e.g., see Duleep,

1989; Panis and Lillard, 1995). Accordingly, our findings will overstate the extent of any redistribution

associated with the current social security benefit formula.9

        Fourth, findings are sensitive to the interest rates employed. For the most part, we use actual

interest rates observed to date. To project for the future, we use the intermediate interest rate and

wage growth assumptions from the Social Security Administration.10




                     IV. Relation of AIME to Work History and Wage Rates.

        In this section we assess the earnings and work patterns of the age eligible population in the

HRS. The unit of observation throughout this section is the individual. All information in the tables

assessing patterns of work and earnings is taken solely from the actual social security records from

1951 to 1991.11 Only age eligible respondents with actual social security records are analyzed in this

section, and only earnings prior to and including 1991 and earnings below the social security maximum


        9
         Note, however, that Liebman (1999) finds only modest differences in the rates of return to
social security when mortality tables are adjusted for education in addition to sex and race.
        10
          If one uses a very low interest rate, it is possible to conclude that, when spouse benefits in
high income households are taken into account, the benefit formula is regressive in the way it
redistributes within generations. See Steuerle and Bakija (1994).
        11
         In particular, the AIME amounts reported in this section are the highest 35 years of earnings
through 1991, indexed to 1992 using the social security average earnings index.

                                                     10
are considered.12 The purpose of this section is to analyze the actual pattern of working years and the

wages over those working years, without introducing the uncertainties fostered by imputations.

Widows and respondents who had been previously married 10 years or more are treated as married,

since their benefits may be affected by the earnings of their former spouses.

A. Averages by Sex, Marital Status, and Primary vs. Secondary Earner.

        First we consider in Table 1 the average values of average indexed yearly earnings (12 times

AIME) plus some additional variables measuring years of work and earnings. These are: number of

years and average annual earnings in years with non-zero earnings, number of years and average annual

earnings in years with significant earnings (a concept to be explained shortly), and lifetime household

earnings. The rows report results for the full sample and for subgroups divided by sex and marital

status. The last two rows report for the high (primary) earner and low (secondary) earner in a

household. The number of observations is the simple count of individual respondents, and the earnings

amounts are indexed to 1992 using the social security average annual earnings index and are in

thousands of dollars.

        More specifically, Column 1 shows the average values of average indexed yearly earnings. The

value is around $15,000 for all respondents, with average AIME’s of around $23,000 for males and

$8,000 for females. The average AIME of unmarried males is considerably less than that of married




        12
           In calculating household earnings, or in categorizing an earner as a primary or secondary
earner in the family, it is occasionally necessary to impute the earnings of the spouse if the spouse (or
former spouse, in the case of widowed respondents and divorced respondents whose marriages lasted
10 years or more) does not have a social security record.


                                                    11
males, but the reverse is the case with unmarried females relative to their married counterparts. The

second column of Table 1 reports the number of years with nonzero earnings (even if earnings were

$200 from a summer job) and annual earnings in years with nonzero earnings. All age eligible

respondents with matched records average 26 years of covered earnings through 1991 (the median is

29 years). Annual earnings in those years average $17,000. On average HRS respondents were 56

years old at the time of the HRS survey and were expecting to work about another seven years. At

retirement, the AIME should be higher for median respondents by about a quarter. A comparison of

the first three columns suggests that the reason that women have only a third the AIME of men is

because they work less than two thirds the number of years worked by men, and when they do work,

their yearly earnings are half those of men.

        To avoid including low-paying summer jobs and similar work in the averages, we introduce the

notion of “significant” earnings in Columns 4 and 5. To calculate significant earnings, we first find the

average of the highest five years of indexed earnings (in order to mute the effect of a year of very high

earnings). Earnings in any particular year are presumed to be significant if the indexed earnings in that

year are at least 25% of this average. Thus for a person with a continuous earnings history, all earnings

are deemed to be significant as long as the ratio of high (five year average) to low real earnings is not

more than 4 to 1. Almost a fifth of the earnings years are excluded because they involved very low

earnings, and this ratio is slightly larger for women than for men. Correspondingly, average earnings are

higher by about a sixth if years with very low earnings are excluded. Again, this ratio is higher for

women than for men.

        Lifetime earnings of households sum the earnings of men and women in two earner households,

                                                     12
or include the earnings of the single earner in the case of unmarried individuals. Households with

women have about 95 percent of the earnings of households with men, reflecting the lower earnings and

greater number of single women than single men.

        Although we will not analyze in detail the redistribution from singles to marrieds, there are

considerable differences between married and unmarried. Married men have about ten percent more

years of covered earnings than unmarried men, and for married men, earnings in years of nonzero

earnings are about a quarter higher. Married women have about four fifths of the years of nonzero

earnings of unmarried women, and about three fourths of the earnings in years that they worked.

        The last two rows of Table 1 report similar statistics for primary vs. secondary earnings.13 In

married households, the highest earner is denoted as primary, and the spouse is secondary. The earner

in single households is considered primary. It is clear from these figures that both work and earnings

when working differ considerably between primary and secondary earners. We do not find anything

near earnings parity within HRS households. Thus we can very clearly expect the distributions of family

earnings to be more concentrated, e.g., to exhibit a lower ratio of standard deviation to the mean, than

the distributions of individual earnings.

B. Earnings Measures and Measures of Years of Work by AIME.

        Table 2 begins an examination of years of work and earnings when working among individuals

falling in different AIME categories. The first six columns report, by AIME, the same information as in

Table 1, and the last column is the weighted percentage of observations falling within the specified


        13
         In his analysis of distribution, Liebman (1999) arrays families according to the earnings of the
primary earner.

                                                    13
AIME range, using HRS weights. Thus, the 1481 respondents in the first row, who have annualized

AIME’s of from 0 to $3000, make up a weighted 19% of the total of 7370 respondents. Notice from

the last column of the table that almost a third of the respondents have annualized AIME’s of $6000 or

less, while the top third have annualized AIME’s of $21,000 or more. The median AIME lies in the

fifth bracket at about $13,000 per year at an annualized rate.

        As noted above, on average HRS respondents were born in 1936, so they were 56 years old

at the time of the HRS survey, and were expecting to work about another seven years. As of 1992,

those in the lowest AIME category have only worked 9 years. AIME is calculated on the basis of

highest 35 years of earnings, so those in the lowest AIME category worked about a quarter of the

years included in the AIME calculation. If they worked another seven years on average, they would

end up working for half the period. But given their track record, most of those in this group would

work less than that, if at all. The twelve percent of the sample that falls in the second AIME category

have worked 18 years. If they worked seven more years, they would end up working two thirds of the

35 years used in calculating AIME. However, they too will probably work a smaller fraction of the 35

year period. Clearly an important reason for having a low AIME is that one has not consistently

worked. Even in years when they have worked, workers with low AIME’s are less likely to be

working “significantly,” suggesting that low earners have more uneven earnings streams than high

earners.14


        14
           For many individuals, low wages are the result of choosing to work part-time, and/or to
interrupt consecutive years of employment with a number of years out of the labor force. Thus
significant earnings may understate potential earnings had the individual worked full-time over their adult
life.

                                                    14
        Low earnings in each year worked are also a cause of low AIME, as is clear from the data in

column 2 of the table. As one moves down the lowest five AIME categories, the change in average

earnings and the change in years with nonzero earnings appear to be roughly of equal importance in

explaining the variation in AIME. From the sixth AIME category on, that is above median AIME, most

people will have worked in most years since leaving school, so that the increase in the wage as one

proceeds up the AIME categories provides most of the explanation for the increase in AIME.

        Lifetime household (family) earnings (husband and wife, or sole earner) are reported in the fifth

column of Table 2 by AIME category. Lifetime family earnings include the sum total of all social

security covered earnings in the 1951-1991 period, indexed to 1992 by the social security average

annual earnings index. For individuals whose spouses did not have social security records, the records

were imputed by matching procedures.15 For married, widowed, and divorced (with a marriage which

lasted at least 10 years) respondents, the household earnings is the sum of the lifetime earnings of the

respondent and the spouse.

        Lifetime family earnings are not nearly as dispersed as are AIME amounts. They increase from

$620,000 to $1,560,000 from the lowest to highest AIME categories, an increase of only 2.5 times in




        15
           The imputed match is done on the basis of gender, cohort, race (3 categories), earnings (6
categories), and assets (8 categories), which are available for the spouse even if the spouse was not
interviewed. For the match, we look at married respondents who had characteristics which were
identical (or as nearly so as we could find) to the characteristics of the non-interviewed spouse. For
widows and divorced respondents, we do not have any information about the former spouse, so the
match is based on the characteristics of the respondent. In this case, we try to find spouses who were
married to individuals with the same gender, cohort, race, and educational attainment (7 categories) as
the widowed or divorced respondent. We substitute educational attainment for earnings and assets,
since earnings and assets can be significantly affected by the fact of widowhood or divorce.

                                                    15
lifetime family earnings. There is a corresponding increase in AIME of 24 times from lowest to highest

category. This comparison suggests that AIME is a rather poor indicator of lifetime earnings of the

household. It also suggests that individuals falling in the bottom AIME category are not as poor as

their AIME suggests. Consequently, we can expect that although the social security benefit formula

appears to be very progressive, it is going to be less effective in redistributing benefits among families

according to lifetime earnings than is suggested by its sharp progressive structure. To be sure, those

with fewest years of covered earnings, and lowest earnings when working, fall in the bottom AIME

category. But their spouses frequently have higher earnings, and that limits the effectiveness of any

redistribution based on AIME of the covered individual.

        Table 3 breaks out the results of Table 2 by gender; to avoid unnecessary clutter only the

results for significant earnings are presented. As we go down the columns, the years of earnings within

each AIME group and average earnings in those years is very similar for the two genders. The major

differences are in the last two columns for each group. Almost two thirds of women fall within the

lowest three AIME groups, with almost one third falling within the very lowest AIME group, which

averages 6 years of significant work and $6,000 in average earnings in those year. In contrast, only 15

percent of men fall within the lowest three AIME groups. Because the women fall predominantly in the

lowest AIME groups, with few years of earnings and low earnings in those years, overall they have 60

percent of the years of significant earnings compared to men, and 50 percent of the earnings in those

years, as reported in the last row of the table. These results suggest that when we aggregate the men

and women living in the same households to compute a measure of family earnings, the distributions will

become relatively narrower.

                                                     16
        The other notable thing about Table 3 is in the lifetime household earnings column. For men,

low AIME amounts are associated with very low levels of lifetime household earnings, but for women

the household earnings amounts corresponding to low AIME’s are much higher. Men with AIME’s

between 0 and $3,000 have lifetime household earnings of only $170,000, but women with the same

level of AIME have household earnings of almost $700,000. This is another indication that women

with low AIME’s may be married with men with higher earning power, although the same does not

seem to be true of men with low AIME’s.

C. The Distribution of Significant Earnings by AIME.

        Table 2 reports average significant earnings by AIME category. Table 4 indicates the

distribution of those significant earnings within each AIME category. The entries in the table are

percentages of those in the AIME category with the indicated levels of annual significant earnings.

Thus, 25% of the individuals in the $0-3,000 annualized AIME bracket had 0 to $3,000 of significant

earnings in years in which they had positive significant earnings, and 27% of them had $3,000 to

$6,000 of significant earning in years when they had earnings. The figures in any column of the table

add up to 100 percent.

        Comparing significant earnings with AIME, there are many observations that appear to have

much higher significant earnings than their average indexed earnings, suggesting again that one reason

for their low realized earnings is few years of work with significant earnings. Almost half (48 percent)

of those with an annualized AIME of 0 to $3,000 have significant earnings averaging $6,000 or more in

each year of work with significant earnings. However, they have significant earnings less than half the

time. Of those with annualized AIMEs from $3000 to $6,000, 44 percent have significant earnings of

                                                    17
$12,000 or more, and 4.7 percent have significant earnings of more than $21,000. Similar patterns are

evident for the next few AIME categories as well. In all of these cases, much higher earnings than is

suggested by their AIME goes together with a significant number of years not worked. Another

indication of the importance of differences in years of work is the difference between the median value

of significant earnings, $19,400, and the median AIME of about $12,600.

        These distributions are sufficiently widespread to suggest that when AIME is used as a basis for

redistributing social security benefits, some with high earnings potential are beneficiaries of the resulting

redistribution. Significant numbers of workers falling in the low AIME categories have high earnings in

years of covered employment. Consequently, many workers falling in the lower AIME categories are

there because they work few years, rather than because they have low earnings potential. The result is

a disparity between earnings in years of covered work and AIME.

        The benefit formula treats generously everyone who is in a low AIME category, regardless of

whether the cause is a low level of earnings or few years of work. So a part of the redistribution of

social security benefits is from those who work more years to those who work fewer years.

Presumably, those who are falling the in low AIME categories with high earnings potentials are spouses

who choose not to participate for many years in the labor market. The next set of results considers the

consequences of these participation outcomes for the distribution of family earnings.

D. Further Details on the Distribution of Family Earnings By AIME.

        Table 5 presents the distribution of lifetime family income grouped by the AIME category of the

respondents, as measured by the total indexed social security earnings of both spouses. Note that for a

married couple, there will be two entries in the table, one for the AIME level of each spouse. The most

                                                      18
notable feature of this table, particularly for the lower AIME brackets, is the bimodal distributions of the

lifetime household incomes within each AIME bracket. There is a cluster of individuals at the lowest

observed level of lifetime household income for each AIME bracket. These are presumably

respondents who never married or whose spouses are essentially not working. At a considerably

higher level of lifetime household income there is a broader peak of respondents who, although their

own AIME is relatively low, are married to individuals with considerably higher lifetime earnings. In the

bottom two AIME categories, for example, 15-20% have lifetime household earnings in excess of

$1,250,000, which is 25% above the median lifetime household earnings level of about $1,000,000.

        Table 6 decomposes the first five columns of Table 5 by gender. Among the women, the same

bimodal distribution is evident, if anything even more pronounced. Among the men, however, the

bimodal distribution essentially disappears. For men who have low levels of AIME, only a relatively

small number have lifetime household earnings that are very high. Relatively few men are in these

categories, with only 15% having annualized AIME levels of less than $9,000, but those men are likely

to live in households with very limited lifetime resources. The same is not true for women. The majority

of women are in the lowest three AIME brackets, but most of them have fairly high family lifetime

earnings.




  V. Redistribution of Social Security Taxes and Benefits Among Individuals and Families.

        The next set of results deals with distributions of social security taxes and benefits. Since in this

section we are more concerned with redistribution, rather than with distributions of work and earnings,

we felt that it was important to include the full sample in these calculations. Hence, we include all age

                                                     19
eligible respondents, regardless of whether they had a social security record or not, and we impute

records for those for whom none was obtained.16 Further, these results use earnings which are

projected beyond 1991 until the individual’s indicated expected retirement age 17. The AIME figures

reported in this section are the real value of the expected actual AIME. Nominal earnings amounts are

indexed by the social security average annual earnings index up to age 60, as specified in the AIME

calculation rules, and the value of the nominal AIME is adjusted from age 62 to 1992 using the Social

Security Administration’s projected inflation rate.

A. Alternative Measures of Redistribution.

        Table 7 presents baseline results for all age eligible respondents using own benefits and taxes.

Each column of figures pertains to ten percent of the covered individuals, with the deciles defined




        16
            Specifically, we used starting date on their current job, starting and ending dates for their last
jobs (i.e., the job last held by those not working in 1992), a previous 5 year job, and up to two other
jobs with pensions. Respondents were also asked about final earnings on those jobs. In addition, we
used information in Wave 3 about the date of entry into the labor force, how many years were worked
before the date the previous job was secured, and how many years of work were in jobs covered by
social security. Earnings for other years are estimated by adjusting observed earnings on the basis of
experience. The coefficients for experience, based on data from the Survey of Consumer Finances,
are: experience .0138, experience squared -.000283, and experience * education .000996
(Anderson, Gustman and Steinmeier, 1999).
        17
         Future earnings are projected by assuming that real earnings observed in the last year in the
1991 will persist until the respondent’s expected retirement date. If the respondent has no earnings in
1991, zeros are projected for future years. If the expected retirement age was greater than 70, or if the
individual indicated that he never expected to retire, a retirement age of 70 was used unless the
individual had already worked beyond that age in 1992. If the respondent did not provide an expected
retirement age, an age of 62 was used, again unless the respondent had already worked beyond that
age.

                                                      20
according to place in the distribution of AIME. 18 The first two rows are ex ante expected taxes and

expected benefits. To calculate these figures, the taxes and benefits each year are adjusted for the

probability of collecting them.19 The resulting figures are then indexed to 1992 using the 10 year

government bond rate if the year is before 1992, or the Social Security Administration’s projected

interest rate if the year is after 1992. Finally, the adjusted taxes are added to get the figures in the table,

and the same is done for benefits. Taxes and benefits are measured in thousands of 1992 dollars, and

Table 7 includes results for all eligible respondents.

        The last column of the table indicates that for the HRS cohort, on average social security taxes

will exceed benefits. The difference is about $15,000 per age eligible HRS respondent.20 We use the

current law, rather than a hypothetical law revised to restore financial balance in the system, as the

baseline in judging the current amount of redistribution.21 Reflecting the progressivity of the benefit


        18
           Table 7 and those that follow group the population by AIME decile, which is a change from
the first 6 tables. The earlier tables address the question of how hours and earnings are distributed in
each AIME category, and having even dollar brackets facilitates that discussion. However, the
distributional issues discussed in Tables 7 to 10 are most easily understood if the population is grouped
into deciles.
        19
          The taxes and benefits are calculated ex-ante from the time the individual starts paying taxes.
        20
         Because taxes are collected on average 30 years or so earlier than benefits are paid, this
amount is extremely sensitive to the exact series used to discount taxes and wages to a common date.
        21
           As noted earlier, if efforts to fix the insolvency of the system are adopted soon enough, the
shortfall of benefits below taxes in Table 5 may understate the shortfall between benefits and taxes
experienced by the HRS cohort. But the HRS cohort is old enough that its members may not
experience a further reductions in social security benefits. Without knowing how revisions will be
shaped, and if some degree of privatization will be introduced, we have no way of knowing how
redistribution will be changed by any remedy that is adopted. Using similar reasoning, it will be
dangerous to project the experience of the HRS cohort onto younger cohorts without making significant
adjustments.

                                                      21
formula, respondents’ benefits exceed taxes through the bottom half of the income distribution. For the

upper half of the distribution by AIME, taxes exceed benefits, by increasing amounts as we move

through the deciles. The lowest decile does not have more than $500 in either taxes or benefits

because if they have worked at all, they generally will not have worked more than the 10 years

necessary to entitle them to benefits.

        The next two rows are measures of redistribution within the deciles. The gini coefficients are

based on a diagram where the horizontal axis is the cumulative weighted taxes, and the vertical axis is

the cumulative weighted benefits. The gini coefficient for the first decile is omitted since few taxes are

paid or benefits received for this group. From the second decile on, the gini coefficients fall gradually,

suggesting that the amount of redistribution within AIME categories declines with higher incomes. The

gini coefficient in the last column, which measures redistribution among the entire population, reflects the

redistribution among the various deciles, and is higher than the coefficients within the individual deciles.

        The next row is an alternative measure of redistribution within the column group. To get these

figures, the actual benefits of each individual are compared to the benefits that individual would have

received if benefits were the same proportion of taxes as they are for that group. If the actual benefits

are more than the pro-rata benefits, given the taxes, we can say that benefits were redistributed to this

individual from other members of the group. The difference between the actual benefits and the pro-

rata benefits is a measure of the amount of redistribution to (from) this individual. The values reported

in the table for this row are the sum of the redistributions for all individuals who had positive

redistributions, divided by the total benefits for the group in the column. This measure is essentially the

maximum gap between the gini curve and the 45% line in the diagram for the gini coefficient. A figure

                                                     22
of 10% means that of the total benefits received by the group, 10% would have to be redistributed from

some individuals of the group to other individuals in order for everyone to receive the same ratio of

benefits to taxes paid. The values reported in this row have a similar pattern to the one observed for

the gini coefficient. The value of 14.1% in the last column means that for the entire population, the

amount of redistributed benefits amounts to 14.1% of total benefits.

        The next two rows of the table measure redistribution among the various deciles. The first of

these two rows compares actual benefits of the group to the benefits that would have been received if

benefits were simply pro-rated to taxes for the entire population. This measure of redistribution is a

measure of net redistribution to the decile. For instance, the value of 37% in the fourth decile means

that the actual benefits of that decile are 37% higher than would be the case if benefits were

proportional of taxes for the entire population. This 37% obviously comes at the expense of other

deciles. Again, this measure is essentially meaningless for the first decile, which pays few taxes and

receives almost no benefits. In the second and third deciles, over half of the benefits received by those

in those deciles are due to redistribution of benefits from other deciles. On the other hand, those in the

top AIME decile receive 33% less than their pro-rata share of taxes; those benefits are redistributed to

those in other deciles.

        The row labeled as “Share of Total Redistribution@ looks at redistribution to those in the

AIME decile in another light. The previous row expressed the net redistribution to the group as a

percentage of total benefits to the group, but this row expresses the net redistribution to the group as a

percentage of the total amount redistributed for all individuals. The share of redistribution rises

between the second and third deciles principally because the benefit amounts are larger in the third

                                                    23
decile, but from the third decile on, the share of redistribution measure again declines as AIME

increases. The top two deciles provide almost two-thirds of the total amounts redistributed. The

redistribution is slightly negative for the first decile because this decile pays some taxes but almost never

receives benefits because they do not have the requisite 10 years of work. Another point of note in this

row is that the positive amounts (as do the negative amounts) sum to about 76.5%. This means that

almost three quarters of the total redistribution is among the deciles, with only a quarter redistributed

within the deciles.

        The final rows of the table give percentiles for internal rates of return. Before calculating these

rates, the taxes and benefits are indexed to 1992 using the historical CPI or the projected social

security inflation rate. That means that these rates are effectively real rates. To get these figures, each

individual in the group has a real internal rate of return calculated. These rates are then arrayed by

value, and the (weighted) percentiles are found by picking the appropriate spot in the distribution. An

examination of these figures reveals that when the benefits approximately equal taxes in the previous

rows, the internal rates of return are approximately 3.0%. Another way to interpret this is that the

average of the historical real returns for the HRS cohort has been approximately 3.0%. Note also that

the percentage of observations is a weighted percentage, as in the previous tables. On average, these

real rates of return are 4.8 percent for those in the 90th percentile of returns, to 0.4 percent for those in

the 10th percentile of returns. The distributions of returns decline as expected as AIME increases.

B. Measures of Redistribution Using Individual and Family Benefits and Individual AIME

Distribution.

        Table 8 reports benefits redistributed shares, gini coefficients, and median rate of return. The

                                                     24
first row simply repeats some of the results from the final column of Table 7. The next two rows split

the results into men and women separately. The second section reports results when benefits include, in

addition to own benefits, spouse and survivor benefits, while the third section counts social security

benefits and taxes for both spouses in the household.22 Each section takes us another step toward

considering redistribution at the level of the family.

        The first column of Table 8 gives amount of redistribution among all individuals in the group.

For the first row, redistribution is measured among all respondents in the sample. The second and third

rows suggest that there is less redistribution within the groups of men and women taken separately than

for all respondents. The reason is that much of the redistribution based on own benefits is from men to

women, because, as we have seen above, the AIMEs for women are consistently lower than they are

for men.23

        The second section of the table suggests that there is less redistribution among all individuals

        22
          More specifically, the first section uses only the social security taxes, including the employer
share but excluding the medicare taxes, and the benefits that the respondent will collect on the basis of
his or her own earnings. The second set uses the same taxes but includes the benefits that the spouse
will collect on the basis of the respondents earnings over and above the benefits that the spouse would
collect anyway based on the spouse’s own earnings. The third set of calculations sums the ex ante
taxes and total benefits of the two partners, even if one of the partners has died or if the partners are
divorced, as long as they were married for 10 years or more. This treats married and
widowed/divorced respondents on an equal ex ante basis, and does not treat differently the woman
whose husband dies one year before the survey differently from the women whose husband dies one
year after the survey. We impute former husband’s earnings based on individuals matched via the
process described in footnote 15.
        23
          When we recalculate Table 5 separately for men and women, we find that for men, taxes paid
(1150) exceed benefits (765) by a wide margin. For women, taxes (448) fall short of benefits (513),
indicating that women benefit from redistribution. On average their benefits are increased 29 percent,
and they receive 88 percent of all benefits redistributed, while men donate 22 percent of their benefits
to accomplish this redistribution.

                                                         25
when own and spouse benefits are taken into account. As suggested by the earlier literature, high

AIME respondents apparently benefit disproportionately from spouse and survivor benefits, suggesting

their spouses have lower earnings relative to their own. Notice that there is little change within the

men’s and women’s groups when own and spouse benefits are taken into account. It is the apparent

redistribution among all individuals, and again importantly from men to women, that is reduced when

own and spouse benefits are counted. Finally, the amount of redistribution declines again when family

benefits are attributed to each respondent.24 What is happening here is that within the household, the

redistribution towards spouses who worked part of their lifetimes are offset by the redistribution away

from the husband. The redistribution to single women from men is not netted out, however, and this

means that there is more redistribution when all respondents are grouped than within the groups of men

and women alone.

        The second column of the Table 8 presents gini coefficients. Benefits and taxes are more

unequally distributed among women than men. When all respondents are pooled, the amount of

inequality between benefits and taxes, and thus the amount of redistribution, declines when own and

spouse benefits are counted. There is a further decline, particularly among women, when family

benefits and taxes are attributed to each respondent.

        The last column 8 indicates median rates of return by sex and type of benefit. Reflecting the

greater redistribution to women, from row 1 we see that rates of return to social security are almost




        24
          Since the family redistributions are identical for husbands and wives, the weights of married
(and widowed or divorced) respondents are given half weight in order to avoid double counting of
these redistributions

                                                     26
twice as high for women than men. When spouse and survivor benefits are taken into account and

attributed to the earner who is responsible, the rates of return increase within the group of all

respondents and within the group of men. There is no change within the group of women because, by

and large their husbands’ earnings are higher than their own earnings, and as a result, there is little value

to the spouse and survivor benefits they accrue. Taking family benefits into account slightly increases

the rate of return for men and for all, and reduces the rate of return for women.

C. Measures of Redistribution Using Individual and Family AIME Distributions.

        Table 9 reports the redistribution to those falling in each decile group, under various definitions

of the group and of relevant benefits. The redistribution is measured as the percentage of benefits

accruing to the decile which have been redistributed from other deciles, so that the first row of Table 9

simply repeats the fifth row of Table 7. The first panel of Table 9 uses the annualized AIME of the

individual, while the second panel combines this with the annualized AIME of the spouse if the

respondent is married, widowed, or divorced. Within each panel, redistribution to the decile is

reported first on the basis of own benefits and taxes, second using a definition that also adds spouse

and survivor benefits based on the respondent’s own earnings, and third on the basis of family benefits

and taxes for each respondent.

        Looking at the top panel of the table, we find much less redistribution moving from the top row,

where we report the redistribution according to the simple social security formula, to the third row,

which reports redistribution using total family benefits. For those in the second to sixth deciles, the

redistribution declines sharply between the first row and the third row, and in particular from the second

row to the third row, where family benefits are considered. As with Table 8, the introduction of family

                                                     27
benefits causes the high redistribution to at least some low AIME women to be offset by the

redistribution away from their spouses, reducing the net redistribution. In the second decile, this effect

reduces redistribution from a half of benefits to a quarter, and in the third to fifth deciles, the share of

benefits due to redistribution falls by a fifth of total benefits or more. However, in the top two deciles,

the principal reduction in redistribution occurs when we add spouse and survivor benefits. In these

deciles the spouse and survivor benefits are most valuable, since they accrue primarily to higher wage

individuals whose spouses have relatively low AIME’s.

        In the bottom panel of the table, regrouping the deciles according to family AIME’s, which are

roughly equivalent to lifetime family earnings, there are two findings of note.25 First, the pattern of

changes when we add spouse and survivor benefits, and then family benefits, essentially reproduces the

pattern in the top panel. This indicates that the same processes which produced the pattern in the top

panel continues to operate even when we look at lifetime family income rather than lifetime individual

income. However, the levels of redistribution in the bottom panel are almost always lower than in the

top panel. The deciles in the bottom panel are simply a reshuffling of the same respondents in the top

panel, except that in the reshuffing some high AIME individuals are coupled with lower AIME

individuals, and vice versa. In this regard, note that the distribution of family AIME amounts is relatively




        25
             The observations in this table are still individuals, although they are now classified by family
AIME. In some results, Liebman (1999) classifies families based on the AIME for the high earner; in
others he classifies families based on the AIME for the total covered earnings of both spouses. In the
latter case, he divides both taxes and benefits evenly among each spouse, a treatment that by itself
would generate tables that, during the period of the marriage, are analogous to the tables we construct
that report redistribution based on family AIME.

                                                      28
narrower than the distribution of individual AIME amounts.26 This process also reshuffles some

individuals with high individual AIME’s and high losses from redistribution to deciles lower in the family

AIME distribution, thereby tending to reduce the redistribution among the deciles. As can be seen

when we compare the redistribution observed in the top row of Panel A of Table 9 with the bottom

row of Panel B, the measured redistribution is halved when respondents are grouped by their family’s

AIME, and benefits and taxes are considered at the family level, rather than when individuals are

ordered by their own AIME and only individual benefits are considered.




                          VI. Redistribution When Families Are Classified

                            By Earnings Capacity (Significant Earnings).

        Table 10 reports on benefits lost or gained as a result of redistribution when respondents are

grouped by earnings capacity, as measured by“significant earnings”.27 The AIME measures of Tables 7

to 9 are roughly proportional to realized lifetime earnings, while significant earnings are roughly

proportional to potential lifetime earnings. The two concepts differ because not all potential earnings




        26
         For instance, the gap between the 25th and 75th percentiles of individual AIME’s is from
about $6,000 to about 28,000, or 4.5 to 1, while the similar gap of family AIME’s is from about
$11,000 to about $39,000, or 3.5 to 1.
        27
           As before, “significant” earnings are 25% or more of the average of the 5 highest earnings
years, after adjustment to 1992 dollars using the CPI. The combined total significant annual earnings is
simply the sum of the annual earnings of the husband and the wife. All of the earnings figures in Table
10 include all earnings, not just covered earnings or those below the social security maximum earnings
amount.

                                                     29
will be realized if the respondent has extended periods not working. 28 In the first panel of Table 10,

each respondent is ordered according to the individual respondent’s “significant earnings”. The

second panel orders respondents by the “significant earnings” for the respondent’s family.29

        As we have seen earlier, especially for those in the lower deciles, their significant earnings are

much higher than their AIME. That is, many of those with a low AIME have not worked many years,

but when they did work, their yearly earnings were much higher than their AIME suggests. As a result,

the brackets for the bottom deciles of earners in Table 10 are much wider than the brackets in Table 9.

        Compared to the top panel of Table 9, the redistribution percentages in the top panel of Table

10 appear to be slightly less. This occurs because some individuals with low realized AIME’s

nevertheless have higher potential earnings, and therefore higher “significant” earnings. These

individuals, who receive positive amounts of redistribution, are reshuffled to higher deciles when

significant earnings are considered, and therefore tend to dilute the negative redistributions in those

deciles. This in turn reduces the measured extent of redistribution among deciles when significant

earnings are considered.

        However, the major finding of Table 10 comes in looking at the bottom row of the bottom

panel. This row looks at family taxes and benefits for individuals grouped according to the potential



        28
         For example, if the wife earns $40,000 for 7 years, her significant annual earnings are
$40,000 even if she is out of the labor force for the other years.
        29
           Coronado, Fullerton and Glass (1999a) order families based on full family earnings, which
assumes that each spouse works full time at the wage observed when they were working. We obtain
the same ordering among families when we use “significant earnings” for the family to order families by
their earnings capacity. They also make an alternative calculation where they use the average wage for
the sample to value leisure at the same price across each individual.

                                                     30
earnings of the family. Compare this to the first row of Table 9, which looks at the individual taxes and

benefits according to the actual earnings of the individual. The redistribution figures in the bottom row

of Table 10 appear to be roughly a quarter of the corresponding figures in the top row of Table 9. The

implication is that when family taxes and benefits are used, and when respondents are grouped

according to their total potential family income, the redistribution among deciles is dramatically reduced.

That is, the amount of redistribution from families with high potential income to families with low

potential income, the type of redistribution that most of us think about when we talk about

redistribution, is much lower than an analysis grouping individuals according to individual realized

earnings would suggest. Instead, much of the redistribution among families based on potential family

income must occur within deciles. The obvious candidate is transfers from families with two earners to

traditional families with roughly the same combined earning power but in which only one spouse is a

lifetime worker.

        Figure 1 uses rates of return to summarize these results. The top panel shows the strong

redistribution when deciles are computed according to each respondent’s AIME, and also shows the

25th to 75th percentile range of the rates of return within each decile. In the second panel, where

individuals are grouped by family AIME, the solid line becomes flatter, corresponding to the finding

above that almost half the redistribution fostered by the social security benefit formula is eliminated

when we evaluate redistribution on a family rather than on an individual basis. In the third panel, where

families are grouped according to their significant earnings, the system redistributes hardly at all.

Virtually all of the redistribution is within deciles rather than between deciles. Taken together these

results suggest that whatever redistribution exists under the current system is largely redistribution

                                                     31
among families with similar potential earnings capacities and benefits traditional families with a spouse

who chooses not to work.




                                              VI. Conclusion.

        This paper has investigated the extent to which the social security benefit formula redistributes

benefits from high to low earners. The extent of redistribution that is found depends on how one defines

high earners. The benefit formula clearly redistributes own benefits from own taxes when incomes are

measured for each individual by own AIME. Much of the redistribution at the individual level is from

men to women. The extent of redistribution is halved, however, when benefits and taxes for both

spouses are analyzed at the level of the family. Moreover, the remaining redistribution is mostly from

families that have spent many years in the labor force to those with fewer years of work. Thus when

we array families by earnings in years that they work, which is a measure of potential earnings, we find

that the benefit formula redistributes very little from families with high earnings potential to families with

low earnings potential.

        A direct examination of the social security benefit formula, and a finding that benefits are

redistributed from high to low earners when people are classified according to own AIME, might

suggest to policy makers that the current system is highly redistributive. One might then believe that

there is a considerable potential cost in terms of foregone redistribution to going from the present

system to an alternative that does not explicitly redistribute, e.g., to a system of national retirement

accounts that is neutral with regard to redistribution. However, our evidence suggests that it is a

mistake to argue for the current social security benefit formula on the grounds that it is highly

                                                      32
redistributive from families with high earnings potential to families with lower potential. A better

argument could be made if the focus were on redistributing from two earner families to traditional

families with one earner and a stay-at-home spouse.

        Without repeating all of the caveats mentioned earlier, it is appropriate to end with a word of

caution. The results presented in this paper pertain only to a single cohort, those born from 1931 to

1941. Further investigation is required before these findings can be generalized to the cohorts that will

follow. Nevertheless, it is clear from these results that the general perception that a great deal of

redistribution from the rich to the poor is accomplished by the progressive social security benefit

formula is greatly exaggerated. As a result, adoption of a social security scheme with individual

accounts designed to be neutral with regard to redistribution would make much less difference to the

distribution of social security benefits and taxes among families with different earnings capacities than is

commonly believed.30




        30
         Feldstein and Liebman (1999) discuss features of a system of individualized accounts that
would foster redistribution.

                                                     33
                                            References


        Anderson, Patricia M., Alan L. Gustman and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 1999. “Trends in Male
Labor Force Participation and Retirement: Some Evidence on the Role of Pension and Social Security
in the 1970s and 1980s”. Journal of Labor Economics 17(4), Part 1: 757-783.

       Coronado, Julia Lynn, Don Fullerton and Thomas Glass. 1999a. “Distributional Impacts of
Proposed changes to the Social Security System”. Tax Policy and the Economy 13: 149-186.

       _______________. 1999b. “Long Run Effects of Social Security Reform Proposals on
Lifetime Progressivity”. Paper presented at NBER conference on Distributional Aspects of Social
Security and Social Security Reform. October.

       Cutler, David M. “Comment”. In M. Feldstein, editor, Privatizing Social Security.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 357 - 361.

     Duleep, Harriet. 1989. Measuring Socioeconomic Mortality Differentials Over Time.
Demography 26 (May): 345-51.

        Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey Liebman. 1999. “The Distributional Effects of an Investment
Based Social Security System”. Paper presented at NBER conference on Distributional Aspects of
Social Security and Social Security Reform. NBER Working Paper 7492.

        Gustman, A., O. Mitchell, A. Samwick, and T. Steinmeier. 1999. "Pension and Social Security
Wealth In The Health And Retirement Study". In J. Smith and R. Willis, editors. Wealth, Work and
Health, Innovations in Measurement in the Social Sciences. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, pp. 150-207.

        Gustman, A. and T. Steinmeier. 1998. "Privatizing Social Security: First Round Effects of A
Generic, Voluntary, Privatized U.S. Social Security System". In M. Feldstein, editor, Privatizing
Social Security. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, pp. 313 - 357.

        _______________. 1999. “What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions and Social
Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data From the Health and Retirement Study”. NBER Working
Paper 7368.

        _______________. 2000. “Social Security Benefits of Immigrants and Native Born”. In
George Borjas, editor, Issues in the Economics of Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press for NBER, pp. 309-350.



                                                 34
        Haider, Steven and Gary Solon. 1999. “Evidence of Non-Response Bias in the HRS Social
Security Files”. Xerox. Ann Arbor, Michigan.

        Liebman, Jeffrey B. 1999. “Redistribution in the Current U.S. Social Security System”. Paper
presented at NBER conference on Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security
Reform. October.

       Olson, Jan. Forthcoming. “Linkages with Data from SSA Records in the Health and
Retirement Study”. Social Security Bulletin.

        Panis, Constantijn W.A. and Lee A. Lillard. 1995. “Socioeconomic Differentials in the Return
to Social Security. Santa Monica: Rand, January.

        Smith, James P. “The Distribution of Family Earnings”. Journal of Political Economy 87(5)
Part 2: S163-S192.

        Social Security Administration. 1999. Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security
Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: Social Security Administration.

       Steuerle, C. Eugene and Jon M. Bakija. 1994. Retooling Social Security for the 21st
Century: Right and Wrong Approaches to Reform. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.




                                                 35
                                                                  Table 1
                                     Earnings and Years of Work By Sex, Marital Status and Type of Earner


                                                         Years with                        Years with
                                                       Nonzero Earnings               Significant Earnings*
                                                                                                                     Lifetime
                                  Annualized       Number           Annual         Number           Average         Household        Number of
                                   AIME            of Years         Earnings       of Years         Earnings         Earnings       Observations

  All Respondents                   $ 15 K            26            $ 17K              22           $ 20K             $ 980K             7370

  Males                               23              32              24               27              27              1010              3389
  Females                              8              21              12               16              14               960              3981

  Married Males                       23              32              24               28              28              1050              3067
  Married Females                      8              20              11               16              14              1010              3602

  Unmarried Males                     16              29              18               27              21               570               322
  Unmarried Females                   12              25              15               21              17               440               379

  Primary Earners                     20              31              22               26              25               870              4403
  Secondary Earners                    7              10              11               15              14              1140              2967

*Significant earnings are indexed yearly earnings that amount to at least 25 percent of the average of the high five years of indexed earnings.




                                                                        36
                                                                    Table 2
                                                  Earnings and Years of Work By AIME Group


                                       In Years with                    In Years with
                                      Nonzero Earnings               Significant Earnings*
                                                                                                    Lifetime
                                   Number          Annual          Number           Average        Household       Number of         Percent of
                                   of Years        Earnings        of Years         Earnings        Earnings      Observations      Observations
Annualized AIME
 $ 0-3K                                9             $ 5K              6             $ 6K           $ 620K             1481               19%
    3-6                               18               9              13              12              730               919               12
    6-9                               24              12              18              15              830               719                9
   9-12                               27              14              21              18              900               638                8
  12-15                               30              16              24              20              980               531                7
  15-18                               32              19              26              22             1000               454                6
  18-21                               33              21              28              25             1050               410                5
  21-24                               35              23              30              27             1110               408                6
  24-27                               35              26              31              29             1210               386                5
  27-30                               36              29              32              32             1260               391                6
  30-33                               36              31              33              34             1410               429                7
  33-36                               37              33              33              37             1470               367                6
  36+                                 39              35              36              38             1560               237                4

All Respondents                       26              17              22               20              980             7370              100


*Significant earnings are indexed yearly earnings that amount to at least 25 percent of the average of the high five years of indexed earnings.




                                                                        37
                                                                   Table 3
                                            Earnings and Years of Work By AIME Group and Gender


                                                       Males                                                          Females

                                     In Years with                                                   In Years with
                                  Significant Earnings*                                           Significant Earnings*
                                                           Lifetime Percent of                                              Lifetime Percent of
                                 Number       Annual      Household Obser-                        Number       Annual      Household Obser-
                                 of Years     Earnings     Earnings  vations                      of Years     Earnings     Earnings  vations
Annualized AIME
 $ 0-3K                              7          $ 8K        $ 170K          5%                       6          $ 6K        $ 690K         31%
    3-6                             12           14           280           5                       14           12           840          18
    6-9                             16           17           430           5                       19           14           950          14
   9-12                             20           18           510           6                       21           17          1070          11
  12-15                             24           20           660           6                       25           19          1180           8
  15-18                             26           22           770           7                       26           23          1220           6
  18-21                             28           24           880           7                       28           25          1310           4
  21-24                             30           27           980           9                       30           26          1440           3
  24-27                             31           29         1150            9                       30           30          1490           2
  27-30                             32           32         1230           11                       32           32          1450           2
  30-33                             33           34         1380           13                       30           37          1730           1
  33-36                             33           37         1460           12                       34           35          1650           1
  36+                               36           38         1560            8                       36           37          1700           0

All Respondents                     27           27         1010         100                        16           14             960       100

*Significant earnings are indexed yearly earnings that amount to at least 25 percent of the average of the high five years of indexed earnings.




                                                                        38
                                                                      Table 4
                                          Distribution of Significant Earnings Within AIME Categories*


                                                                       Annualized AIME
                       $ 0-3K     3-6      6-9     9-12     12-15 15-18 18-21 21-24 24-27 27-30 30-33 33-36                          36+          All
Level of Significant
 Earnings*
 $ 0- 3K                  25%                                                                                                                      5
    3- 6                  27        3%                                                                                                             5
    6- 9                  26       24        5%                                                                                                    8
    9-12                  13       29       26        6%                                                                                           9
   12-15                   5       20       29       26       12%                                                                                  9
   15-18                   3       13       19       29       31       18%       1%                                                               10
   18-21                   1        7       11       20       24       28       20        3%                                                       8
   21-24                            3        6       11       17       22       32       30        5%                                              8
   24-27                            1        2        5        9       17       25       29       32        6%                                     8
   27-30                                     1        2        3        8       12       22       30       33        7%                            7
   30-33                                     1        1        2        4        4        8       20       30       38        7%                   7
   33-36                                                       1        3        3        3        7       18       29       37       15%          7
   36-39                                                                1        2        3        2        5       13       26       71           6
   39-42                                                                                  1        1        4        9       28       14           3
   42+                                                         1                 1        1        3        3        4        3                    1

Column Total            100% 100% 100% 100%                  100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%

Percent of              19%        12        9         8       7        6        5         6        5        6        7        6        4     100
Observations

*Significant earnings are indexed yearly earnings that amount to at least 25 percent of the average of the high five years of indexed earnings.




                                                                         39
                                                                  Table 5
                                    Distribution of Lifetime Household Earnings Within AIME Categories


                                                                  Annualized AIME
                     $ 0-3K   3-6       6-9    9-12    12-15 15-18 18-21 21-24 24-27 27-30 30-33 33-36               36+   All
Lifetime Household
 Earnings Level
$     0-100K           28%                                                                                                   3
   100-200              6     27%                                                                                            2
   200-300              5      6         24%                                                                                 4
   300-400              4      4          9      24%                                                                         4
   400-500              4      4          5      12      21%                                                                 4
   500-750             11     10         11      12      24      46%      38%      3%                                       12
   750-1000            13     11         11       9      13      15       24      51      40%      12%                      14
  1000-1250            15     15         12       9       7       9       11      20      24       48    36%   19%          17
  1250-1500            14     19         17      17      14       9        7       9      16       24    36    45    52%    20
  1500-2000             1      4         11      17      22      20       18      12      15       12    22    32    42     14
     2000+                                                        1        3       5       5        3     7     5     6      2

Column Total          100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%

Percent of             19%    12          9       8       7        6       6       6        5       6    7     6      4    100
 Observations




                                                                   40
                                                            Table 6
                     Distribution of Lifetime Household Earnings Within Lower AIME Categories By Gender


                                          Males                                                    Females


                                   Annualized AIME                                           Annualized AIME
                     $ 0-3K    3-6   6-9     9-12 12-15            All         $ 0-3K    3-6   6-9     9-12 12-15     All
Lifetime Household
 Earnings Level
$     0-100K           58%                                           3%          13%                                    7%
   100-200             16      53%                                   3            4       21%                           5
   200-300             10      18       38%                          3            5        4      20%                   5
   300-400              2      10       25        36%                4            4        3       4      19%           5
   400-500              4       8       11        27    26%          4            3        3       2       5    18%     4
   500-750              9       8       15        23    47          13           11       11       9       8    10     11
   750-1000             2       3        8        11    17          16           15       13      12       8    10     13
  1000-1250                              2         1     7          19           18       18      16      13     8     15
  1250-1500                      1                 2     3          21           16       23      23      23    20     18
  1500-2000                                                         13            1        5      14      24    36     15
     2000+                                                           1                                                  2

Column Total          100%    100% 100%        100%     100%                    100%    100%     100%     100% 100%

Percent of              5%       5       5         6      6        100           31%      18      14      11     8    100
 Observations




                                                              41
                                                                  Table 7
                Baseline Measures of Distributions of Own Social Security Benefits and Taxes for All Age Eligible Respondents


                                                                   Annualized Individual AIME Deciles
Annualized AIME Range*        $ 0-0.2K    0.2-4      4-7      7-11    11-16 16-21          21-26 26-31          31-38      38+    All

Average Lifetime Taxes*         $ 0K         8        21        38         57       79       105       131       156       186    78
Average Lifetime Benefits*        0         16        37        48         59       72        86        97       106       113    63

Measures of Redistribution:
 Gini Coefficient                 -        0.17      0.17      0.15        0.15    0.15      0.13      0.10      0.09      0.07   0.19
 Share of Benefits                -
   Redistributed Within                    12.2%     12.0      10.8        11.1    10.5      9.5       6.9       5.9       4.7    14.1
   the Decile
 Share of Benefits                -
   Redistributed From                      57.2%     53.0      37.0        21.6    11.3      1.4       -8.9     -18.9     -33.0    -
   Other Deciles
 Share of Total
    Redistribution Coming       -2.3%      10.1      21.8      19.8        14.4    9.1       1.3       -9.7     -22.4     -42.0    -
    to the Decile

Rate of Return Percentiles:
 90%                                       6.3       6.1       5.0         4.3     3.8       3.6       3.0       2.6       2.0    4.8
 75%                                       5.3       5.3       4.5         3.8     3.4       3.1       2.5       2.1       1.7    3.9
 50%                                       4.7       4.6       3.9         3.3     2.9       2.4       2.1       1.9       1.5    2.6
 25%                                       4.0       4.0       3.2         2.6     2.2       2.0       1.8       1.6       1.3    1.6
 10%                                       3.3       3.1       2.4         1.7     1.5       1.6       1.6       1.4       1.1    0.4

*In thousands of dollars.



                                                                      42
                                      Table 8
                           Measures of Redistribution:
                     Individual vs. Family Benefits and Taxes

                   Share of Benefits              Gini                  Median Rates
                  Redistributed Within         Coefficients              of Return
                         Group

                                          Own Benefits and Taxes
All Respondents           14%                    0.19                       2.6%
 Males                     7                     0.10                       1.9
 Females                  12                     0.17                       3.7

                                    Plus Spouse and Survivor Benefits
All Respondents           11                      0.15                      3.0
 Males                     8                      0.11                      2.6
 Females                  11                      0.16                      3.7

                                         Family Benefits and Taxes
All Respondents           10                      0.14                      3.1
 Males                     7                      0.10                      2.7
 Females                   8                      0.12                      3.5




                                         43
                                                                   Table 9
                                         Share of Benefits Redistributed to Group by AIME Decile

              (Figures Are the Percentage of Benefits Accruing to the Decile Which Have Been Redistributed from Other Deciles)


                                                                              Annualized Individual AIME Deciles
Annualized AIME Range*                               $ 0-0.2 0.2-4        4-7  7-11 11-16 16-21 21-26 26-31 31-38                38+

Own Benefits and Taxes                                  -       57%       53     37      22        11      1       -9      -19   -33
Including Spouse and Survivor Benefits                  -       51        47     30      14         5      -2      -6      -12   -19
Family Benefits and Taxes                              26       23        18     11       3        -3      -9     -12      -16   -23

                                                                             Annualized Family AIME Deciles
Annualized AIME Range*                               $ 0-3K    3-8        8-14 14-20 20-26 26-31 31-36 36-42 42-49               49+

Own Benefits and Taxes                                 33%      50        28     13      4         -4     -10     -13      -15    -8
Including Spouse and Survivor Benefits                 25       44        22      9      2         -1      -4      -7      -10   -12
Family Benefits and Taxes                              30       23        13      3      -2        -2      -4      -7      -10   -16




*In thousands of dollars.




                                                                     44
                                                                     Table 10
                                           Share of Benefits Redistributed to Group by Earnings Decile

              (Figures Are the Percentage of Benefits Accruing to the Decile Which Have Been Redistributed from Other Deciles)



                                                                                Individual Significant Annual Earnings Deciles*
                                                        $ 0-6K    6-10        10-14 14-17 17-21 21-26 26-31 31-37                 37-48      48+

Own Benefits and Taxes                                    53%       50         38       25      13       3        -7      -15       -21      -21
Including Spouse and Survivor Benefits                    46        43         30       18       7       1        -6      -11       -14       -9
Family Benefits and Taxes                                 28        20         14        6       1       -5      -11      -15       -16      -14

                                                                               Combined Significant Annual Earnings Deciles*
                                                       $ 0-13K 13-21          21-29 29-35 35-41 41-46 46-53 53-62                 62-79      79+

Own Benefits and Taxes                                    43%       20          2       -3       -5      -5       -5       -3       -4        -6
Including Spouse and Survivor Benefits                    36        14          2       -1       0       -2       -4       -4       -6        -4
Family Benefits and Taxes                                 21         7          3       1        2       -2       -3       -4       -7        -5

*Significant earnings are indexed yearly earnings that amount to at least 25 percent of the average of the high five years of indexed earnings.




                                                                         45
                                       Figure 1
        Social Security Rates of Return by AIME and Annual Earnings Deciles
                25th-75th Percentile Ranges, with Medians Indicated


                                       Returns on Individual Benefits and Taxes


                         6%

                         5%
        Rate of Return




                         4%

                         3%

                         2%

                         1%
                              1   2         3      4       5       6      7       8   9       10
                                                    Individual AIME Deciles



                                      Returns on Family Benefits and Taxes


                         6%

                         5%
      Rate of Return




                         4%

                         3%

                         2%

                         1%
                              1   2         3       4      5     6       7        8       9   10
                                                     Family AIME Deciles



                                      Returns on Family Benefits and Taxes


                         6%

                         5%
Rate of Return




                         4%

                         3%

                         2%

                         1%
                              1   2      3      4      5      6      7      8     9           10
                                      Combined Family Significant Annual Earnings


                                                        46
