                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    USING THE EITC TO HELP POOR FAMILIES:
           NEW EVIDENCE AND A COMPARISON WITH THE MINIMUM WAGE


                                           David Neumark
                                           William Wascher


                                          Working Paper 7599
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7599

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 by David Neumark and William Wascher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Using the EITC to Help Poor Families: New Evidence and a
Comparison with the Minimum Wage
David Neumark and William Wascher
NBER Working Paper No. 7599
March 2000
JEL No. J39, I32

                                                ABSTRACT

        This paper evaluates the effects of the earned income tax credit (EITC) on poor families. Exploiting
state-level variation in EITCs, we find that the EITC helps families rise above poverty-level earnings. This
occurs by inducing labor market entry in families that initially do not have an adult in the workforce.
Evidence based on the federal EITC is less supportive of a positive impact of the EITC on poor families.
Finally, our results suggest that for the range of policy changes typical of recent history in the U.S., the EITC
is more beneficial for poor families than is the minimum wage.




David Neumark                                               William Wascher
Department of Economics                                     Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
                                                            System
Michigan State University                                   20th and Constitution, NW
East Lansing, MI 48824                                      Washington, DC 20551
and NBER
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu
Introduction

      The United States has in recent years relied on three types of policies to boost the incomes

of poor families: the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), the minimum wage, and welfare.

Although welfare acts directly to provide income to many of the neediest families, and thus is

perhaps the most immediate means of assisting the poor, concerns have been raised about the

potential for longer-term dependency associated with pure income-support programs. Given

these concerns, the principal attraction of both the EITC and the minimum wage is that they are

intended to raise the earned income of the poor, a goal which is generally viewed as more

desirable than making direct transfer payments to low-income families. However, most empirical

research has focused on the impacts of the EITC and the minimum wage on other labor market

behaviors−such as labor supply or labor demand−which although obviously related, provide only

part of the overall picture.1 The extensive body of research on the effects of the minimum wage

on the employment outcomes of youths is, of course, well known. But, even with respect to the

EITC, where the bulk of the literature is quite recent, previous studies have focused primarily on

the effects of the program on labor force participation and hours worked for particular subgroups

of the population (such as single mothers with children), rather than on the overall distributive

effects among families participating in the program.

      Moreover, those few studies that do examine the effects of the EITC (or the minimum

wage) on family incomes have relied mainly on simulation methods to reach their conclusions,

rather than on direct empirical estimates. Such studies, which tend to take parameter values from

the empirical literature, might be adequate if there was a general consensus about the effects of

these programs on labor market behavior. However, because much of the literature studying the

behavioral influences of anti-poverty policies is contentious (e.g., the recent debate over the

employment effects of minimum wages), the simulation results are likely to be viewed




                                                 1
skeptically, especially by those with an alternative point of view regarding the assumptions

underlying the simulation.

      In this paper, we examine the empirical link between the EITC and earned pre-tax income

using panel data on poor and low-income families that are the EITC’s intended beneficiaries.

Using data on federal and state parameters of the EITC program, we estimate the effects of the

EITC on earned incomes of poor families and on transitions of families into and out of poverty.

While the main contribution of the paper is this new evidence on the EITC, we also provide some

contrasts with the effects of minimum wages on family incomes, building on some of our earlier

work (Neumark, et al., 1998).

      Although very much a reduced-form approach, the resulting estimates of the effects of

these two alternative policies on earned income have three major advantages over the estimates

from previous studies. First, our procedure allows the data to speak directly to the question of the

efficacy of using either the EITC or the minimum wage as a redistributive tool, and circumvents

the need to choose point estimates for behavioral parameters. Second, we can control for other

influences on family income changes (including the EITC or the minimum wage) that might bias

estimates based on parameter values from studies focusing solely on one or the other policies.

Third, by examining both federal and state policy, we are able to use several types of variation in

the data to help identify the effects on income.

      Our results indicate that there are differences in how the EITC and minimum wage policy

affect earnings. Both policies appear to have positive income effects on poor families with

children. However, the EITC effects are larger, evaluated on the basis of the average policy

changes of the past 15 years. Complementary evidence on employment and hours effects

indicates that the benefits of the EITC come about mainly by inducing labor market entry for poor

families without any adult workers in the year prior to the change in the EITC. On net, these




                                                   2
results suggest that the EITC is the more effective anti-poverty tool, especially if one considers

positive work incentives as a goal of anti-poverty programs.

      By using pre-tax (and therefore pre-EITC) earnings rather than total income, we obviously

ignore an important component of the redistributive effects of the EITC. In this respect, our

estimates provide a very conservative test of the benefits of the EITC relative to the minimum

wage. We choose to focus on pre-tax earnings for two reasons. First, it permits a direct

comparison of our estimates for earnings with our complementary estimates of labor supply

effects; the fact that we find consistent results in both sets of estimates increases our confidence

that the income effects that we are estimating are related to the EITC. Second, in much of the

discussion of potential anti-poverty policies, there is a stated preference for policies that

encourage work and longer-run economic self-sufficiency; witness, for example, the recent

emphasis on welfare reform and empowerment. The EITC is frequently praised along these same

lines, reflecting an assumption that the credit encourages families to work more. Our aim is to

provide some additional evidence with which to assess the accuracy of these claims, by looking at

the EITC’s effects on families’ earned income.

      Nevertheless, we should stress that because we use pre-tax earnings, our estimates imply an

even greater effectiveness of the EITC in raising the income levels of poor families than is

suggested by a literal reading of the coefficients in our family earnings equations. Either way,

however, our results confirm the sense provided by previous simulation studies of the EITC and

minimum wage that the former is the more effective policy for fighting poverty.2

Previous Research

      Research on the EITC is quite sparse as compared with that on other anti-poverty

programs, although the quantity of research in this area is growing rapidly. In large part, this is

because the EITC is a relatively recent policy initiative. Although it was first implemented in

1975, the EITC was considered a relatively unimportant component of welfare policy until it was


                                                  3
expanded sharply as part of the 1986 Tax Reform Act, effective in 1987; additional EITC

expansions took place in each year from 1991 to 1996. Moreover, as noted above, most of the

research thus far has focused on estimating behavioral responses for particular subgroups of the

population rather than on evaluating the net effects of the program for the poor.

      In earlier papers, such estimates were typically derived from simulations based on

parameters taken from the negative income tax literature or from more general studies of labor

supply (Hoffman and Seidman, 1990; Dickert, et al., 1995). More recently, Eissa and Liebman

(1996) and Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999a and 1999b) have directly estimated the effects of the

EITC on the labor supply of single women with children. Both papers find that the expansion of

the EITC raised work activity among this group. In contrast, Eissa and Hoynes (1998) compute

similar estimates for married couples and find that the EITC had a small positive effect on the

labor supply of married men, but a large negative effect on married women, with the net result

being a decline in family labor supply.

      Comparisons of the EITC and minimum wage policy have also been conducted using a

simulation approach. The best known study in this area is by Burkhauser, et al. (1996), who

evaluate how well the minimum wage targets the poor and compare the amount of additional

income received by such families with what would be provided by the EITC. The paper

concludes that the 1990 and 1991 minimum wage increases stemming from the 1989

Amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act benefited upper income families (income-to-needs

over 3) more than poor families, because many minimum wage workers are in higher-income

families. In contrast, the increases in the EITC between 1989 and 1992 went nearly exclusively

to poor and near-poor families with children. However, these simulations ignore both labor

supply effects of the EITC and labor demand effects of minimum wages. While informative

about the targeting of benefits, they are unlikely to be definitive about the ultimate effects of the

alternative policies on income.



                                                  4
Data

       To conduct the analysis, we use data at the family level drawn from the March CPS annual

demographic files for the years 1986 through 1995.3 As each family is potentially in the March

sample for two consecutive years, we attempt to match records across years in order to observe

changes in income during the period of our sample. Overall, the match rates were above 80

percent, although families with younger heads and lower income-to-needs ratios were somewhat

less likely to be successfully matched.4

       For each family that could be matched across years, we extracted data on the amount and

composition of family income, family size, and state of residence, as well as other variables

introduced below. The income and family size data are then used to calculate an income-to-needs

ratio for each family, based on the official poverty line for a given family size in each year. Note

that the income data in the March CPS refer to the previous year, so that our sample period

actually corresponds to the years 1985 to 1994.

       To each of these family-year records, we appended the relevant data for the key parameters

of the EITC program and the prevailing minimum wage in effect for the year in which the income

data are reported. For the minimum wage, we used the higher of the federal or state minimum

wage for each state and year, following existing practice in the minimum wage literature. For the

EITC, we collected information on various parameters of the federal program applicable to each

family based on the number of dependent children residing in the family; these parameters

include the phase-in rate of the credit, the maximum income level to which the phase-in rate is

applied, the income level at which the credit begins to be phased out, and the phase-out rate. In

the empirical analysis, we use the phase-in rate as the primary measure of the generosity of the

EITC.5 The phase-in rate and the maximum credit are reported for the federal program in the first

six columns of Table 1. The phase-in rate varies from zero prior to 1993 for families with no

children to 30 percent in 1994 for families with two or more children; the maximum credit ranged


                                                  5
from 0 to more than $2,500 over the same period. In addition, there are currently 10 states that

offer an EITC to low-income families. These state credits are, for the most part, defined as a

simple percentage of the federal credit received by the family, and range from less than five

percent to more than 60 percent, depending on the state, year, and number of children (Table 1).

Finally, while the federal program provides for a refundable credit, certain states offer only a non-

refundable credit, and in some specifications we exclude these states from the sample or try to

make credit rates comparable in the two types of states.

      In addition, in some specifications we include controls for business cycle conditions and

for the presence of other changes in welfare programs. For the former, we use the unemployment

rate for prime-age males in each state and year. For the latter, we use the maximum level of

AFDC benefits (in real terms) available to a family of three, along with a variable measuring the

fraction of months in each year for which a state received a waiver from federal AFDC

requirements.6

Empirical Estimates

      Our empirical strategy is to employ a specification that can be applied directly both to an

analysis of the effects of the EITC on income-to-needs and to an analysis of the effects of a

minimum wage policy. Partly for this reason, we chose a reduced-form specification that limits

the number of explanatory variables to exclude those that might be considered endogenous to

these specific policies. In addition, we estimate some specifications using income-to-needs

categories to construct the dependent variable, and some using income-to-needs directly. In the

former case, the dependent variable is defined as the probability that a family moves from having

an earned income-to-needs ratio (I/N) in the X1 to Y1 range in year one to a ratio in the X2 to Y2

range in year two. Using a linear probability model, this specification can be expressed as:

      I{X2<(I/N)2<Y2 | X1<(I/N)1<Y1}ist = α + Pistβ + γ∆Ust + Zistπ + δs + λt + εist ,      (1)




                                                  6
where I{…} is an indicator variable for the specified outcome, ‘i’ indexes families, ‘s’ states, and

‘t’ years. Pist is the policy under consideration (e.g., the state and/or federal EITC, or the real

minimum wage).7 ∆Ust is the change in the adult male unemployment rate, which we include to

capture different patterns of changes in economic conditions across states; these could generate

spurious results if, for example, good economic conditions positively impact poor families, and

also lead to more generous state EITCs as a result of budget surpluses. Zist is a vector of other

control variables, δs is a vector of state indicators, and λt is a vector of year indicators. The state

indicators capture persistent differences across states in transition rates, for example different

trends in poverty. The year indicators capture aggregate changes in transition rates that may be

driven by other factors, including other policy changes at the national level.

      The parameter β is of particular interest in this study as it provides an estimate of the effect

of the policy variable on the transition rates or changes in income-to-needs. For example, if the

policy variable is the change in the EITC credit rate and X1, X2, Y1, and Y2 are defined to

measure the transition rate out of poverty, then β would tell us whether an increase in the credit

rate results in an increase in the probability of families leaving poverty. Given that the state and

year terms soak up some of the variation in the data—including some of that in the EITC

variables, it is useful to point out how the estimates of policy effects are identified. In particular,

the inclusion of the year indicators implies that the effect of the federal EITC is identified from

variation in EITC parameters across families with different numbers of children. The inclusion of

the state indicators implies that the effect of state EITCs is identified from within-state variation

in EITC parameters.8 We also include controls for the number of children under 18 (defined

using separate indicator variables for families with one child, two children, and three or more

children). In some specifications we interact these children indicators with the year dummy

variables to account for other sources of change in family incomes that might differentially affect




                                                   7
families with different numbers of children. When we do this, the effect of the federal EITC is no

longer identified, since this varies only with year and number of children.

      After looking at the evidence on the effects of the EITC on transitions into and out of

poverty (in terms of earned income), we use similar specifications to examine the effects of

changes in the EITC on income-to-needs ratios of poor families. In particular, we estimate

specifications of the form:

      {(I/N)2−(I/N)1}ist = α + Pistβ + γ∆Ust + Zistπ + δs + λt + εist ,                    (2)

for the change in income-to-needs ratios among families with earnings below the poverty line in

year one. Finally, in some specifications we examine the direct influence of the policy variables

on employment transitions or on changes in hours worked in an attempt to identify the channels

through which the EITC affects income-to-needs.

      Table 2 reports the means and standard deviations for the basic data used in the analysis.

The first column shows the descriptive statistics for the sample of matched families in the CPS.

Mean earned income is above $30 thousand per year in our sample, and the average income-to-

needs ratio is a bit above 3. However, 23 percent of families in our sample have an earned

income-to-needs ratio below one, and another 8 percent are between one and 1.5. These poor and

near-poor families are the intended targets of both the EITC and the minimum wage, and we

would expect families with much higher income-to-needs ratios to be unaffected by the EITC.

For this reason, we restrict the sample in the subsequent analysis to include only those families

with an income-to-needs ratio between 0 and 3 in the first year they are in the sample. When the

higher income families are dropped from the sample (column 2), mean earned income falls to less

than $13 thousand and the average earned income-to-needs ratio is only slightly above one. In

addition, nearly half of the families in this subsample have an earned income-to-needs ratio below

one and about 60 percent are below 1.5. About 55 percent have children below age 18, which for

most of the sample period is necessary to be eligible for the EITC.

                                                    8
      The EITC is targeted at families with children under age 18, and thus in many

specifications, we further restrict the sample to such families.9 Note that this choice, coupled

with the information we have on state EITC supplements, leads to a different control group than

that used by Eissa and Liebman (1996) and Eissa and Hoynes (1998) in their studies of the

federal EITC. In particular, those studies typically identify families most likely to be eligible for

the EITC and compare the labor supply response in those families to the changes in labor supply

in families not eligible for the EITC, such as those without children. In contrast, our estimation

procedure makes use of state variation in the EITC across families with the same number of

children to identify EITC effects on earned income, which, as we show below, often leads to

quite different estimates. Descriptive statistics for this subsample are shown in the third column

of Table 2.

      As can be seen in the middle of the table, transition rates across various parts of the earned

income distribution are fairly high. In each of the samples, more than 20 percent of families

move out of poverty (based on earnings) each year, while about one-quarter of families with an

initial earned income-to-needs ratio between one and 1.5 fall into poverty in the following year.

These numbers are suggestive of a sizable amount of idiosyncratic change in family incomes, and

provide a baseline with which to compare the EITC or minimum wage effects we report later in

the paper.

      Finally, the average federal EITC credit rate in our sample period was 14.8 percent for

families with children, with the average size of an increase equalling 4.0 percentage points per

year (using the numbers in column (2) of Table 2). The average state supplement for those states

with an EITC program was 4.8 percent, with the average increase equal to 1.5 percentage points

per year. The average real minimum wage was a bit less than $3 over our sample period, with the

average real increase equal to $.20 per year.




                                                  9
The Earned Income Tax Credit: effects on earned income

      Table 3 presents estimates of the effects of the EITC from the basic specifications shown in

equations (1) and (2). Each row of the table reports estimates from a single specification, with

the first column showing the estimated effects of changes in the federal credit rate and the second

column estimated effects of changes in the state supplements. For the federal program, the credit

rate is defined as the proportion of earned income that can be applied as a credit to an eligible

family’s federal taxes over the phase-in range of the EITC; this variable thus varies across

families based on the year in which they are in the sample and on the number of children in the

family. For the state programs, the variable is the supplement used to augment the federal credit

as specified in states that also have an EITC program;10 this variable also varies across years and

with the number of dependent children in the family, but varies across states as well.

      There is perhaps some question as to whether the policy variable should be entered in

levels or changes. The motivation behind using changes is that a change in the policy (like an

increase in the credit rate) generates a contemporaneous increase in the probability that poor

families escape poverty, as some families now decide that employment is worthwhile for some

member or members. On the other hand, to the extent that there are always random shocks

throwing some families into poverty, a higher level of the EITC could arguably be associated

with faster transitions out of poverty.11 As the choice of whether to use the level or change is

readily testable in a nested framework, we let the data guide us in this respect. In particular, the

specification using levels of the credit rate and the p-values for the test of the restrictions implied

by the change specification are shown in Appendix Table A1. The statistical significance of the

lagged value in many specifications argues against using only the contemporaneous level of the

credit rate, and in no case were we able to reject the restriction implied by the specification using

only the change in the credit rate; indeed for the state credit rate this restriction held remarkably




                                                  10
closely.12 Thus, in the remainder of the paper, we report results from specifications using

changes in the EITC variables.13

         Returning to Table 3, Panel I reports estimates of the effects of the EITC on the probability

that a family with earned income below the poverty line in year one has an earned income level

above the poverty line in year two. As can be seen in the top row of the panel, the effect of the

federal credit rate is negative, suggesting that increases in the EITC credit rate are associated with

reductions in the rate of transition out of poverty, but the estimate is not statistically significant.

One possible interpretation of a negative coefficient is that the EITC reduces work among low-

income families, reflecting a large income effect on labor supply. Note, however, that because

year effects are included in this specification, identification of the coefficient comes primarily

from the correlation of changes in the federal EITC with differences in transition rates for

families with no children and families with children. And, because there are potentially other

federal policies that have different effects on the incomes of families with and without children

(e.g., AFDC or child care credits), this equation may be subject to specification bias. We can get

around some of the more obvious misspecifications by limiting the sample to families with

children, thus identifying the coefficient from the differences in transition rates for families with

one child and families with more than one child. But as indicated in the second row, the

coefficient for this subsample is more negative, although with a considerably larger standard

error.

         A potentially more fruitful approach is to use state-year variation in the EITC program as a

means of identifying the effects of the EITC on earned income.14 The estimated coefficients of

the state EITC variables are shown in the second column. For the sample as a whole, the

estimated state EITC effect on the transition rate out of poverty is positive but not statistically

significant. However, when the sample is restricted to include only families with children, the

estimated EITC effect is larger and becomes significant. This is, in fact, the sample for which



                                                   11
one would expect to see sizable EITC effects, and, in our view, results in a cleaner control group

than can be achieved with the entire sample.

      In the third row, we include year-children interaction terms in the specification to control

for changes in other policies or economic changes that vary with the number of children in each

family. Upon including these interaction terms, only the effect of state EITCs is identified.

Using this specification, the results are similar to those in the previous row, with the beneficial

effects of the EITC on family earnings again showing up quite clearly. Moreover, the size of the

coefficient estimate indicates that the effect of the EITC on poverty rates is not negligible. To

make this readily apparent from the regression results, the EITC variables are standardized so that

one-unit changes correspond to the average increases among observations for which an increase

occurred (reported in Table 2).15 These coefficients indicate that an average (.04) increase in the

credit rate increases the probability that a poor family’s earnings rise above the poverty threshold

by about .06. Since the mean of this transition rate is .21 (Table 2), this is an increase of between

one-quarter and one-third.

      We delve into the EITC effects further in Panel II, focusing in particular on changes in

income-to-needs for families with earnings below the poverty line in year one (equation (2)

above). The results for this specification are quite similar to those in Panel I. Changes in the

federal credit rate are estimated to reduce income-to-needs in both the full poor family sample

and in the sample restricted to poor families with children, although the estimates are not

statistically significant. With respect to the state credit, the EITC has a positive and significant

effect on income-to-needs in both samples, with the size of the coefficients indicating that an

average (.04) increase in the credit rate raises the income-to-needs ratio among poor families by

around .07 on average.

      In Panel III, we examine the possibility that the EITC increases or reduces the probability

that a family’s earnings drop below the poverty line using a similar set of specifications. In this


                                                 12
set of results, we restrict the sample to families with earned income-to-needs ratios between one

and 1.5. In our sample period, the income level at which families are first entitled to the

maximum EITC benefit almost always occurs at an income level that is below the poverty line for

families with one or more children.16 Thus, for these families theory predicts that a higher EITC

will reduce labor supply. Of course it is not the credit rate that is relevant to these families, but

the maximum credit. Historically, however, the maximum credit and the credit rate have always

moved in the same direction, so to keep things consistent with the earlier specifications, we

continue to look at the credit rate as a proxy for the generosity of the EITC.17

      In general, there is little evidence that the EITC has any effect on the rate of transition from

near-poor to poor. For the federal credit, the coefficient estimates are in the direction of

suggesting that the EITC increases the likelihood that families fall into poverty, although the

estimated effects are again not statistically significant. In addition, the coefficients on the state

credit rate show essentially zero effect of the EITC on this transition rate.

      Panel IV of the table reports the effects of the EITC on changes in earned income-to-needs

ratios for this same set of near-poor families. As can be seen in the first column, changes in the

federal credit rate are estimated to have negative effect on the income-to-needs ratio of near-poor

families, with the estimated effect statistically significant for the sample as a whole but not for the

subsample of families with children. In contrast, and consistent with the results in Panel III,

changes in the state credit rate are estimated to have little effect on income-to-needs for this group

of families.

      In sum, the evidence from the federal and state experiments reported in Table 3 points in

quite different directions. For the federal credit rate, there is no evidence that the EITC increases

earned income among poor families, a result that runs counter to the program’s intent. In

contrast, the coefficients on the state credit rate suggest strongly that the EITC raises earned

income among poor families with children. And, perhaps more importantly, families eligible for


                                                  13
the EITC are more likely to see their earnings rise above the poverty line when the credit

increases in generosity.18 In the other direction, there is some evidence from the federal

experiment that a higher EITC leads to a reduction in earned income among near-poor families,

although this evidence is relatively weak. For the state experiment, the evidence points to very

little effect on families with earned income initially just above the poverty line. Of course, all of

these estimated coefficients understate the overall positive effects on income associated with the

EITC. That is, the increase in total resources would be more pronounced if one considered the

additional income received from the credit itself, which is not taken into account in this

analysis.19

      To demonstrate the source of the differences in results more clearly, Figures 1 and 2

present an analysis of the residuals from regressions of the EITC credit rate and poverty status in

year two (conditional on poverty in year one) on the auxiliary variables in the basic specification.

In particular, the upper-left panel of Figure 1 shows the yearly mean residuals of the change in the

federal EITC credit rate for families with one child, while the upper-middle panel shows the

yearly mean residuals for the changes in the federal credit rate for families with two or more

children. Comparing these two panels documents that the credit rate was increased by

significantly different amounts in 1991 and 1994, with more minor differences in the intervening

years (see Table 1); note that in all instances, the credit rate was increased by more for families

with two children than for families with one child, resulting in the pattern of residuals shown in

these panels.

      As it is relative movements in the one- and two-child credit rates that identify the EITC

effect in the federal experiment, the estimated effect can be derived from the correlation of these

residuals with those in the bottom panel, which are the mean residuals from the poverty status

regression. In particular, note that the relative movements in the credit rate in 1991 are negatively

correlated with the transition rate residuals in that year, while the large relative change in the



                                                  14
credit rates in 1994 are associated with residuals in the middle of the range. As can be seen in the

upper-right panel, these patterns, combined with those for the remaining years, result in a

negative and imprecisely estimated EITC effect from the federal experiments.

      Figure 2, which shows similarly calculated residuals for the state treatment and control

groups, indicates that there is significantly more variation in the relative movements in the credit

rate in the state experiment, which probably helps to identify the EITC effect more accurately.

As indicated in the upper-right panel, the mean residuals for changes in the credit rate and the

transitions out of poverty are positively correlated in the state experiment, producing a positive

estimate of the effect of the EITC on earned income-to-needs.

Labor supply effects

      Although our sense is that using state variation in the EITC provides a cleaner experiment

than does the federal credit, the differences in coefficient estimates associated with these two

EITC variables raise important questions about what we have found. To attempt to shed

additional light on the results for income, we performed a complementary analysis of the effects

of the EITC on employment and hours worked for our subsample of poor families with children.

In general, the specifications are similar to those in Table 3, with the exception that the dependent

variable is either the probability that a family added an adult worker in the second year they were

in the sample, or the change in total hours supplied by adult family members between the first and

second years.

      In Table 4, we estimate the effects of the EITC on the probability that a family adds an

adult worker between year one and year two. In Panel I, we first (in sub-panel A) limit the

sample to those families that had no adults working in year one. For both the federal and state

EITC variables, the effects of the EITC show through quite clearly. In particular, an average

increase in the federal EITC is estimated to raise the probability of adding a worker in year two

by .11, and the coefficient is statistically significant at the five-percent level. The specifications


                                                  15
using the state credit show a similarly-sized positive effect on employment, although it is

estimated a bit less precisely. The fact that we find positive employment effects for both credit

rates suggests that the earlier negative effects on income found for the federal EITC specifications

may have been spurious, possibly owing to correlations between the EITC and other federal

programs that affected the incomes of poor families in a way that masked the benefits of the

EITC, but did not have a corresponding effect on labor supply behavior.

       In sub-panel B, we restrict the sample to families that had one adult worker in year one to

see if the employment effects extended to the working poor as well. In general, there is little

evidence of any EITC effect for this subgroup. The estimated effect of the federal credit is

positive, but imprecise. For the state credit rate, there is weak evidence of a negative effect of the

EITC on the probability that such families add another worker to the labor market. Although this

result is suggestive of a negative income effect on labor supply, the estimated coefficients are also

statistically insignificant.

       In Panel II, we examine the effects of the EITC on total hours worked by adult family

members, splitting the sample into those families with no adult workers in year one and those

families with at least one adult worker initially. As can be seen in sub-panel C, the federal EITC

is estimated to have essentially no effect on hours worked by families with no adult workers

initially. This result seems surprising given the positive employment effects reported in the top

panel, and again points to the inconsistent and potentially spurious results obtained for the federal

EITC experiment. In contrast, the estimated effects of the state credit rate show sizable positive

effects on annual hours worked in families without an adult worker in the first year, which

although only marginally significant, are consistent with the results for employment shown in the

top panel. The size of the hours change seems large at first glance, but given that it is associated

with entry into the work force, it is consistent with the lumpy nature of employment. For families

with an adult worker in year one (sub-panel D of Panel II), there is a positive EITC effect using



                                                 16
the federal credit rate as the explanatory variable, but the estimated coefficient is not statistically

significant. The effect of increases in the state EITC credit rate, however, is to reduce hours

worked for families that initially had at least one adult worker in year one. These results are the

clearest indication we have of the negative effect of the EITC on labor supply found by some

previous researchers (e.g., Eissa and Hoynes, 1998).

      The results from Table 4 indicate more clearly the sources of the positive and negative

effects from the EITC. Increases in earnings mainly come about by inducing adult workers in

families without an adult in the labor market to enter the labor market in order to take advantage

of the credit. In contrast, poor families that already have an adult working do not increase their

hours and may reduce them in response to an increase in the credit rate. This suggests that such

families are likely to be operating on the flat portion of the EITC schedule, so that the negative

influence of higher income on labor supply is the dominant consideration. However, the evidence

in Table 3 indicating no negative effects of increased generosity of the EITC on near-poor

families differs somewhat in indicating that for these families there is little response to the EITC.

This poses somewhat of a puzzle because the families for whom these effects are identified are

more likely to be in the phase-out range, where the negative labor supply effects should be

stronger.

      In Table 5, we attempt to match up our estimated effects of the EITC on income with the

estimated labor supply effects reported in Table 4. In particular, given that the effects on

employment and hours worked are most pronounced for poor families with no adult workers in

year one, we would expect to see the largest positive effects on earned income for these families.

In contrast, the effects on earned income for poor families with an adult worker in year one

should be minimal or even negative, as there is no evidence of a positive labor supply response

for such families, and some evidence of an EITC-induced reduction in hours worked.




                                                  17
      For poor families with no adult workers in year one, the results in Table 5 generally

conform to these expectations, at least for the coefficients on the state credit rate. In particular,

there are clear positive effects from the state credit rate on the probability that a poor family

without a worker in year one becomes non-poor in year two (sub-panel A), as well as on the

change in income-to-needs ratios (sub-panel C) for such families. In contrast, the estimates show

little effect of the federal EITC on the earned income of poor families with no adult worker in the

first year, either in terms of the transition rate out of poverty or the income-to-needs ratio, despite

the strong positive employment effect reported in Table 4.

      Turning to poor families with an adult worker in year one, the results in sub-panel B

indicate little effect from either the federal or state EITC on the transition rate to above poverty-

level earnings, consistent with the lack of positive labor supply influences reported in Table 4.

As indicated in sub-panel D, when the dependent variable is specified as the change in income-to-

needs, the coefficient estimates on the state EITC variable are positive, although not statistically

significant. Nevertheless, these positive or non-negative earnings effects are difficult to square

with the EITC-induced reduction in hours worked for these families estimated in Table 4. In part,

it appears that some large changes in income-to-needs within this group account for the positive

estimate in Panel D. When we use the probability that a family experienced an increase in

income-to-needs between year one and year two (Panel III), as a means of reducing the influence

of extreme observations, the EITC coefficient estimates for the sample of poor families with no

adult worker in year one are similar to those in Panel II (although less precisely estimated), while

the coefficient estimates for the sample of poor families with an adult worker in year one become

small and negative; the failure to find stronger negative effects despite the negative labor supply

effects for this group is nonetheless puzzling.




                                                  18
Robustness and validity checks

      The next two tables assess the robustness and validity of the estimated effects of the EITC

on income-to-needs by varying the specification and sample used in the analysis. In Table 6, we

vary the threshold across which we measure transitions to test the sensitivity of our results to this

rather arbitrary specification choice. There are two reasons to look at evidence for earned

income-to-needs thresholds below one. First, given our findings that the EITC effects are largest

for families without an adult worker (and thus little if any earned income) in year one, we might

expect to see stronger effects when we set the threshold at a lower level. For example, a family in

which a worker enters the labor market at a minimum wage job is unlikely to attain poverty-level

earnings in the subsequent year (more so if there are children or the job is part-time). In this case,

our choice of one for the earned income-to-needs cutoff in previous specifications would miss

some of the beneficial effects of the EITC. Second, as already noted, we do not measure all

components of income used to classify families as poor or non-poor, so that families attaining a

lower fraction of the poverty threshold in terms of earnings alone might nonetheless escape

poverty.

      The results in the table are suggestive of some sensitivity to the choice of threshold, at least

for families with no adult worker in year one (sub-panel B). In particular, the state EITC effects

are strongest for this subsample when the threshold is set at .3, indicating that some families’

earned income-to-needs are lifted by the EITC, although not to a ratio above the poverty line.

This suggests that our previous estimates focusing on the transition out of poverty may understate

the beneficial effects of the EITC on earnings of low-income families. Of course, some families

seem to be helped even more by the EITC, as is indicated by the positive coefficients for all of the

income thresholds in the table. Consistent with the results reported in Table 5, the estimated

effect of the federal EITC is small and negative for poor families with no adult worker in year

one, a result that is insensitive to the choice of threshold. Similarly, for poor families with an



                                                 19
adult worker in year one, our earlier finding of essentially no effect of the EITC on poverty

transitions is not affected by the choice of income-to-needs threshold.

      In Table 7, we repeat the analysis in Table 3 for both the effects of the EITC on transition

rates to above poverty-level earnings and on changes in income-to-needs, but introducing a

variety of other differences in the sample or specification. In Panels A and B, we vary our

treatment of states offering only non-refundable tax credits at the state level, on the grounds that

refundability is often touted as a major feature contributing to the value of the program to low-

income families. In particular, if refundability is important to a family’s labor supply decisions,

the estimated EITC effects should be larger for the lowest-income families once the credit for

states without refundable credits is downgraded or when these states are dropped.20

      When the states with non-refundable credits are excluded from the sample (Panel A), the

estimated effects of the state EITC on transitions out of poverty for this subsample are smaller

than the baseline results, rather than larger, and no longer statistically significant. However, the

effect of the state EITC on the change in income-to-needs is still significant when these states are

excluded and is nearly identical to the baseline results. As an alternative, we attempt to equate

the effective rate of refundable and non-refundable credits, setting the credit rate for the latter

equal to one-fifth of the statutory rate. The choice of one-fifth as the equivalent rate for non-

refundable credits is based on the “trade-off” between refundable and non-refundable rates

established in Maryland in 1998, when taxpayers were offered an option of a 50-percent non-

refundable supplement or a 10-percent refundable supplement. However, we obtain essentially

the same results when we do this, as reported in Panel B. In no case is there any meaningful

change to the federal or state EITC coefficients.

      In Panels C and D, we alter the set of control variables used in the analysis. In Panel C, we

drop the change in the unemployment rate, on the grounds that it is potentially endogenous to

changes in the EITC (if, for example, the EITC raises household spending). The drawback to this


                                                  20
change in specification is the absence of controls for state labor market influences on poverty

rates. In any event, there is little change in any of the EITC parameter estimates when the

unemployment rate is omitted, perhaps because much of the variation in economic conditions is

aggregate variation captured by the year effects. In Panel D, we add controls for changes in real

AFDC benefits for a family of three, and in the extent to which state welfare laws could differ

from federal regulations (federal waivers). The results are very similar when these controls are

added, consistent with our earlier argument that the specifications using the state credit rate are

less susceptible to biases associated with the omission of other state policies.

      In Panel E, we use changes in the maximum credit rather than the phase-in rate as the EITC

policy variable. The rationale for this alternative is that the change in the phase-in rate does not

always provide a complete description of changes in the EITC program. In particular, using the

maximum credit also captures changes in the phase-in range, and thus may pick up some

variation omitted by the credit variable. As it turns out−perhaps not surprisingly given that the

changes in the maximum credit and the phase-in rate are highly correlated in our

sample−substituting the change in the maximum credit as the EITC policy variable has little

qualitative effect on the results. In particular, for the federal EITC, the coefficients are still

negative and insignificant. For the state EITC, the estimated effect is somewhat smaller than the

baseline results (as before, for average policy changes), but the coefficients continue to indicate

positive and statistically significant effects of the EITC on both the transition rate out of poverty

and on the change in income-to-needs.

      The next three panels investigate the effects of using alternative treatment and control

groups in the analysis. In Panel F, we limit the control group to states that have a geographical

border with the states that have their own EITC program. The idea here is that bordering states

will be more similar in other ways to the EITC states and thus form a better control group. For

the state EITC phase-in rate, there is little change in the coefficient estimates. For the federal


                                                  21
EITC, the estimated effect is still negative, but is substantially larger than in the baseline, and is

statistically significant. In Panels G and H, we omit the states with the largest changes in credit

rates from the sample to test the sensitivity of the estimated EITC effects to these policy outliers.

In Panel G, we drop all observations on families from Wisconsin with three or more children, for

whom the phase-in rate was very high beginning in 1989. In Panel H, we omit observations from

Maryland, which introduced a large non-refundable credit in 1987. In neither case does the

change in sample have much effect on either the federal or state EITC coefficient estimates. 21

      Finally, in Panels I and J, we examine the possibility that the results we report for the EITC

in earlier tables are spurious, by looking for positive EITC effects in samples of families not

eligible to participate in the program. In Panel I, we apply our methodology to families that have

earned income-to-needs ratios between zero and three, but that do not have any children and thus

would not be eligible for the EITC prior to 1994. In particular, we estimate specifications like

those in Table 3 for this sample of currently childless families, but attach the EITC parameters

that would have been relevant to them if they had three or more children. If the effects we have

attributed to the EITC were actually associated with an omitted variable that also boosted earned

income and that was correlated with the EITC, then we might expect to see spurious “EITC

effects” for this ineligible population as well. For both the federal and state EITC variables, the

estimated coefficients are very small and insignificant. In Panel J, we perform the same analysis

on a sample of families with income-to-needs between three and 10, well above the qualifying

cut-off for the EITC. Again, the resulting coefficient estimates are small and insignificant,

indicating no effect of the EITC on this group of families. As we should not expect to see EITC

effects for these particular samples, these results add credence to our interpretation of the results

in Table 3 as reflecting causal effects of the EITC.




                                                  22
The EITC versus the minimum wage

      In Table 8, we report estimates from specifications that include both the EITC variables

and the minimum wage, to see if conditioning on minimum wage changes alters the estimated

EITC effects on earned income, and to provide a more direct contrast of the effects of the

alternative policies for the same population. As it turns out, there is a relatively low correlation

coefficient (less than .15) between changes in minimum wages and changes in EITC parameters,

and thus adding the minimum wage changes to the specification has little effect on the estimates

of the EITC effects. As already noted, we scale the EITC variables to measure the effects of

average policy increases in the federal credit rate over the sample period. Similarly, we scale the

minimum wage variable to measure the effects of average real increases in the minimum wage

over the same period.22

      In Panel I, we report estimates of the effects of the two policies on transition rates from

below poverty to above poverty-level earnings. Looking first at the results for the full sample

(sub-panel A), as can be seen in the first row, for the entire sample of poor families we again find

no evidence that the federal EITC raises earned income-to-needs, and only weak evidence that the

state EITC has a positive effect. In addition, the minimum wage is estimated to have essentially

no effect on the transition rate, consistent with the evidence reported in Neumark and Wascher

(1997).23 When the sample is restricted to families with children, however, both the state EITC

and the minimum wage are estimated to have a positive influence on earnings. The EITC effect

is more than twice as large as the minimum wage effect, pointing to the greater effectiveness of

the EITC in raising earnings, at least for the types of changes in policy enacted during our sample

period.24 Moreover, the difference in minimum wage effects between families with and without

children is suggestive of an offsetting negative effect on earnings of families without children.

      The remainder of Panel I reports results conditioning on the presence of an adult worker in

the family initially, which, as documented in earlier tables, was strongly associated with the


                                                 23
effects of the EITC. In sub-panel B, we report results for families with no adult worker in year

one. As before, we find stronger positive effects of the EITC on the probability of a transition to

above poverty-level earnings. In contrast, the minimum wage effects are weaker, with the

contemporaneous effect, in particular, becoming smaller and statistically insignificant. In sub-

panel C, we report estimates for families with at least one adult worker in year one. Here there

are no significant positive effects of the EITC, but the positive effects of the minimum wage are

considerably larger. This evidence is consistent with the EITC doing much more to help families

with no adult worker initially, while the benefits of the minimum wage fall more strongly on

those families−with children−that have adult workers.25

      In Panel II, we repeat the analysis using changes in income-to-needs as the dependent

variable. Qualitatively, the results are similar to those in Panel I. The federal EITC has either a

negative or no discernible effect on income-to-needs ratios among poor families; the state EITC

has a positive effect on income-to-needs, especially for the subsample of poor families with

children; and the minimum wage has a modest positive effect on earnings of poor families with

children, but no effect for the sample of poor families as a whole. Similarly, disaggregating by

the presence of adult workers in the initial year again reveals that the benefits of the EITC fall

largely on families with no adult workers initially, while the minimum wage benefits families

with adult workers.

Conclusions

      This paper evaluates the effectiveness of the earned income tax credit in raising the

earnings of poor and low-income families. In particular, we move beyond the simulation

approach commonly used in the literature and provide reduced-form estimates using two-year

panels of families derived from matched CPS files, focusing on the probability that an initially

poor family sees its earned income rise above the poverty line, and on the changes in income-to-

needs that such families experience, as a result of increased generosity of the EITC.


                                                 24
      The results of our estimation strategy hinge on the nature of the experiment we perform. In

particular, when we look at the federal EITC, identifying its effects from differences in the credit

rate by family size, we either find that the EITC reduces the probability that a poor family escapes

poverty or, in our preferred specifications, find no statistically significant effect. In contrast,

when we focus on state credit rates, thus using state variation to identify the EITC effects, we find

evidence that the EITC helps families rise above poverty-level earnings. Neither experiment

points to any effect of the EITC on families initially above the poverty line, suggesting that the

EITC is well targeted. We find a similar pattern of results when we use changes in income-to-

needs as the dependent variable.

      The difference between the estimated effects on earned income using the federal or state

credit rate is explored further by examining the effects of the EITC on family labor supply. In

general, the results based on the state credit rate form a more consistent whole, pointing to a

positive labor supply effect for the same sets of families for which we estimate a positive effect

on earned income. In contrast, the results based on the federal credit rate are difficult to interpret

in a consistent fashion, raising the possibility that our federal EITC estimates are being

contaminated by spurious influences, perhaps stemming from the small amount of variation that

identifies the federal experiment, and/or underlying differences in trends for families of different

sizes. In particular, one possibility is that other federal policies are changing over this period in a

way that limits the extent to which variation in the number of children in a family can identify the

EITC effect.

      Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999a) provide a detailed discussion of a wide array of such policy

changes, in particular those focused on increasing work incentives for single mothers. These

include changes in income taxes, AFDC and Food Stamp benefits, Medicaid, training programs,

child care programs, and private health insurance. They also provide rather compelling evidence

that−as a whole−the time-series pattern of changes in work among single mothers is consistent



                                                  25
with these policy changes having sharply boosted employment of single mothers. To the extent

that such policy changes induce different patterns of employment change in families with and

without children, as well as in families with different numbers of children, isolating the effects of

the EITC may require using specifications that allow for different trends over time for families

with different numbers of children (i.e., year × children interactions).26 As only the state EITC

experiment is identified in such specifications, this explanation is an argument in favor of our

state experiment for estimating the effects of the EITC on earnings, and is consistent with our

evidence that only the state EITCs yield a set of results broadly consistent with theoretical

predictions.

      The labor supply estimates we report also indicate more clearly the channels through which

the EITC operates. In particular, there is strong evidence that the EITC raises earnings by

inducing labor market entry among families that initially do not have any adults in the work

force. In contrast, we find some evidence that increasing the EITC credit rate reduces hours

among poor families that already have a working adult, thus offsetting the additional (post-tax)

earnings associated with the more generous credit. Thus, our estimates are consistent with both

alternatives found in the literature−notably the positive labor supply effect for single mothers

(many of whom would not have been in the work force initially) and the negative overall labor

supply effect for married couples (at least one of whom may initially have been an earner).

      Finally, our results suggest that for the range of policy changes that have been typical in

recent years, the EITC is more beneficial for poor families than is the minimum wage. The

minimum wage appears to have some positive effect on the earnings of families with children.

But our estimates of the effects of the EITC are much larger than for the minimum wage. Our

evidence also highlights the different types of families that the alternative policies are likely to

benefit, indicating that a higher minimum wage helps families with adults in the work force,

while increased generosity of the EITC primarily benefits families that initially have no adult


                                                  26
workers, an empirical result that follows quite expectedly from the theoretical prediction that the

EITC will encourage labor market entry.

      The fact that the EITC appears to increase earnings is a particularly strong statement in

favor of such a policy. For one thing, our analysis does not include the income benefits of the tax

credit itself, and thus we understate the overall effects of the EITC on the total income of eligible

families. Moreover, if the EITC were simply to increase total income rather than earnings, it

would be just another tax and transfer scheme, similar to those that have consistently

disappointed policy makers in the past, presumably because the EITC would not provide longer-

run beneficial effects stemming from increased attachment to the labor market. In this sense,

evidence that the EITC raises labor force participation and earnings among the poorest families

suggests that it may also have a positive influence by encouraging economic self-sufficiency

among the poor, which would enhance its effectiveness as a policy for fighting poverty, and−we

suspect−its political support.




                                                 27
                                            References

Barrow, Lisa, and Leslie McGranahan. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and Durable Goods
Purchases.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Mimeo, 1999.
Blank, Rebecca, David Card, and Philip Robins. “Financial Incentives for Increasing Work
and Income Among Low-Income Families.” NBER Working Paper No. 6998. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1999.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and Andrew J. Glenn. “Public Policies for the
Working Poor: The Earned Income Tax Credit versus Minimum Wage Legislation.” Research in
Labor Economics 15 (1996): 65-109.
Council of Economic Advisers. “Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996.”
Mimeo, 1997.
Dickert, Stacy, Scott Houser, and John Karl Scholz. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and
Transfer Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation.” In Tax Policy and the
Economy, edited by J. Poterba, 1-50. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995.
Eissa, Nada, and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor
Supply of Married Couples.” NBER Working Paper No. 6856. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1998.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey Liebman. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 No. 2 (1996): 605-637.
Hoffman, Saul, and Laurence Seidman. The Earned Income Tax Credit: Antipoverty
Effectiveness and Labor Market Effects. Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research, 1990.
Johnson, Nicholas, and Ed Lazere. “State Earned Income Tax Credits.” Poverty Research News
III No. 1 (Winter 1999), Joint Center for Poverty Research.
Meyer, Bruce, and Dan Rosenbaum. “Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax and Welfare
Policy and its Effects.” Northwestern University. Mimeo, 1999a.
Meyer, Bruce, and Dan Rosenbaum. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” NBER Working Paper No. 7363. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1999b.
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. “The Effects of Minimum Wages
on the Distribution of Family Incomes: A Non-Parametric Analysis.” NBER Working Paper No.
6536. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1998.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. “Do Minimum Wages Fight Poverty?” NBER
Working Paper No. 6127. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997.
Romich, Jennifer L., and Thomas Weisner. “How Families View and Use the EITC: The Case
for Lump-Sum Delivery.” Northwestern University. Mimeo, 1999.
Smeeding, Timothy M., Katherin E. Ross, and Michael O’Connor. “The Economic Impact of
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC): Consumption, Savings, and Debt.” Syracuse University.
Mimeo, 1999.
                                               Footnotes


Neumark is Professor of Economics at Michigan State University and a Research Associate of the
NBER. Wascher is Chief of the Wages, Prices, and Productivity Section at the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. We thank Raven Saks and Yuri Soares for excellent
research assistance, and Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Bruce Meyer, Chris Taber, David Wetzell, Jim
Ziliak, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. The views expressed are those of the
authors only, and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board. This paper was
prepared for the Joint Center for Poverty Research conference “The Earned Income Tax Credit:
Early Evidence,” Northwestern University, Oct. 7-8, 1999.

1
  Blank, et al. (1999) suggest that policy makers also attempt to use such programs to encourage
longer-run economic self-sufficiency. This stated objective might help to explain the interest in
the labor market effects of income-support programs, although it does not explain the dearth of
research on their effects on income. Of course, one could argue that if there are no effects of the
EITC on wages (which theory predicts might fall), then studying labor supply effects is sufficient
to gauge income effects. Strictly speaking, this is true, as long as we can look at labor supply of
all family members, weighted by the wages of each person. Studying family income directly is
less demanding of the data, and of course we should not necessarily rule out wage effects of the
EITC.
2
 Another alternative is to focus on the effects of the EITC on consumption, as is done in Romich
and Weisner (1999), Smeeding, et al. (1999), and Barrow and McGranahan (1999).
3
  We have chosen to cut off the sample at this point for two reasons. First, we wanted to avoid
potential complications associated with welfare reform. In particular, the introduction of TANF
in 1996 and the corresponding proliferation of state experiments would likely make it difficult to
distinguish EITC effects from those of other policies. Second, because of CPS sample redesign,
data from June ‘94-August ‘95 cannot be matched forward, so we cannot use the March 1995-
March 1996 match.
4
  When reporting descriptive statistics we use weights designed to reduce bias associated with
differential match rates. Specifically, we retained the family-specific sampling weight from the
CPS and adjusted by an estimate of the probability of a successful match derived from a logistic
regression of matching success on the age of the family head and the initial income-to-needs
ratio. The resulting weight is an estimate of the inverse of the probability of being in our matched
sample of families. Although the regression estimates we report are unweighted, the results were
not qualitatively affected by weighting.
5
  In our sample, the correlation between the changes in the credit rate and the maximum credit is
0.98, which is not surprising since they are closely related by construction. When we estimated
specifications using the change in the maximum credit in place of the change in the credit rate,
the results were very similar to those shown here; limited results using this alternative measure
are reported below.
6
 See Council of Economic Advisers (1997) for additional information on how these variables
were constructed.
7
    Pist is typically a vector, including, for example, changes in federal and state EITC parameters.
8
  In estimating equation (1), we found that the estimated standard errors of the state EITC
variables are smaller when fixed state and year effects are included. This implies that the
inclusion of these variables reduces the residual variance by an amount sufficient to outweigh the
loss of information that including such fixed effects usually entails. In such a case, the fixed
effects should obviously be included.
9
  Indeed, prior to 1994, families with no children were not eligible for the EITC. Henceforth, we
simply refer to families with and without children under 18 as those with and without children.
10
  With the federal rate denoted rf, and the state rate denoted rs (defined as zero in states without
an EITC), the combined rate (rc) is rc = rf⋅(1+rs). The federal EITC is calculated as rf multiplied
by income (Y), over the phase-in range. The state EITC is then equal to rs multiplied by the
federal EITC, or rs⋅(rf⋅Y) (see, e.g., Johnson and Lazere, 1999). We therefore use rf as the federal
rate, and rs⋅rf as the state rate.
11
   One potential drawback of using the level of the EITC in equation (1) is that, unless for some
reason a higher EITC also increased the rate of transition into poverty, the eventual implication of
a permanent increase in the transition rate out of poverty would be to eliminate poverty
altogether.
12
  For the federal credit rate, the estimates of coefficients on the lagged level were very imprecise,
as this variable has far less variation given that the sample period ends in 1994.
13
  We also estimated specifications in which we added the second lag (in levels) to the
specification with current and lagged levels. The second lag was always insignificant, whether
tested jointly (federal and state) or separately.
14
  This is, of course, subject to some of the same concerns as the federal credit, in that there may
be state-specific policies coming into play at the same time that have differing income effects on
families with different numbers of children. However, we suspect that this is less of a problem
across states than it is for the federal EITC; moreover, the additional variation in the data allows
us to include additional interactions to control for some of these possible effects. The drawback
of this approach is that relatively few states have a separate EITC. This raises the possibility that
the estimates are being driven by one or two states, an issue to which we return later in the paper.
15
  We use the average change in the federal EITC rate for both federal and state EITC variables
since we are trying to estimate the effect of a single policy, although we have two different
experiments with which to do this. The choice of scale has no effect on the statistical inferences,
of course.
16
  For only a small handful of near-poor families (1.7 percent) did the poverty line climb above
the maximum credit in year 2, by an average of only $160 (nominal).
17
   The phase-out rate and the length of the credit plateau (i.e., the range of earnings over which
the maximum credit is earned) can also affect labor supply. Since 1987, increases in the credit
rate have always been associated with increases in the phase-out rate, which should reduce labor
supply, but the length of the plateau has also increased with the credit rate, which could exert a
slight positive influence on labor supply as families move to a higher kink point. In any event,
we verified that the empirical results for the near-poor are similar using the change in the
maximum credit as the policy variable.
18
  For the specifications for transitions to above poverty-level earnings, and for changes in
income-to-needs for families below poverty-level earnings, we tested the restriction that the state
and federal effects were equal. This was rejected at the 5-percent level.
19
     Information on the actual credit received is not available in the CPS.
20
  For our sample period, excluding families only eligible for non-refundable credits means
dropping all observations for Maryland, Iowa, and Rhode Island.
21
  There were also sizable expansions in Medicaid in Wisconsin in both 1988 and 1992, which
may confound the estimated effects of the EITC. We verified that the results were qualitatively
similar omitting the Wisconsin observations altogether, although remaining statistically
significant only for the change in income-to-needs.
22
   Whether we use federal increases only or federal and state increases is irrelevant, as the former
is .209, and the latter .204. (These are real increases in 1982-1984 dollars; see Table 2.)
23
  In that paper, we find that minimum wages have a slight positive effect on the probability of
escaping poverty (defined in terms of total income), and a larger positive effect on the probability
of slipping into poverty.
24
  One could contemplate policy changes of very different magnitudes, and in principle come up
with a comparison as favorable to one policy or the other as one would like. However, the
dangers of extrapolating regression results well beyond the range of changes in the exogenous
variables that occur in the sample are well-known, and it is plausible that the effects of policy
changes of very different magnitudes differ substantially. For example, many of those who argue
that minimum wage increases do not reduce employment of low-wage workers qualify their
conclusions to refer to small changes. It is because of these considerations that we express our
results in terms of the sample average policy changes.
25
  The latter result is not surprising. While job loss from minimum wage increases may entail
some “losers,” the winners are relatively more likely to be those with jobs already. Of course,
given relatively high turnover among low-wage workers, some of those without jobs initially may
benefit by entering the labor market at higher wages.
26
  Meyer and Rosenbaum (1999b) carry out a multivariate analysis of the effects of the EITC (and
income tax rates) on the labor supply of single women, in light of other accompanying policy
changes. Echoing our concerns, they add interactions between years and number of children to
their specifications. Because they look at the EITC and income taxes combined, use simulated
tax/EITC payments, and focus on single women, the results are not directly comparable to ours.
