NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOCAL REVENUE HILLS:
A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM SPECIFICATION W1TH
EVIDENCE FROM POUR U.S. CiTIES

Andrew Haughwout
Robert Inman
Steven Craig
Thomas Luce

Working Paper 7603
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7603

NATIONAL BUREAU OP ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

The authors would like to thank the Zell Center for Real Estate Research, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania

for financial support. Haughwout and Inman also received support from the National Science Foundation. The
comments of Howard Chernick, Joe Gyourko, Todd Sinai, Anita Summers, and John Quigley are appreciated as are
those of seminar participants at Princeton University, the Wharton School, the ZEW Federalism Conference, the
Norwegian Tax Forum 1999, the NBER Summer Institute Public Finance Workshop, and the 1999 Meetings of the
American Public Policy and Management Association. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

2000 by Andrew Haughwout, Robert Inman, Steven Craig, and Thomas Luce. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.

Local Revenue Hills:

A General Equilibrium Specification with Evidence from Four U.S. Cities
by

Andrew Haughwout, Robert Inman, Steven Craig, Thomas Luce'

Adam Smith: High taxes, sometimes by diminishing consumption of the taxed
commodities, and sometimes by encouraging smuggling, frequently afford a smaller
revenue to government than what might be drawn from more moderate. taxes. (From
Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, book V, Chapter II.)
Alexander Hamilton: It is a signal advantage of taxes on articles of consumption that they
contain in their own nature a security against excess. . . . If duties are too high, they
lessen the consumption; the collection is eluded; and the product to the treasury is not
so great as when they are confined within proper and moderate bounds. (From "Further

Defects of the Present Constitution," Federalist Papers, No. 21.)
Jules Dupuit: Ifa tax is gradually increased from zero up to the point where it become

prohibitive, its yield is at first nil, then increase by small stages until it reaches a
maximum, after which it gradually declines until it becomes zero again. (From Jules
Dupuit, "On the Measurement of Utility from Public Works," reprinted, in K. Arrow
and Tibor Scitovsky (1969), Readings in Welfare Economics, Homewood, Ii: Richard D.
Irwin.)

John Maynard Keynes: Nor should the argument seem strange that taxation may be so
high as to defeat its object, and that, given sufficient time to gather the fruits, a reduction
of taxation will run a better chance than increase of balancing the budget. (From John
Maynard Keynes, Collected Works of John Maynard Keynes, St. Martin's Press, p. 338.)

Local Revenue Hills: A General Equilibrium Specification with Evidence
from Pour U.S. Cities
Andrew Haughwout, Robert Inman, Steven Craig, and Thomas Luce
NBER Working Paper No. 7603
March 2000
JELN0. H2, H71, R5l
ABSTRACT

We provide estimates of the impact and long-run elasticities of tax base with respect to tax
rates for four large U.S. cities: Houston (property taxation), Minneapolis (property taxation), New
York City (property, general sales, and income taxation), and Philadelphia (property, gross receipts,
and wage taxation). Results suggest that all four of our cities are near the peaks of their longer-mn

revenue hills. Equilibrium effects are observed within three to four fiscal years after the initial
increase in local, tax rates. A significant negative impact (current period) effect of a balanced budget

increase in city property tax rates on city property base is interpreted as a capitalization effect and

suggests that marginal increases in city spending do not provide positive net benefits to property

owners. Estimates of the effects of taxes on city employment levels for New York City and
Philadelphia — the two cities for which employment series are available —show the local income and

wage tax rates have significant negative effects on city employment levels.

Andrew Haughwout
Domestic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
New York, NY 10045
andrew.haughwout@ny.frb.org

Steven Craig
Department of Economics
University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204
scraig@uh.edu

Robert Inman
Finance Department
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
inman @wharton.upenn.edu

Thomas Luce
Hubert Humphrey School of Public Policy
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
tluce@umn.edu

Understanding the equilibrium effects of taxation on the level and location of economic
activities, long a concern of public finance economists, is now a priority for policy advisors and

elected officials as well. Today, almost no city, state, or national budget fails to mention the

wisdom of controlling taxes to enhance economic development and job growth. Further,
understanding how tax rate changes affect the equilibrium level of tax revenues — called
"dynamic revenue scoring" — defines the government's equilibrium budget constraint and is

now viewed as essential for sound fiscal planning (Auerbach, 1995). While there is general

agreement that taxes matter, we are still far from a consensus on how much. This paper
provides estimates of the effects of local taxation on the taxed activities in four large U.S. cities:

Houston, Minneapolis, New York City, and Philadelphia.
The analysis is useful for at least four reasons. First, large cities are important economic

centers. Poorly designed tax policies may have adverse effects on the levels and locations of
economic activities within large cities, with potentially significant costs in lost agglomeration

economies in both the production of goods and services and in the generation of new ideas

(Glaeser, Kallal, Scheinkman, Shleifer, 1992). We provide estimates of the effects of tax
changes on changes in the level of taxed activities within our sample cities.2

Second, in

contrast to much of the previous empirical analysis in local public finance, the cities we examine

2 We know of only five previous studies which look specifically at the effects of taxation
on economic activity for large cities: Grieson (1980), Gruenstein (1980) and Inman (1995)
examine the effects of the Philadelphia wage tax on city jobs; Grieson, et al. (1977) looks at the
effects of the New York City business taxes on aggregate city business activity; Inman (1995)
studies the effects of property taxes on property values and business taxes on business activity
in Philadelphia; and Mark, McGuire, and Papke (1998) study the effects of property and sales
taxation on jobs and employment for Washington, D.C.. Bartik (1991) provides the best overall
summary of what we know about the effects of local taxation on economic activity generally.

I

here are large open city economies containing both firms and households. They are not Tiebout-

Oates bedroom suburbs. The appropriate analytic framework is the Rosen-Roback model with
endogenous land values and wages (Roback, 1982) extended, however, to allow for household

consumption and for household and firm investment in housing and business capital. We
provide this extension. Third, in today's increasingly decentralized public economy, cities will

be asked to assume expanded responsibilities for the provision of public services, including
services and transfers to low income households. Under the terms of the Welfare Reform Act

of 1996, additional federal or state aid is unlikely to be forthcoming to meet the full costs of
these added welfare responsibilities (Inman and Rubinfeld, 1997). In a mobile urban economy
with attractive suburban alternatives, there may be insufficient long-run city taxing capacity to

fill the gap. Our empirical results provide the first econometric estimates of a large city's
'revenue hills" (aka "Laffer Curves') as a basis for measuring the city's equilibrium budget
constraint and its ability to meet any new fiscal demands in a post-welfare-reform economy.
Fourth, the paper offers additional evidence as to the general sensitivity of tax base to tax rates;

see Gruber and Saez (1999; federal personal taxation) and Hines (1999; corporate taxation) for
reviews.

Section II presents a general equilibrium model of the effects of city tax rates on city tax

bases and revenues. The analysis here provides us with the appropriate specification for our

empirical analysis of how changes in rates affect bases and revenues as well as a structural
framework within which to interpret estimated effects. Each of the important taxes used by
large cities are included in the analysis: property taxation on households and firms, sales and
gross receipts taxation, and resident and non-resident wage and income taxation. All four of our

3

sample cities use the property tax. In addition, New York City earns significant revenues from

a general sales tax and from a tax on residents' income. Philadelphia uses a gross receipts tax

and a tax on residents' and non-residents' wages. Section III describes our data and provides

estimates of the effects of changes in tax rates on tax base. Sensitivity analyses of our core
results, including instrumental variables estimation to allow for endogenous tax rates, test the
robustness of our basic conclusions. Section III also provides estimates of the effects of city

taxes on city employment for the two cities (New York City and Philadelphia) for which
accurate employment series are available. Section IV presents estimates our cities' current

revenue hills. Each of our cities is very near or at the top of its revenue hill(s). Section V
provides a few concluding comments.

II. The Effects of Taxation in a Large Open City Economy
Individual large cities offers only one of many competitive locations for residents and

firms. Capital, labor, and households are mobile, both across locations in a given economic
region and between regions. Capital located in a city must earn the competitive rate of return,
goods produced within the city must sell at competitive world prices, labor working in the city
but living the suburbs must earn the competitive wage, and residents living and working within

the city must receive an overall level of utility comparable to that available outside the city.
This section outlines a general equilibrium model of the effects of city taxation and public goods

on the levels and location of economic activity to a large, open city. The analysis extends the
model of Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982). The model differs in two important respects from
previous general equilibrium models of fiscal policy in open economies; for example, Polinsky

4

and Rubinfeld (1978), Brueckner (1981), and Sullivan (1985). First, like Rosen-Roback we

close our model by assuming an exogenous supply of city land; thus, land prices are
endogenous. Second, in additional to residential property taxation (the focus of previous work),

our model also studies the effects of business property taxation, the taxation of labor incomes
of residents and non-residents, and sales taxation on domestic consumption and export goods.

Like previous fiscal models, however, we assume local tax rates and public services are set
exogenously.

Households living in the city consume three private goods -- an all-purpose consumption

good (x), housing structures (h), and residential land (4) -- and an all-purpose pure public good

(G). All endogenous variables of the model are denoted in italics. The residents are assumed

to purchase the three private goods (x, h, 4); Consumption goods (x) are purchased at an
exogenous world price (a

1)

plus any local sales tax levied on consumption (rj; see Poterba

(l996). Housing structures are constructed at the competitive price (a 1) and paid for through
an annual rental cost sufficient to return a competitive rate of return (r). In addition, residents

pay a local property tax (rn) levied on the value of housing structures (='

1

h). Households

purchase land within the city at an endogenously determined annual rental price (R) and pay the

local property tax (,) levied on land values (= (R/rY er). The specification here is general with
respect to the contribution of land and structures to household welfare as residents get direct

utility from both land and structures; see Amott and MacKinnon (1977). The number of

Requiring residents to consume x within the city removes the effect of local sales taxes
on cross-border shopping; see, for example, Walsh and Jones (1988) and most recently Goolsbee
(1999) for evidence. In our model residents are free to leave the city when the sales tax is
increased.
5

households living within the city (N) is endogenous. City residents are assumed to work only

within the city and to receive an endogenously determined wage (B less any locally levied
resident wage tax (rj. Residents maximize a common, well-behaved utility function U(x, h,

6;

G) subject to the budget constraint inclusive of local tax payments:

[l+,-J.x + [r+r].h + [r+r1,].(RIr).4 = [l-r].W,
which in turn defines resident demand curves for x, h, and 2;
(1)

x=x(R,W;r,G;r, 1);

(2)

/z=h(R,W;rr,G;r,l);

(3)

Er

= £(R, W; r, 0; r, 1);

where ç represents the vector of exogenous residential tax rates {r,, r,
Long-run spatial equilibrium requires that residents or households planning to live within

the city achieve the same level of utility as available to them outside the city. Given a
household's demands for x, h, and e, the indirect utility function for a typical resident can be
specified and set equal to an exogenous utility (V0) available outside the city:
(4)

V(R, W; ;, 0; r, 1) =

V0.

Firms within the city buy capital (K), resident labor (N), non-resident or imported labor

'Implicit in this specification of the household budget constraint are four assumptions which

define the initial incidence of local taxation. First, the supply of consumption goods (x) is
perfectly elastic to city residents; residents therefore bear the initial burden of the local sales tax.

Second, there is a perfectly elastic supply of housing structures to city residents; residents
therefore bear the initial burden of the portion of the property tax which falls on structures.
Third, all residents own land in the city; residents therefore bear the burden of the portion of
the local property tax which falls on resident owned land. Fourth, given the full mobility of
firms, there is a perfectly elastic demand for resident workers; residents therefore bear the initial
burden of the resident wage tax. Under the assumptions of our model, the equilibrium incidence
of local taxation will be borne by landowners.
6

(Al), and land (L) to produce the common consumption good (X); the aggregate production
technology for city fiims is assumed to be constant returns to scale (linear homogeneous) over

these four private market inputs. Firms also use the exogenously provided all-purpose public
good (G) as a production input; (3 is assumed to influence firm production as a beneficial Hicks-

neutral shift in the marginal productivities of the private inputs. Firms buy capital at its
exogenous market price (

1)

and pay an annual cost of capital equal to the competitive rate

of return (r) plus any local property tax (rn) levied on the value of that capital (=

1

K). Firms

hire resident labor N at the endogenously determined resident wage (W). Non-resident labor CM)

is paid an exogenous non-resident wage (s) needed to attract non-resident workers to city jobs
plus a compensating differential for non-resident labor taxes imposed by the city at the rate r,1.5
The gross-of-ta wage paid by city firms to non-resident workers equals (1 +rJ s. Finally,

firms use land within the city paying the annual rental rate (R) plus the property tax (re) on the

value of that land (= (R/r) •L). For production efficiency, firms within the city maximize
output defined by their common constant returns production technology needed to produce one

unit ofX, given G --1 = X(k, n, in, tf; (3), where k =

KLY,

ii = N/K, in = M/K, £y= LJX-

- subject to a constant avenge cost constraint inclusive of local tax payments:

c = [r +

+ W-n + [l+rJ's.m + [r+rI1-(R/r)-t

where k, n, in, and 4 measure inputs per unit output. The resulting firm demands for factor
inputs, specified here as demand per unit output, are:

When specifying the effect of non-resident wage tax rates on tax base we recognize that
cities will actually tax the gross-of-tax wage. If m is the actual rate imposed on the gross-of-tax
wage and r,, is an implied rate on net-of-tax wages, then identical revenues will be raised and
economic behaviors will be identical when i'm [(1 +rm) - s] = r,• s or when we define r,,, =
(Jl - J. Our empirical results are unaffected by this re-specification.

7

(5)

k=

(6)

n=n(R,W;r,G;r,s);

(7)

,n=m(R,W;r,G;r,s);

(8)

4 = t4R, W; r, G; r, s);

k(R, .W; T, G; r, s);

where Ic represents the vector of exogenous Ittor tax rates {r, r,,j.
Long-nm spatial equilibrium does not allow city firms to make excess profits or losses

solely because of city location. City firms' long-run avenge costs must therefore equal the
competitive price of the produced good (

1) less any city taxes imposed on the value of the

firms' gross output (rJ. Based upon the factor demand curves above, the firms' zero excess
profit constraint will be defined as avenge revenue (Si) minus per unit taxes (r,rJ minus average
cost:6

(9)

1 - Tx - c(R, W; r, G; r, s) =

110(R,

W; Tx Tç, 0;

r, s, 1) =

0.

The spatial equilibrium conditions specified by eqs. (4) and (9) define the equilibrium

values (denoted by *) of 2? and W; see Figure 1. The household utility constraint (eq. (4)) is
represented by one of a family of rising indifference curves, V(.) =

V0,

in the {R, W} space.

The firm profit constraint (eq. (9)) is shown as one of a family of the declining profit curves,

Implicit in this specification of the firm's after-tax profits are four assumptions which
define the initial incidence of local taxation on firms. First, the supply of capital equipment is
perfectly elastic; firms therefore bear the initial burden of the portion of the local property tax
which falls on firm capital. Second, there is a perfectly elastic supply of suburban workers to
city firms; firms therefore bear the initial burden of a non-resident wage tax. Third, all firms
own land in the city; firms therefore bear the burden of the portion of the local property tax
which falls on firm owned land. Fourth, there is an elastic demand for city firm output in the
world market; city firms therefore bear the initial burden of any tax imposed by the city on firm
output. Again, given the assumptions of our model, the final burden of these local taxes is
shifted back onto land values.
8

Figure 1

Rent-Wage Eqnilibrium in an Open City

V(•)=V0

K4

fl(.=O

w*

w

= 0. Citizens will be better off if they can move to an indifference curve below V0
(earning higher wages andlor paying lower rents) and firms will be more profitable by moving

to a profit curve below fl(.) =0 (paying lower wages and rents). The equilibrium wage (W
and rent (R*) defined by the intersection of V0() and fl0(•) in Figure 1 are consistent with each
resident receiving V0 and each city firm receiving no excess profits or losses.

R* = Rfr, T, T, G; r, s, 1; V0),

(10)

= Wfr, r, r,, 0; r, s, 1; V0).

(11)

Eq. (10) specifying R* as a function of exogenous tax rates, public services, and market prices

is a typical land value (= Rfr) capitalization equation.7 Equation (11) is the counterpart wage

capitalization equation as specified in Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982). Substituting these
specifications for R* and WK into eqs. (i)-(3) and (5)-(8) defines the equilibrium values of
household goods demands per resident (x*, h*, 1r*) and firm factor input demands per unit of
local output (k*,

n, m*,

17), respectively.3

Aggregating household and factor demands now allows us to specify equilibrium tax
bases for each city tax. The tax base per resident for city property taxation equals:

' The familiar Tiebout-Oates capitalization equation is a special case of eq. (10). With no
firms competing for city land, resident demands fully determines land rents. Thus, V(R; ;, 0;
W, r, 1) = V0, and therefore R = R(r, 0; W, r, 1; V0).

The model is closed by fixing the aggregate supply of land in the city. Aggregate
production by firms within the city, r, is determined by the equilibrium in the land market. We
assume each city has a fixed aggregate supply of land, L,, which must equal the equilibrium
units of land for each
aggregate demand for land by firms and households. Firms demand
unit of Xt produced, while the na" households employed by firms per unit of r produced each
demand 4* units of land. The amount of land demanded in equilibrium is [17 + n*esc] per
unit of X* produced. The aggregate demand for land is therefore Ld* = [17 + fl*Ir*] •r.
Setting L, = Ld* to clear the city land market implies: X* = LJ[17 + n*lr*]; see Haughwout
(1998). Aggregate city resident employment is specified as: N* = n*x*.
9

B,* =

k*/n* +

(R*/r)(tr* +.

(t7/n)}

+ h,

= 8iATr ?f, Tx, 0; r, s, 1, Va;

(12)

for city sales taxation:
BS*
(13)

B,5

=

=

r1, T,

0;

s, 1, Va;

r,

for resident wage taxation:

= 1'1
(14)

B* = B(r,

Tç,

Tx, 0; r, s, 1, Va;

for non-resident wage taxation:

=
(15)

=

Bm(Tr, T,

0; r,

s, 1, V0);

and for local gross receipts taxation (remembering n'

is

resident-worker per unit of local

output):
Bx* =
(16)

Bx* =

lIti,

t, r,, G; r,

m,

1, V.

Though the model presented here is relatively simple, a priori predictions for the effects

on tax base of changes in tax rates and public good provision are generally not possible without

a parameterization of preferences and technologies.

Fiscal policies which affect the

attractiveness of the city to both households and firms shift both the households' break-even
indifference curve and firms' zero profit curve in Figure 1, preventing a priori predictions for
R*

and W*. Without

knowing the changes in R5 and

10

W,

no

a priori predictions are possible

for household consumption, factor utilization, and finally tax bases.9 Matters must ultimately
be resolved empirically.
The theoretical analysis has made clear that a correctly specified model of the economic

consequences of local taxes in an open city economy must include all local tax rates and local
public services in each tax base equation and that the full effects of rates and services on base
are observed only after equilibrium adjustments in local land and labor markets. Further, both

local tax rates and lbcal public goods are seen to impact on tax base. Thus specifying an
equilibrium relationship between tax base and tax rates alone -- and ultimately a city's revenue

hill -- requires a specification for how changes in tax rates change public goods. This is
provided by the government's budget identity:

G [Er•B1 + Z]/c,
where Z are non-tax revenues and c is an index of local public service costs; see Inman (1979).
Substituting the budget identity for G into eqs. (12)-(16) provides the final general equilibrium,

balanced budget relationship between tax rates, tax base, and tax revenues:
(17)

B1 = B(Tr, r1, Tx, Z, c; r, s, 1, V0),

and between tax rates and tax revenues:
(18)

= rsB1('r, Ic, Tx, Z,

c;

r, s, 1, V0),

See Haughwout and Inman (2000). One prediction is possible: dB*Idr > 0. A ceteris
paribus increase in the city resident wage tax rate makes city residency less attractive. Thus V0

moves to a lower indifference curve in Figure 1, sliding down the fixed ll schedule, thereby
reducing the equilibrium value of R* while raising W*. As W* = B*, dB*/dr > 0. Mayors
should be careful with this result, however. Since resident wages have risen, firms will hire
fewer resident workers for each unit of output. This result is also found in the models of
Polinsky and Rubinfeld (1978) and Brueckner (1981).
11

for each local tax base [i= p, s, w, m, X].'°
The city's equilibrium revenue frontier is now defined as the aggregate of all city
revenues for each combination of city tax rates, specified as:
(19)

5.1?

= trB,(r,, Tr'

A small increase in any individual tax rate (

Tx,

Z, c; •) + Z.

Mi), when coupled with adjustments in local

public goods as required by the city's budget identity, results in an equilibrium balanced budget

change in city revenues of:
(20)

= Ar•B3 +

The first term measures the direct revenue effect of a small increase in the tax rate
s,

=

w, m, X). The second term measures the indirect effect of the rate increase as local tax bases

respond to changes in local tax rates and to balanced budget adjustments in G. The expression
within (} measures the change in each B1 because of the small change in ri; e11 is the elasticity
of B, with respect to changes in i. Since tax revenues are allocated to the purchase of public

goods, it is possible that the z's are positive -- for example, land taxes used to finance valued
public goods as in Brueckner (1982). For the general tax structures modeled here, however,
negative c's are also possible; see Haughwout and Inman (2000). Values of ed's are therefore

an empirical issue. We will estimate eq's for Houston, Minneapolis, New York, and
Philadelphia and use those estimates to place each city on its current revenue hill.

10

Assuming, as we do, that the conditions for the Implicit Function Theorem hold for the

system of tax base equations plus the budget identity. Sufficient for a stable equilibrium
specification is that c > r1 3B,IdG, or in words, increasing G cannot bring in more in tax
revenues (Er1. 3B,/dG) than it costs to produce the good (c). This "reduced-form" approach to
specifying the equilibrium tax base equations is similar to that used by Vigdor (1998) in his
study of the property tax base for resident-only communities.
12

ifi. Data and Estimation
A. Data
The Data Appendix provides a summary of the data used in our analysis. All four cities

use a property tax (B,,, ri,); New York uses a general sales tax (B,, rJ;'1 New York uses an

income tax based upon the federal income tax definition of taxable income (B,,,, c,);'2 and
Philadelphia imposes a resident (B,,, r) and non-resident wage tax (B,,,, rJ and a gross receipts
tax (Br, rx). Unfortunately, Philadelphia data are not available to separate wage taxes collected

between residents and non-residents; we therefore estimate an avenge Philadelphia wage tax
base equation (B,,,j. For New York City and Philadelphia we also estimate a city employment
equation relating aggregate employment (N + Al) to local tax rates.

The property tax base per resident (B) in each city is the aggregate market value per
resident of all taxable property as estimated by each city from its tax roles using samples of
"arm's length" sales of properties within the city.'3 The sales tax base (Br) and the income tax
base (B,,) per resident for New York City are the City's estimates from tax returns of aggregate

retail sales and aggregate taxable wage and unearned (investment) income, respectively.

"

Houston and Philadelphia also use a general sales tax, but there is insufficient variation
in the sales tax rate over time to allow estimation of a revenue hill.
12

The wage tax base is approximately 75 percent of taxable income in New York City; see
Tax Revenue Forecasting Documentation: Financial Plan, FY 1994-98, City of New York,
Office of Management and Budget, 1994. New York City also imposes a non-resident income
tax, but rates and revenues are low and rate variation is insufficient for empirical analysis.

'

The estimates are not from (possibly biased) assessor's estimates, but from actual sales.

Similarly, when specifying the effective tax rate on property in each city we use the estimated
ratio of assessed value to market value (assessment rate) based upon market value as specified
by market sales.
13

Philadelphia's gross receipts taxbase (B and wage tax base per resident (B,,, + B,,, = B÷J are
estimates from tax returns of aggregate business sales and of aggregate resident plus non-resident

wage income originating in Philadelphia. For New York City and Philadelphia, annual
aggregate employment (N ÷ Al) is also available as each city is also a county (ies for New
York); comparable data were not available for Houston and Minneapolis.

Each local tax rate, except for New York City's income tax, is a proportional tax rate.

For New York City's progressive income tax we define r as the top marginal rate; estimated
elasticities using the median income family's tax rate were similar. In all cities, property tax
rates (rn) are the effective avenge tax rate defined as the city's proportional mill rate times the

market value weighted avenge rate of property assessment within the city.'4 New York's
sales tax rate (r,) and Philadelphia's wage (r÷J'5 and gross receipts (ry) tax rates are the
statutory rates. There is significant variation in each city's tax rates, both up and down; see the

Data Appendix. All tax rate and tax base data were provided by either the city's Department
of Revenue or City Controller.
Other independent variables include: exogenous non-matching federal and state grants-in-

" Houston,

Minneapolis, and New York City have different classes of property with

different effective tax rates for each class. For these cities we create a single tax-based weighted
average of the separate property tax rates as our measure of ri,. The assessment to market value
ratios are based upon market value as estimated from an annual sample of arm's length sales of
market properties.

'

The Philadelphia wage tax rate used to explain the aggregate resident plus non-resident
wage tax base is a weighted average of the resident (r) and non-resident (r,,,) wage tax rates,
+ .3. Tm where the weights were provided by the Philadelphia
specified as w+m =

Department of Revenue, based on periodic Department surveys. We thank Mr. Michael Isard
for this data.
14

aid to the city (including school aid) minus net spending by the city on welfare (Z);16
exogenous determinants of the cost of local public goods (c) measured by changes in the national

industrial producer price index (1994 = $1.00); resident interest rates (r) measured by the AAA
corporate borrowing rate; non-resident wages (m) measured by national average hourly earnings

in nonagricultural industries; and the national rate of violent crime (CRIME) as a measure of
the relative attractiveness to residents of moving from the city to the suburbs (V0); see the Data

Appendix. (Unfortunately, continuous time series of city-specific crime rates were not available
for our four cities.) The relatively short sample periods in our study preclude us from including

all these exogenous variables in each tax base equation. As an alternative we will therefore use

two aggregate proxies for the time series patterns in these variables -- a simple time trend
(TIME) and the national rate of unemployment for civilian workers (UE) -- and then include
each of the exogenous variables individually for separate analysis.

Also included in each tax base equation are measures of possibly important exogenous
economic or policy "shocks" specific to each city's economy. For Houston's property tax base

equation we test for the impact of the annual rate of change in crude oil prices (LFUEL). For
Minneapolis we test for the effects of seven years (1982-1988) of exogenous state funding for

downtown city construction, including a convention center and a new sports stadium
(STADIUM). For New York City we include the annual change in the inflation-adjusted Dow

Jones industrial avenge (ADOW) in each tax base equation. For Philadelphia we test for the
effects of changes in the national level of health care expenditures (AHEALTH) on tax bases.

Since the mobile middle class and firms determine land values and wages within the city,
we use only exogenous aid which can be allocated to middle class and/or business services.
Thus city welfare spending is subtracted from total exogenous grants-in-aid.
15

Both New York City and Philadelphia tax bases also may have been affected by policy "shocks"

from neighboring states, in particular, the introduction of the New Jersey state income tax in
1976 and, for New York City, the introduction of the Connecticut state income tax in 1991. We

include year indicator variables for the introduction of these taxes in the New York City and

Philadelphia base equations. Finally, beyond their decisions to set local tax rates, we test for
an independent effect of mayoral reputation on tax base by including indicator variables for the

nationally prominent mayors in our sample: Mayors Rizzo and Rendeil in Philadelphia, and
Mayors Koch, Dinkins, and Giuliani in New York City.

The tax base equations specified as eq. (17) are estimated here in first-differences to
allow for possible non-stationarity of the level time series in tax base and tax rates.'7 A test

for the possibility of pooling our four sample cities to obtain more precise estimates of the
effects of tax rates on the property tax base rejected pooling for these four cities.'8 All base
equations are therefore estimated separately for each city. Initial core equation estimates (Tables

1-3) are by OLS. Final equation estimates (Table 4) allow for the possible simultaneity of local

17 If we hope to recover the underlying structural relationship between tax rates and tax base
from time series data, it is essential that all variables in the underlying relationship be generated
by stationary stochastic processes. Augmented Dickey-fuller tests (available upon request) reveal
each of our national and city time series are first-order integrated processes 1(1). Given these
results, all equations will be estimated in first differences. ADF test statistics for the residuals
from the estimated core equations and the corresponding MacKinnon (1991) critical values are
available upon request.

18 A pooled regression regressing iJ3,,, on a constant term, tSr,, tSUE, tSZ, and ISCRIME
has an unadjusted R2 = .28. The pooled regression of SB on city-specific constants and each
variable interacted with a city-specific indicator has an unadjusted R2 = .53. An F test for the
significance of all interaction terms as a test of validity of pooling rejects the null hypothesis of
pooling at the .02 level of significance: F1574 = 2.507. Significant interactions were observed
for all tax rates.
16

tax rates and tax base. Instruments for tax rates include exogenous regulatory and political

events likely to affect local tax rates but not directly influence city tax bases — e.g., local
political election cycles, state tax rates, state spending other than grants to cities, the political

composition of the state legislatures, the political party of the governor, and a variety of city
specific regulatory events. lv estimates are provided even for local tax rates set by the state

(New York City sales and income tax rates) or requiring state approval (Philadelphia wage tax
rates) under th! assumption that approval by the state may also be sensitive to changes in local
tax bases.

B. Estimation: Core Results
Tables 1 and 2 present our core estimates of the effects of changes in city tax rates on
changes in city tax base as well as estimates of each city's short-run and longer-run elasticities

of base with respect to own tax rate (aJ. Longer-run elasticities are reported for specifications

including three lagged rate changes for property taxation and two lagged rate changes for sales
and income taxes; longer lag structures did not contribute significantly to the explanatory power

of the estimated equation. The F statistic for the joint contribution of three lagged rate changes

(F(r(-3)) for property taxation and of two lagged rate changes (F(ai-(-2)) for sales and income
taxation are reported in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. Also reported for each equation are the

Durbin-Watson test statistic for the null hypothesis of no first-order serial correlation; in no
instances do we reject the null hypothesis.

Table I presents our core estimates for the property tax base equation for each city,
specifying changes in the property tax base per resident (a.B) as a function of a constant term,

balanced budget changes in the city's effective property tax rate (a), the national rate of

17

Table 1: Property Taxationt
houston

Constant

AD,,

All,,

7216

76.26

(705.0)
AT,,

Aie(1)
Ai-,,(—-2)

Ar,,(—3)

All,,
186.8

(7S1.9)

(1000.0)

(6,491.4)
•--

(8163.3)

All,,

-—

--

--——

All,,

AUE

—2.56

(664.3)

AZ
AC'RlME

—-

--

392.4

381.2

110.2

—14.97

59.94

(244.8)

(332.2)

(369.3)

(341.7)

—2,524.8k

—1,205.9

(896.9)

(951.0)

A2

1.32

9,076.5
(6,869.9)

0.17

——

(954.4)

267.2

426.3
(761.8)

(252.4)
3.22

1.19

(2.21)

(2.28)

41.48

—-

—43

—

F(Ar(—3))

-—

—

.

L52
0.06

(.93)

.59

1.50

1.31

0,20

0.18

—.28

._.32*

(.11)

-—

(.12)

(2,023.2)
926.2
(2,121.7)
—2,709.7

AD,,

123.3

102.0

(134.9)

(157,9)

303.4

(368.5)

—

1.09

(1.57)

(625.9)

—

——

5.59
(12.12)

(721.9)
—123.4

(807;6)

—

—

—

—1,288.7

—174.6

—176.5

—1,257.8

(767.9)

(71L2)
(140.6)

—

(1.68)

—.

89.7

(158.8)

—

314.8
(365.5)
.35

AR,,

—3,0218 _3,091.7*
(603.9)

(1,906.6)

(7.61)

—.40
-—

—

(354.5)

39.09

(.43)

—

—122.7

(41.92)

CUr
(.39)

—1,170.2

38.81

0.19

—--

(1,091.5)

—

(1,793.7)
—1,121.7

—1,261.2

(35.89)

1.45

(1,663.2)

(1,279.9)

—

AR,,

10,673.0* —10,130.8
(1,517.9)

(1,246.8)
—2,115.3

(27.50)

D.W.

All,,

(247.4)

(6,610.7)

—

AD,,

373.2

2,634.7
(7,406.3)

302.9

AD,,

All,,

Philadelphia

(235.7)

—14,203.i
(5,891.7)

New York

Minneapolis

—

.75

(147.3)
—.08

(1.88)

(2.32)

3.44

—

(4.79)

2.15

1.12

1.43

1.24

1.40

1.65

1.72

0.32

0.62

0.61

0.61

0.48

0.47

0.50

(.13)

(.14)

(.08)

(.08)

(.24)

——

1.58

—1.11$
(.26)

2.36*

—

(.18)

.84

Standard en'ois lot cacti estimated coellicieot are reported iii parentheses. D.W. is the Diirhiii-WaLson test statistic for serial correlation. ft2 is the coefliuent of
determination corrected for degrees of freedom. 'the elasticity of tax base with respect to tax rates (cur) is based on the marginal effects of rates on tax base,
calculated for the immost recent Fiscal year's tax base amid tax tale for cacti city. F(AT(—3)) is time I" statistic testing time null hypothesis that three lagged changes in
rates jointly have no iniloemice omm change in tax base.

*coelliciemmtls t statistic

2.00. Mnmmmeapohs' three lagged changes in rates are jointly signiFicant at the .10 level.

unemployment (zSUE), federal and state aid (including school aid) to the city net of welfare
spending (AZ), and the national rate of violent crime (ACRIME). The constant term provides

estimates of the average annual real growth in tax base. We test for the effects of changes in
public goods costs (Ac), interest rates (Ar), non-resident wages (Am), mayoral regimes, and
various economic shocks on these core estimates in Section ffl.C, Table 4 below.
For all four cities, Ar has a statistically significant negative effect on the rate of change

of the city's property tax base. In contrast, SUE, AZ, and ACRJME are not statistically
significant; a result confirmed in a pooled regression allowing for a common effect across all
four cities of AUE, AZ, and ACRIME on AB (available upon request). The insignificance of
AZ on city property values is consistent with the estimated negative impact of balanced budget

increases in property tax rates on property base. Both results imply additional public monies

are being allocated to uses not valued by property owners, for example, services for lower
income households or for public employee wage increases. City intergovernmental aid does
increase city revenues, but there are no important multiplier effects through an enhanced city
tax base. The insignificance of ACRIME on city property values may be due to the fact that we
are forced to use a national crime rate to proxy for local crime, though Cullen and Levitt (1996)

in their larger panel study of crime and cities found a similar insignificant effects of crime on

home values using city-wide crime rates. Other studies have found higher crime does reduce
home values, but only if it occurs in the home's immediate neighborhood; see Thaler (1978),
Hellman and Naroff (1979).

What matters most for changes in our sample cities' property tax bases are changes in

their tax rates. Table 1 reports the elasticities of each city's property tax base with respect to

18

changes in the city's property tax rate (EB,j, evaluated at the city's most recent year's tax base

and rate. The first two columns for each city in Table 1 provide estimates of the one-year,
impact elasticity of tax base with respect to changes in tax rates, measured as changes in the
market value of the city's tax base over the course of the fiscal year from a change in the city's
property tax rate announced before the beginning of the fiscal year. We also provide estimates

of a longer run tax base elasticity allowing for the effects of tax rate changes over the current

and three prior fiscal years.'9 These longer run elasticities are reported under each city's last
column in Table

1.

The one-year impact elasticity is most likely measuring a capitalization

effect of rate changes on the market values of existing land and structures.2° The longer run
elasticity includes this capitalization effect as well as any effects of rate changes on firm and
household investments over the four year period, an adjustment period consistent with other
estimates of firm and household investment behaviors; see Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger

19

We have also estimated our model in levels specified as a stock adjustment model.

Estimates of the underlying dynamic relationship between base and rates in the stock adjustment

specification are consistent with the dynamic relationships estimated here; that is, new
equilibrium values of tax base occur quickly, generally within four years. Results available upon
request.
20

There may be some adjustments in firm and housing capital within the city over the initial
fiscal year of the rate change. For example, as tax rates rise, firms may be able to relocate or
sell existing capital not "bolted" to the plant floor. As tax rates fall, firms and households can
undertake new investments in capital -- for example, expand the plant or add a family room.
One would expect the one year response of physical capital to rate changes to be larger for rate
reductions than for rate increases, given that it should be easier to expand firm and household
investment in place than to relocate plant and structures or to disinvest in housing; see Caballero,
Engel, and Haltiwanger (1995) and Sinai (1997). To test this hypothesis, the impact elasticities
were re-estimated allowing for asymmetric responses of the property base to rate increases and
decreases. In each city, the response to rate cuts was larger than the response to rate increases
(as expected), but the differences were statistically significant only for Philadelphia. Full
estimates are available upon request, but see footnote 21 below.
19

(1995) and Sinai (1997). The impact elasticities are estimated precisely (t statistics generally
3.00); the longer-nm elasticities are less well estimated and therefore should be interpreted with

care. With the exception of Houston, the estimated longer-run elasticities are larger in absolute
value than the estimated impact elasticities.
Both Houston and New York City show impact elasticities very close to, or possibly even

greater than, -1.0, the point at which the decline in tax base just offsets the added revenues from
the increase in tax rates. A balanced budget increase in the local property tax rate from current

levels will generate little or no additional net revenues for Houston or, barring large positive

effects on other bases (see Table 3), for New York City either. In contrast, Minneapolis and
Philadelphia with estimated impact elasticities for property taxation of - .3 and -.4 respectively

will be able to raise additional revenues from an increase in local property tax rates. These
initial revenue increases do not hold, however, as a rate increase erodes tax base over the next
three fiscal years. The longer run tax base elasticities for Minneapolis and Philadelphia are both
just over -.7, roughly twice as large as their impact elasticities and not statistically different from

-1.0.
Further, the significant negative impact elasticities, when interpreted in the light of the

structural model of Figure 1 imply that for the marginal property owners in our sample cities,
the property tax rate is too high. An increase in the city's property tax rate offset by a balanced

budget increase in public services may shift upward or downward the V0(•) =

V0 indifference

curve for residents and the rI() = 0 breakeven line for firms. If improved services fail to
compensate households and firms for the rate increase, then V0() and fl0() shift downward.

Rents paid for land and structures in place and thus their capitalized values fall. Under an

20

assumption that the estimated impact elasticities of base with respect to balanced budget changes

in tax rates reflect a change in the capitalized values of land and structures in place -- that is,
new investment or dis-investment in structures (h) and capital (k) take more than one fiscal year

to implement -- then the observed negative elasticities must mean the extra services provided do

not compensate either households or firms, or both, for the rate increase. The estimated impact
effects in fact allow us to compute the benefit shortfall. Houston, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia

property owners are estimated to receive about $.70 in additional benefits for each $1 in
additional property taxes paid, while New York City property owners are estimated to receive
only 5.02 in additional benefits for each $1 in new property taxes paid.2' In our sample cities,

21

From eq. (12) above, the estimated effects of a balanced budget increase in the local
property tax rate reflects a capitalization effect of the rate and service changes on market values
and any adjustments over the initial fiscal year by firms and households in their holdings of

physical capital (k) and structures (h). If firms and households do not change k and h the
estimated effect measures only the capitalization effect. This is most likely to be the case for
the estimated impact effects and, assuming disinvestment takes more than one year, is probably
best estimated by impact effects for rate increases only; see footnote 20. We use the estimates
of the impact effect of tax rate increases in our calculations below.
To estimate the additional benefit for each additional dollar of property taxes paid, note
that the market value of fixed structures and land will be the discounted present value of market
rents -- specified here as MV = RJr. Market rents in turn can be approximated by rents paid
for• the "private' attributes of the property (Ru) plus the value of the public services provided at
+ vG - T, where u is the
the location less the property taxes paid on the property: R =
willingness to pay for G. Finally, assuming a simple linear technology for services U = tT,
then R =
+ [t4 - 1]-T, and MV = (RIr) + ([v4 - lj•TIr). The expression [t4 - 1]
represents the net benefit of a dollar of property taxation. For a small property tax rate change

of Sr applied to the city's current tax base of MV0, AT = Ar 'MV0. Market values will
therefore change by AMV = ([u4' - l]Ir) - AT or by ([u$ - l]/r)Ar• MV0. Thus AMV/Ar =
([u4' - fir) MV0 and, finally, [vt - 1] = [AMY/MI 'r/MV0. Knowing MV0, r, and using
estimates of [AMV/Ar], we can compute [v+ - 1j and thus u4', the marginal benefit of an
additional dollar of property taxation. We assume r = 3.00 (r is measured as a percent in our
regressions), MV0 is set at the sample mean market value for each city, and [AMV/M} is set
equal to the estimated impact effect on the city tax base of rate increases only. The estimated
impact effect of a property tax rate on city property values (standard errors in parentheses) are:
Houston, -5041 (7431).; Minneapolis, -3286 (1932); New York City, - 9224 (3542); and
21

new property taxation must be being spent on public services in low demand by the marginal

property owner or on transfers to non-property owners (e.g., current and retired public
employees or low income residents)!2
Table 2 provides estimates of the effects of own tax rates on tax base for sales taxation
(New York City), gross receipts taxation (Philadelphia), income taxation of residents (New York

City), and wage taxation of residents and non-residents (Philadelphia). Increases in both the

sales (rà and gross receipts (ix) taxes act to reduce their respective tax bases, and the effects
are statistically significant (t 3.70). The estimated impact elasticities of base with respect to
own rates are about - .60 for New York and -.25 for Philadelphia. Inclusion of lag changes in

; and r were never statistically significant and their inclusion had no significant effect on the
estimated base elasticities. We conclude the full effect of a change in the gross receipts or the
sales tax rate will be felt during the first year of the rate change. The New York City sales tax

base fluctuates with swings in the national unemployment rate (e, = -.12) around a stable
level of real sales per resident (insignificant constant term). Changes in exogenous city aid (SZ)

Philadelphia, - 1627 (840). Upon substitution, we estimate vi' = .67 (s.e. = .48) for Houston,
= .67 (s.e. = .19) for Minneapolis, uP = .02 (s.e. = .38) for New York City, and ut =
.70 (s. e. = .15) for Philadelphia. Either u < 1 and avenge property owner values the services
received at less than $1, or i' c 1 and the full tax dollar is not allocated to valued services, or
both.
Vigdor (1998) obtains similar empirical results for his sample of Massachusetts suburban

communities and reaches a similar qualitative conclusion. Given his large cross-section of
communities Vigdor then tests for the likely sources of local rent-seeking. He concludes that
for his sample of largely suburban communities the most plausible explanation for the negative

effect of balanced budget rate increases is a fiscal redistribution from the avenge to lower
valued (median) property owners. For a sample of largely suburban communities, this seems a

reasonable result. In our sample of large cities, rent-seeking by public employee unions
(Gyourko and Tracy, 1989) or poverty households (Glaeser and Kahn, 1999) are likely to play
an important role too.

I4-

Table 2: Sales, Gross Receipts, and Tncoine Taxationt
Gtoss Receipts
Philadelphia

Sales
New York

AB
Constant

Ar,,; Ar,,,÷,,,

Aft,

Aft,

8015

25.94

53.19

(80.59)

(91+70)

(88.17)

----

—-

ABA132+9

-

(224.4)

lncozne/ Wage

New York

AB

ABx

472.2
(263.2)

338.5

387.9

(211.9)

(218.4)

--—

—

2,658.9

—2,433.5

ABw

(560.9)

.

Arw(—4);Arw±m(—1)

Ar,J-—2); Ar±,(—2)

——

(272.8)

-

—1,236.7
(289.3)

—19,477.1 —19,955.5k
(5,207.0)
(5,083.4)

—

--—

—228.4

——

---158.5

—144.7

(94.2)

ACRIME

ABw+r,i

AJJ+,,,

447.5

360.7

112.8

(231.1)

(218.4)

(70.30)

71.42
(69.46)

(74.56)

—2,602.6

—.198.3 .

—166.7

—402.0

(546.1)

(253,1)

(581.9)
—

1)034.6
(535.8)

---

—

---

—-

(95+7)

(.41)

49
(.44)

-—

is

—

—-

39

—

—

(215.6)

—

—293.1

—
—-

—286.8

(208.7)

—4.45

—1.98

(2.95)

-

—

(2.57)
----

-—-

230.6

(223.7)

—

—

—23.62

(221.6)

—

—251.5

—

—

—347.3

(232.0)

(222.7)

.14

.15

(1.02)

(1.01)

—7.64

—

—

—

——152.9

(58.21)

—
—

(62.96)

(.76)

.40
(.70)

—.32

—

.79

(1.99)

(6.98)

(7.58)

(291)

(302.8)

—

3,332.5
(4,942.4)

(230.1)

—14.09

66.46

(5,127.7)
3,796.5
(5,197.2)

141.8

(265.6)

AZ

AB÷211

—711.7

(275.3)

AUE

AD,,,

AD,,,

—
—1,137.4w

(251.7)

A-r,,(—2); Arx(—2)

Philadelphia

(567.1)

Ar,,; Aix
Ar,(—1);Arx(---1)

•

D.W.

2.18

2.14

1.91

1.88

1.50

1.84

- 2.71

2.63

2.84

1.21

1.35

1.36

A2

0.39

0.41

(1.40

0.30

0.48

0.54

0.46

0.46

0.53

0.01

0.18

0.23

ej,-

—.61k

,55#

..63*

—.25

—.25k

—.22

—.84k

77

—.05

—.06

(.07)

(.14)
.26

(.18)

(. 18)

—.72
(.31)

—.06

(.06)
—

(.07)

(.06)

(.13)

—

.41

k'(Ai-(—2))

(.12)

(.13)

—-

——

(.24)
.40

—

2.69k

Standard errors for each estimated codilicient are reported in parentheses. 111W. is the DurbiiiWatson test statistic for serial correlation. ft2 is the coefficient of determination corrected
br degrees of freedoti'. The elasticity of tax base with respect to tax rates (s,r) is based on the marginal effects of rates ott tax base, calculated for the most recent fiscal year's tax
base and tax rate for cacti city. b'(S-r(—2)) is the I" statistic testing the nell hypothesis that two lagged changes in rates jointly have ito iniluence on change in tax base.

4Coelhicicnt's t statistic 2.00. New York City's two lagged changes in rates are jointly signiheant at the .10 leveL

L

and the national rate of violent crimes (ACRIME) have no important effects on New York sales

tax base. Philadelphia's gross receipts tax base is also sensitive to swings in the national rate
of unemployment

= -.11); here the level of the base shows an upward annual trend

(constant term) avenging about 2.7% per annum (.027 = $472/$17,707). The Philadelphia
gross receipts tax base is affected by the upward trend in the national rate of violent crime; the
estimated elasticity

is -.46.

New York City's income tax base per resident is sensitive to changes in the city's income

tax rates; the estimated impact elasticity of base with respect to changes in the top marginal tax

rate is statistically significant and important: e = -.84. The longer-run elasticity is smaller
(- . 72) but not statistically different from the impact elasticity; IV estimates reported in Table

4 show an important effect for lagged rates, however. The city's income tax base has been
growing at an avenge annual real rate of 3.46% to 4.29% over our sample period (.0346 =
$360.6/$10,420

to .0429 =

$447.5/S 10,420 ). Recessionary

upward trend in the national rate of violent crime

periods (e =

-.18) and the

= - .40) have potentially important

negative effects on the city's income tax base.

In contrast to New York, Philadelphia's wage tax base per resident shows little overall

sensitivity to changes in the city's weighted average wage tax rate on residents and nonresidents. The estimated effect of changes in rate on base is small, = -.06, and statistically
insignificant. Nor has there been any significant growth over our sample period in the city's

real wage tax base per resident, again measured here by the magnitude and statistical
significance of the constant term. What does matter for Philadelphia's wage tax base are swings

= -.08). The small and insignificant base

in the national rate of unemployment (UE)

23

elasticity for the Philadelphia wage tax should not lead to the conclusion that wage tax is without

economic consequences. On the contrary, the small base elasticity is the result of two very
important but offsetting real-side economic effects. We find below (Table 5) that the city's wage

tax drives out jobs and residents in roughly the same proportions, leaving the wage tax base per
resident about constant. As an economic and residential center, however, the city is significantly

smaller.
Table 3 reports own and cross tax-rate impact (one fiscal year) elasticities for New York

City and Philadelphia, based upon a first difference specification including all local tax rates,

a constant term, SUE, and zSZ.

Only the tax rate elasticities are reported in Table 3.

Estimation is by Zellner's SUR procedure, equivalent to OLS in this case. Own impact
elasticities from these fully specified regressions are similar in magnitude and statistical
significance to those reported in Tables 1 and 2. The estimated cross-elasticities are generally
small, negative, and statistically insignificant. The one potentially important exception to this
pattern are the estimated positive (and almost statistically significant) effects of increases in New

York City's income tax rate and the Philadelphia's wage tax rate on each city's property tax
base. Figure I helps us understand why this might be so. Since residents bear the initial burden
of the resident income and wage tax and both residents and businesses benefit from the provision

of public goods, V0(.) is likely to shift downward while [L(-) rises. If, in Figure 1, V0() is
steeply sloped, then the upward shift in r10(.) can be sufficient to overcome the fall in V0() so

that the overall city rents (R*) and market values rise. V0(•) will be steeply sloped when city

residents strongly value other goods over living space, what we might expect for city

24

Table 3: Estimated Own and Cross Tax Rate Elasticities
New York

.

.

Ep

.04

i-,,

(.13)

r,

—.23

(.28)

r,,

B3

.25

(.13)

(.06)

.19"
(.07)
—.05

(.07)

Philadelphia
Bus

By,

B

2w+m

—.06

(.20)
—.29

(.46)

79*
(.20)
.17

7-y,

Tx

w+m

—.06

(.11)

(.13)

(.06)

.06

.39*

.01

(.05)

(.06)

(.03)

.38

.14

(.21)

(.25)

—.04

(.12)

tEstimated impact elasticities of each tax base to a corresponding rate change
(standard errors in parentheses) are reported for New York City (FY 1959 to FY
1997) and Philadelphia (FY 1970 to FY 1998). Each AR equation includes the
changes in all three tax rates as well as AUE and AZ as independent variables.
Elasticities are calculated for the most recent fiscal year's tax base and tax rate
for each city.

*Estimated elasticity's t statistic

2.00.

residents!3

C. Estimation: Robustness
Table 4 provides two checks of the robustness of our core results, first to the inclusion
of possibly important exogenous economic "shocks" which may affect both tax base and tax rates

and then, second, to the possible endogeneity of local tax rates. Failure to control for either

local economic shocks or for the endogeneity of local tax rates may bias our estimated

elasticities. Our analysis here uses iSB regressed against r, SUE, and zXZ as a core
specification, but then adds city specific "Shock" variables to control for possible omitted

variable bias. Appendix B provides the first-stage estimates of local tax rates for our IV
estimation; instruments include exogenous political and regulatory events likel' to influencelocal

tax rates but not local tax base, at least directly.24

For Houston, we measure local economic shocks by the change in a four-year moving

average of the annual refiners' real (1994) price per barrel of domestic crude oil (4FUEL),

reported in Table 4 as "Shocks". Increases in the four year price of crude oil increases

Haughwout and Inman (2000) explore this argument more completely and show formally
that for plausible paraineterizations of the city economy income tax rate increases can increase
city property values in equilibrium.
24

The formal model also specifies a roles for the costs of local public goods (c: measured
by changes in the national industrial producer price index), the interest rate faced by firms and
households (r: measured by the AAA corporate borrowing rate) and the non-resident wage (m:
measured by national avenge hourly earnings in non-agricultural industries). As additional
sensitivity tests, we did include zIc, iXr, and m in each of the core tax base equations of Tables
1 and 2. In most instances they had their expected signs in the .B equations (- for zIc for all
bases; - for zlr for the property base, ambiguous for sales and income; ambiguous for m in all

base equations), but the estimated effects were only significant for âc in the Philadelphia
property base equation (c = -.62) and zSm in the two income tax base equations (ewm = .95
for New York and Ew+mm = .80 for Philadelphia). Full results are available upon request.
25

Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis
1-Inuston

New York

Minneapolis

AB

z\B

Philadelphia

ABx

AB

AB5

Bw-1-m

Economic Shockst

z;,

—13,782.6
(5,6(13,8)

L1T,TX

--

(718.6)

-

(1544.0)

(540.0)
(279.2)

(5,399.4)

l78.9

2,635.1

L17w,L1w-1ni

(573.6)
"Shocks"

720.2*
(284.8)

(37)

1,5561k
(422.5)
(.00)

(.22)

—.62

(.74)
(.13)

.04
C19)

.85

(.54)
(.18)

(.12)

(.29)

(226.3)

7,45*
(2,32)
(.07)

(.21)

1.34
(4.74)

(11.20)

_.24*

—.05

(.07)

(.06)

—.72

IV Esiinates1'

L1r

—18,895.5

-

(7,4819)

&r5,Tx
Ar,i1r1.÷,,,

---

—1,626.5
(920.6)

—8,233.2

—-

—2,377.8
(1,006.2)

.

(2,125.6)

—

——

(285.2)
---

—

—2,615.4

-

.

(6,682.5)
—--

(628.5)

Ej),/E

—.70

(.50)

(.12) (.23)

(.18)

79*
(.13)

(.19)

(.31)

—223.4

(274.3)

—.3P/—.69
(.18) (.34)

—.07

(.08)

(.08)

Ec,,iioiiiic shocks ale nieasuretl by the annual change in the foor—year, iloving average price for domestic crude oil for lleuston (AFLJEI); the seven years of exogenous
state Ion' led econio,, Ic tccelopioent and sports si-au inni coiustroctiou , ii, , lowotowo Mi uiueapolis (1082 - 1088; S'I Al)! U NI } the aninual change iii the real value of the Dow
liii Les mu usiriiul avc'i-age for N ow York City ( DOW), and the auuiuural change iii the lea! level of national personal IiealLli care expenditures for Pluiladelphis (J I EA If!'!!)
A so reported for Minneapolis property taxation, New York City incoutue taxation, and Pluilarlelhuluia property taxation are the 'longer-run" tax base elasticities estuinated
with the inclusion if lagged Lax u ales sri'! these cities' ecouuouoic slLock variables. The longer—run elasticities are reported after the single period elasticity (standard errors
iii parentheses).
IV esti ii ales basel upon iu,struuuiueotal variables estiuustion of each city's tax rates; see Appendix B. The IV estimation equations include eadu city's econonnc shock:
M'lJEE (lloustoo), S'I'A l)IIJM (Minneapolis), M)OW (New York City), and llEAlJl'll (Philadelphia). Flue New York City and Pluiladelphia estimates also allow for
cross—eq nation, c,iri-elstiuiuu of error terous. Also reported for M iuouoapolis property taxation, New York City incOme taxation, and Pluihuuielphiia property taxation are the
"louigec—rnou" tax base elasticities estionated wiLl, the ir,closiou, of IV estimated lagged tax rates. 'flue longeu—rtni elasticities are reported after the single period elasticity
(staouhoil

errors iii l' o theses).

4Coellicieiut's I statistic

? 2(10. Standard errors for cad' estimated coetlicieuut

are reported in parentheses.

Houston's property base wth an estimated elasticity of base with respect to FUEL of .24 (s.e.

=

.09). With the inclusion of FUEL, the estimated elasticity of tax base with respect to tax

rate falls from -1.17 to -.92; compare Tables 1 and 4. To control for the potential endogeneity

of Houston's local property tax rate we re-estimated the core base equation using a predicted

value of local tax rates to estimate r; see Appendix B.

Our instrumental variables (1V)

estimate of eB, for the core specification including AFUEL is -1.27 (s.e. = .50); see Table 4.

Overall, our OLS and IV estimates of e are all near, or exceed, -1, suggesting Houston is at,
or over, the top of its property tax revenue hill.
For Minneapolis, we included as our measure of a local economic shock an indicator

variable (STADIUM) equal to 1 for the seven years of state funded downtown economic
development, including the construction of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome and the
Minneapolis Convention Center, 0 otherwise; see "Shocks" in Table 4. For each of those seven

years, the city's property tax base gained an avenge of $1556/resident for a total increase in
value of S 10,892/resident (= 7 x $1556). Interestingly, this estimated growth in property values

over this seven year period accounts for all the real growth in the city's tax base over our 24
year sample period; Minneapolis's property base would have been stagnant in real terms without

this state intervention. Including the indicator variable STADIUM has no significant effect on
the impact base-to-rate elasticity but it does reduce our estimate of the longer-run elasticity from

-.72 (Table 1) to -.50 (Table 4). The IV estimates for the Minneapolis property tax equation
(now including STADIUM) show some evidence of possible simultaneity bias as well; the impact

elasticity falls from -.37 (Table 4) to -.20 (Table 4). The longer-mn elasticity is not affected
by IV estimation.

26

For New York City, the annual change in the real (1994) value of the Dow-Jones
Industrial Avenge (DOW) was added to each of the core tax base equations to measure the
possible influence of the city's financial sector on tax base; see "Shockf in Table 4? SDOW
was marginally significant only in the city's income tax base equation (t = 1.57), where the

estimated elasticity of base with respect to the DOW is .18.

Adding ADOW to the base

equations had no important effects on our estimated tax base elasticities; compare Tables 1 and
2 to Table 4. What does make a difference to our estimates of the city's base-to-rate elasticitiSs
is allowing for the potential endogeneity of local tax rates. The IV estimates (including SDOW)

are reported in Table 4. With IV estimation, the property tax base elasticity falls from -.94
(OLS; Table 4) to -.70 (IV; Table 4), while the sales tax base elasticity rises from -.49 (OLS;
Table 4) to -.79 (IV; Table 4). The impact and longer-run income tax base elasticity estimates

are robust to IV estimation, -.84 (OLS; Table 4) vs. -.83 (IV; Table 4) and - .68 (OLS; Table

4) vs. - .63 (IV; Table 4), respectively.
For Philadelphia, whose current economy is closely tied to the national health care sector,

we included the annual change in real (1994) national health care expenditures (SHEALTH) as
a measure of a local economic shock. The variable is statistically significant in the property tax

base equation only; see "Shocks" in Table 4. The elasticity of the city's property base with
respect to changes in national health spending is .63 (s.e. = .22). There are no important effects

We also included an indicator variable in income tax base equation called FedReform
equal to 1 for the fiscal year after the passage of the 1986 Tax Reform Act. The 1986 federal
tax reforms broadened the federal tax base and potentially the New York City income tax base
as well. The estimated coefficient for FedReform was 822.4 (s.e. = 1612.9) implying an
increase in base of about 8 percent. The inclusion of FedReform had no important effects on
our estimates of e9 for income taxation.

27

of including &HEALTH on our estimates of Philadelphia's base-to-rate elasticities; compare

Tables 1 and 2 with Table 4. lv estimation (including £HEALTH) lowers the property tax
base elasticities both in the short run — from -.46 (OLS; Table 4) to -.31 (IV; Table 4) — and
the longer run -- from -.77 (OLS; Table 4) to -.69 (1V; Table 4), but the gross receipts tax base

elasticity rises from -.24 (OLS; Table 4) to -.39 (lv; Table 4). Wage tax base elasticity is
unaffected by IV estimation.
Two further sensitivity tests were performed. During our sample period both Connecticut

and New Jersey introduced personal income taxes for state residents, two 'policy shocks" with

possibly favorable effects on the tax bases for New York City and Philadelphia. We included

in each tax base equation an indicator variable equal to 1 for the year in which New Jersey
(1976) and (for New York City only) Connecticut (1991) introduced a personal income tax.
There were no significant effects of these out-of-state tax reforms on the income or sales tax
bases of either city. There were, however, statistically significant and economically important

effects on both cities' property tax bases, felt fully within the first year of the reform. The
reforms had no significant effects on the changes in the property tax base beyond the year of
their introductions, supporting an interpretation of these estimated effects as fiscal capitalization.

The introduction in New Jersey of a state income tax in 1976 raised New York City's property

values by $4989/resident in 1977 (s.e. = 1740), while the adoption by Connecticut of their
income tax in 1991 raised New York City property values in 1992 by $5347/resident (s.e. =
1796).

The estimated coefficients imply the capitalization of from 22 percent (Connecticut

reform) to 38 percent (New Jersey reform) of the state income tax differentials into City
property values. The effect of the New Jersey income tax on the Philadelphia property tax base

28

is also statistically significant, increasing average city values by $2330/resident (s.e. = 1014).
The implied rate of capitalization of state tax differences into Philadelphia property values is 17

percent. The different rates of capitalization can most likely be attributed to differences in the
demand for land by businesses in the two city economies.Th For neither city did the inclusion

26

The introduction of a new tax on households (without compensating services) by the city's

competitive political jurisdictions makes those jurisdictions less attractive. This raises V0 in

Figure 1. For a given II, schedule, R* therefore rises. Thus new taxes in neighboring
jurisdictions will be capitalized back into city values N R*Ir). For comparable upward shfits
in V0, the observed increases in R*/r allows us to identify the relative slope of the U schedule.
A city with a business sector for which land is relatively (un)important in production will have
a relatively (steep) flat fl schedule; see Haughwout and Inman (2000).
For New York City, the 1976 New Jersey income tax introduced a progressive tax on
resident income with rates ranging from 1.5 to 3 percent. An avenge 1976 family considering
living in New York or New Jersey had an annual income of approximately $40,000 per family
in 1994 dollars. This family's faced a new Jersey state income tax rate of approximately 3
percent. They will therefore pay an additional $1200/year in taxes; this provides an income
equivalent estimate of the maximal upward shift in V3. If the II schedule is very steep, R* will
rise roughly $ 1200/year as well. Capitalizing this maximal increase in R* at a real interest rate
of .03 per annum implies an maximal increase in the value of city land and structures of about
$40,000 ( = $12001.03) per "parcel" or about $13,333/resident (assuming three residents per
family). The estimated increase in value is $4989/resident following the introduction of the New
Jersey income tax. Actual capitalization is therefore 37 percent of maximal capitalization. In
Figure 1, the fl4 schedule for New York City must be "moderately" negatively sloped. A
similar calculation for the introduction of the Connecticut income tax gives a similar result. The
1991 Connecticut income tax rate was 1.5 percent but was understood to rise to 4 percent in
1992. For a New York City or Connecticut family with the avenge income of $55,000 (1994
dollars) we use the expected tax rate of 4 percent and an implied tax burden of $2200/year -again a rough estimate of the upward shift in V0. For a very steep [L0 schedule, the maximal
increase in R would therefore be $2200/year. Capitalized at .03 per annum implies an increase
in value of city land and structures of $73,333 or $24,444/resident (assuming three residents per
family). The estimated increase in value is $5347/resident following the introduction of the
Connecticut income tax. In 1991 for the Connecticut income tax increase, the actual
capitalization is estimated to be 22 percent of maximal capitalization. Again we conclude 11e is
moderately negatively sloped, and perhaps flatter (land becoming more important in business
production) than it was in 1976.
For Philadelphia, we also assume a typical family choosing between Philadelphia and
New Jersey in 1976 had an annual family income equal to $40,000 in 1994 dollars. New New
Jersey income taxes will again equal $1200 per year. Assume V3 rises by this amount. If H0 is
very steep, then maximal capitalization into rents (R*) will occur, and, as above, will equal
29

of these policy shocks have important effects of the estimated base-to--rate elasticities.

Our final sensitivity test adds to each tax base equation an indicator variable equal to 1

for the mayoral regimes of the nationally prominent mayors in our sample cities. Controlling

for the fiscal policies of the city and its core economic environment, does the national
prominence of a city's mayor enhance or hurt city tax bases? We tested this proposition
sequentially for Mayors Koch, Dinkins, and Giuliani of New York City and Mayors Rizzo and

Rendell of Philadelphia. For only one mayor was the mayoral indicator variable statistically
significant: Mayor Rizzo cost the Philadelphia wage tax base an avenge of -$282/resident per

year (s.e. = 122) over his eight years in office (about 2.1 percent of avenge city wages). With

this one exception, it has been the fiscal policies of the cities' mayors, not the mayor's
reputation, managerial style or personality, which has determined city tax bases.

D. Estimation: Taxes and City Jobs
As a further test of the underlying model and tax base specification, Table 5 provides

evidence of the effects of changes in city taxes, and associated public spending, on the one
dimension of the real economy we can measure with annual time series data: city jobs. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics' annual employment series are available by county. For New York
City (composed of five counties) and Philadelphia (a city-county) a time series of employment

corresponding to the city's political jurisdiction can be constructed. This is not possible for
Houston or Minneapolis. Results are presented for changes in each city's share of national total

$40,000 per parcel or $13,333/resident. For Philadelphia, the estimated increase in value is

$2330/resident following the introduction of the New Jersey income tax. Thus actual
capitalization is 17 percent of maximal capitalization. We conclude that the ll schedule in
Philadelphia in 1976 is negatively sloped, and flatter (land more important) than was the
corresponding 1976 II schedule in New York City.
30

Table 5: Taxation and Job Location4
New York City (1970-1997)

CoiistanL

Ar5; Ar5f10
Ar(—1); Ar5,.1.,J—1)

A Total
Job Skate

Job Share

A Mann
Job Share

(OLS)

(IV)

(IV)

—.00076

—.00077

A Total

OO023*

(.00(120)

(.00048)

(.00005)

(.00005)

(.0(1044)

— .00065*

.00070*

0(11)8(3*

— .004)60*

(.00022)

(.00024)

(.00028)

(.00029)

(.00021)

(.00024)

(.00028)

(.1)1)019)

(.00021)

(.00027)

JR)057*

—.00047

AlloW
AIIEALT1I

(.00029)
—.01)018

x 106

(.24 iu—) (.25 1o')

.26x 10_U
(.34 x i0—)

.26 x 10_U

.25 x 10

.31 x 10_U

(.21 x t0)

(.21 x 10_U)

-

(.25 x 10°)
—

—-

(OLS)
— M0027t

(.01)043)

x 10_U

A Total
Job Share

.00010

Ar(—2); Ar÷15j—2)

AZ

A Service

Job Share
(IV) —

Philadelphia (1971—1998)
A Mann
A Total
Job Share
Job Share
(IV)
(IV)

(.00025)
.lSx 10—6
(.30 < 10_6)
.28 x 10_U
(.25 x 10_U)

-

A Service
Job Share
(1V)

(.00006)

.00023*
(.00005)

— .00032*

.00032*
(.00010)

(.00009)

(.00011)

(.00015)
—.00036
(.00015)

—.00009
(.0(1007)

m00025*
(.00009)

(.00012)

(.00010)

—:22 x 10_U

—.26x 10—6

—.SOx 10—6

—.09x 10—6

(.00011)

(.00012)

.00031*

.00035*
(.00011)
—.00016

(.27 10_U) (.28 x 10) (.38 x 1o_6) (.31 x

.78 x 10_U

.55 x 10—6

(.49 x 10) (.44 x jo_6)

.37 x io_

.43 x 10

(.58 x 10_U)

(.47 x 10—6)

13W.

1.25

1,33

1.74

1.22

1.83

1.91

1.74

2.01

fl2

.75

.74

.60

.68

.54

.60

.58

.40

(.06)

(.11)

(.12)
4.65*

(.25)
2.47*

(.06)
45*
(.11)

EWM,r
(.1)2)

(.03)

(.05)
4Q*

WfA:T
,

F(A'r(—2))

(.115)

(.1)7)

4.18*

4.18*

(.10)
4.11*

(.03)

_.12*
(.06)

—.14
(.07)
1.50

(.12)
4,fi5*

5.76

Stsiiilai-d eriota lii cciii eslittialed coefficient sic repoiI.ed in parentheses. D.W. is the i)urhin—Watson test statistic for setial coi'teiatioii. Whim approj)riitLC, estimation
corrected mi a first--order autoregressive noess 2 is the coeflicicut of tleteriiiiiiatuoii corrected for degrees of Ircedoin. 'L'iie elasticity of city jobs with respect to
cilaiLgea iii the tIi iiiCLiLtiO or wage lax isle ci calculated for the lust year of thic flew tax rate as the "impact" elasticity (rN÷Ai,r ) and as the "bug—nut" elasticity
alter tliiee Iisi:aI years iii the new tax rate (a ( AIr)• All elasticities are calculated at saLiLJule meals. 1"(ST(2)) is the I" statistic testing the null hypothesis that two
laggeil clL.LLL;L:a ill tOe have liii LolluitIlec 41 cliaiigtt iii job share; the teat was ciuiiiiuttsl ioi- liii) cirigitial OhS speeilicatiiiui.
*CiahliciilLLIa I -statistic -"'2.1)0. New York City's two lagged cilauLgea ii rates are jointly significant at .116 in the 'l'otal tool Manufacturing eqt1atiolls. I'1nladelphuias two
I agget I clot uiges iii r; tea a ic j uitit ly sig ii bean t at .05 ('l'o tab and Se rv ice) anti .1 0 (Maii u facto ii I ig)

employment, of national "manufacturing" employment (= manufacturing + construction +

communications + public utility + transportation employment), and of national "service"
employment (= FIRE

÷

retail + wholesale + services + federal and state government

employment). The constant term from each equation provides an estimate of the secular trend

in the each city's shaze of national jobs, holding fiscal policy constant. Changes in r and Z
measure the effects on jobs of tax and aid financed changes in public spending, respectively.
For each city, we estimated the effects of changes in each of the three local tax rates —property,

sales (New York) or gross receipts (Philadelphia), and income (New York) or wage
(Philadelphia) — on changes in city employment shares. Only changes in New York City's

income tax rate (measured as the top marginal rate) and Philadelphia's wage tax rate (measured

as the weighted average of resident and non-resident rates) showed statistically significant and

quantitatively important impacts on• city shares of national jobs7 These are the results
reported in Table 5, where we highlight the IV estimates. (See Appendix B for instruments.)
Income and wage tax rate changes longer than three fiscal years ago (current plus two lags) were

never statistically significant; F test statistics for the significance of two lagged rates based upon
the OLS estimates are reported for each specification in Table 5. Specifying city jobs as a share

of national jobs proved an adequate control for swings in the national economy; AIJE had no
important added effect on city job shares. ADOW and HEALTH are also included to measure

27

We tested for the effects of changes in each tax rate alone and jointly with changes in the

income or wage tax rates. While the effect of rate changes were generally negative on job
shares, only for the Philadelphia property tax rate in the, total employment and manufacturing
employment equations did the effect reach even marginal statistical significance (t = 1.4). The
implied long-run elasticities of Philadelphia jobs with respect to changes in Philadelphia property
tax rates were -.20 for total jobs and -. 15 for manufacturing jobs. Results available upon
request.
31

the effects on city job shares of. national shocks with possibly important local effects. Table 5
reports the implied impact (eN+Mj and longer-run (PN+M,) elasticities of jobs to current period

and to lagged changes in the city tax rates. For both New York City and Philadelphia local
taxes matte; for city jobs, particularly so for what we have classified as manufacturing jobs.

Our estimated elasticities for New York City and Philadelphia are consistent with results
obtained in other studies of the effects of taxes on jobs; see Bartik (1991; Appendik 2.2) for a
survey.

In 1970 New York City had 5.28 percent of the nation's jobs; today (1997) the city's
share is 2.81 percent. As demonstrated by the negative constant terms in each of New York
City's employment share equations there has been a steady secular trend away from city jobs,

with a greater rate of decline in the city's share of the national manufacturing as opposed to
service sector jobs. Compounding the secular loss in jobs share have been increases in the city's

income tax rates over the past thirty years, rising from a top marginal rate of 2.00 percent to

today's 4.46 percent. The OLS estimates in Table 5 show a statistically significant negative
effect of these rate increases on job share; the IV estimates are less precise but of comparable
magnitude. For New York City, the adverse effect of rising rates on city jobs is almost entirely

due to the negative impact of city taxes on the manufacturing sector; see Table 5. In contrast,

there appears to have been only a small adverse effect of city taxes on the city's share of
national service sector jobs; again, see Table 5. Of the total decline in New York City's share

of national jobs over the past three decades, approximately 16 percent of the decline can be
attributed to the rise in the city's income tax rates. This implies a loss of 492,000 city jobs from

32

1970 to 1997 because of increases in the city's income tax?

Philadelphia's share of national jobs has declined from 1.24 percent in 1971 to .54
percent by 1998. As in New York City, the negalive constant term in the share equations shows

a secular trend away from the Philadelphia economy, a trend affecting the manufacturing and
service sectors about equally. But also as in New York City, the rise in the city's labor tax rate,

here the weighted avenge wage tax rate, from 3.00 percent in 1971 to a peak of 4.765 percent
in 1995 has been a major contributor to the fall in city jobs. Since 1996, the wage tax rate has

been reduced to its current (1998) avenge rate of 4.6025 percent. The OLS and IV estimates
of Table 5 both show statistically significant negative job effects of rising city wage tax rates;

the effects are felt in both the manufacturing and service sectors. Again, we can use the
estimates in Table 5 to allocate responsibility for the loss in city jobs. Of the total decline in
Philadelphia's share of national jobs over the sample period, approximately 21 percent of the
decline can be attributed to the secular rise in the city's wage tax rates. The estimated number
of city jobs lost because of tax rate increases over this period is 206,500. Mayor Rendell's tax
cuts begun in FY 1996 had restored approximately 11,800 jobs by the end of FY 1998.29

28

To calculate the contribution of New York City tax increases to the decline in the city's

share of national jobs we first estimated the difference in the city's predicted job share with

actual tax rate changes and the city's predicted job share with no tax nte changes. This
difference in job shares equals .40 percent, or about 16 percent of the actual decline in shares
(= .401(5.28 - 2.81)). The total number of jobs lost over this period because of rising taxes is
estimated as the change in job share due to tax increases times national jobs in 1997: 491,661
= .004.122.915 million jobs.
29

To calculate the contribution of Philadelphia tax increases to the decline in the city's

share of national jobs we first estimated the difference in the city's predicted job share with
actual tax rate changes and the city's predicted job with no tax rate changes. For Philadelphia,
this difference equals .15 percent, or about 21 percent of the actual decline in shares (=
.15/(1.24 - .54)). The total number of jobs lost over this period because of the secular rise in
33

For both New York City and Philadelphia, Table 5 shows it has been the secular trend
against each city's economy coupled with rising city income or wage tax rates which explain a

significant fraction of the exodus of jobs from the city. There is nothing these two cities can

do about the secular trend, but balanced budget reductions in the city's tax rates can slow
decline, as has happened recently in Philadelphia. Of course, these rate reductions will cost city
tax revenues and, without efficiency gains, city services. The analysis here can provide estimates

of the revenue costs of each new job gained from cutting tax rates. Using 1997

values for

income tax revenues and total city jobs we estimate that for New York City the annual revenue

loss per new city job to be $2405/job per year or, since rate reductions must be permanent to

be credible, a present value cost $80, 167/job assuming a real discount rate of .03. Similar
estimates for permanent reductions in the Philadelphia's wage tax rate, evaluated at 1998 wage

tax revenues and rates imply anannual revenue cost per new city job of $2707/job per year or,

for a permanent tax cut, a present value cost of $90,229/job)° Tax cuts, while not sufficient

wage taxes is estimated as the estimated change in job share due to tax increases times national
jobs in 1998: 194,719 = .0015. 129.813 million jobs. The Rendell tax cut is estimated to have
restored .009 percent to the Philadelphia job share or 11,775 jobs (= .009- 129.813 million
jobs) by 1998.
30

The marginal revenue costs of a new job can be estimated as .Revenue/aJobs, where
SRevenue = Revenues (1 + &8j . (M/'r) and where &Jobs = Jobs• N+M,r (r/r). Since
we use the base-adjusted long-mn elasticities to estimate the effects of rate reductions on
revenues, the estimates of revenue costs will be net of the additional revenues made available

by the new jobs. Using New York City's 1997 values for income tax revenues (= $672/resident)
and city jobs (= .47 jobs/resident), and the IV estimates for E1flT (= -.63; Table 4) and 'N+M,r
- .22; Table 5), we estimate the annual revenue loss per new City job to be - $2405/job.

The present value of these annual revenue costs will be equal to $80,167/job (= $2405/.03)
assuming a 3 percent real rate of interest. Using Philadelphia's 1998 values for wage tax
revenues (= $723/resident) and city jobs (.46 jobs/resident) and the IV estimates for &Rs,r (= .07; Table 4) and EN+M, (= -.54; Table 5), we estimate the annual revenue loss per new City
job to be -$2707/job. For Philadelphia, the present value of these annual costs will be equal to

34

by themselves to reverse the long-run secular trends against the New York and Philadelphia
economies — rates can only fall so far — will at leastslow the city's relative rate of economic

decline and provide increased employment opportunities for city residents.

As a 'jobs

program" for inner city residents, however, the tax cut strategy appears more costly than
pwgrams which train and place residents directly in city or suburban jobs; see Heckman (1999).

Elected city officials must decide whether the private benefits of new city jobs are worth these
public costs of lower taxes and any resulting decline in city services.

IV. Revenue HIUs

Figure 2 presents estimates of each city's longer-run revenue hills for increases in city

tax rates from the city's current (last year of our sample) tax rate and revenue location. Each

city's revenue hills were simulated based upon the IV estimates including economic shocks
reported in Table 4•31 Four general conclusions emerge from the analysis in Figure 2.

$90,229/job (= $2707/.03).
Each revenue hill is estimated by the relationship Revenue = o B0 + Sr B0 + r0 SB
+ SriSB, where To and B. are the actual tax rates and tax base for the last year of our sample,
r is the change in tax rate from o to each new tax rate along the horizontal axis and SB is the
predicted equilibrium change in base for each Sr using the IV estimates reported in Table 4.
For Minneapolis and Philadelphia property taxation and for New York City income taxation the
lagged effects of changes in rate on base are included when estimating SB. (These IV point
estimates are not given in Table 4 but are available upon request.) Finally, to estimate New
31

York City's income tax revenue hill, r0 and r are the tax rates for the avenge income
household; however, SB is estimated from changes in the top marginal rate. We assume the
avenge rate is linked to the top marginal rate through a simple proportional relationship,

estimated from the thta in our sample. Consistent with our model specification, the top
marginal rates are reported on the horizontal axis of Figure 2, New York City, Income Tax.
35

Figure 2: City Revenue HiIIs*
Houston

Minneapolis

Property Tax

Revenues

Property Tax

Revenues

1600 -

917
905

1400 —

800

1234

.4.

200

.4

800 —

/
I

400

N

1163
1000

/
/

600

600

—

400 —
200

0

2.20

H

0

2.0 '2.46 3.0

1.0

5.03 6.0

3.82

2.0

Tax Rate

Tax Rate

New York
Revenues

Revenues

972.

500

94

800

600-

I

//

400- /

I

N'
'

H

l__

H'

I

400

/

2OO

H

1.0

392r

37

300-

I

5.0 6.0

2.0 2.83 3.44
Tax Rate

500
469

.

1

200_/
0

Income Tax

Sales Tax

Property Tax
Revenues

ioo-/
0

/u1
/H

/

/1.

300

H
I

100 -

/

/

(

I

I

0—

6.0 TO 8.0

1 .0 2.0 3.0 4.0
Tax

/

200 -

1.0 2.0 3.0

4.46 5.79 7.0

Rate

Tax Rate

Philadelphia
Property Tax

Gross ReceEpts Tax

Revenues

Wage Tax
Revenues

Revenues

600 -

1200 r
.4-

489

/
/

300200

1,

I
/

I

l

3.06

2.49

600

4.0
Tax Rate

0

400

I

200

1

I

I

2.0

,

20- /
10-/

1.0

600
723

30-/

I

—

6040-

'

100 I
01'

N

1000

,

65

.1

1

I

.229 .4

I

.52.5

.7

Tax Rate

0

-/
/1

/

//

1.0 2.0 3.0 4.05.0 6.0 7.0 8.0
4.60

Tax Rate

Revenue hills are based on estimated IV tax base elasticities as reported in Table 4. The solid lines between dots represent the portion of the bill which
spans the samole range for cay tax rates; the long dashed portions of each hiil are proectons beyond the samples range.

First, with the exception of the Philadelphia wage and gross receipts tax, our sample
cities are very neas, or in the case of Houston's property tax over, the top of their local revenue

hills. The current (1997) Houston property tax rate is 2.46% and current revenues are
$905/resident; the revenue-maximizing rate, however, is 2.20% and maximal (1997) revenues

are $917/resident. Minneapolis is on the rising portion of its longer-run property tax revenue
hill, but the "summit" is fiat and available additional revenues are modest. Minneapolis' current
(1997) rate of 3.82% raises $.1 163/resident while going to the maximal rate of 5.03% adds only

an additional $71/resident to $1234/resident. All three of New York City's taxes are now near

their maximal revenue potentials as well. The property tax can generate an additional
$3 1/resident (= $972/resident - $941/resident) by increasing the rate from its current (1997)
2.83% to 3.44%; the sales tax an additional $13/resident (= $392/resident - $379/resident) by

increasing its rate from 4.00% to 4.88%; and the income tax an additional $25/resident
($469/resident - $445/resident) by increasing its top bracket rate (and all other rates
proportionally) from 4.46% to 5.79%.
Philadelphia is the only city in our sample with an ability to raise significant additional

revenues per resident from local taxes, in this case from the local wage tax. Like our other
cities Philadelphia's property tax shows little new revenue potential; increasing its rate from the

current (1998) 2.49% to a maximal longer-mn rate of 3.06% will yield only $17/resident (
$489/resident - $472/resident) in new monies. The city's gross receipts tax is a small revenue

source generally and can raise only an additional $16/resident ($81/resident - $65/resident) from

increasing its rate from the current (1998) .29% to the maximal rate of .52%. As Figure 2
shows, however, the city's wage tax can generate significant new revenues per capita. But any

36

mayor adopting this strategy wins a Pyrrhic victory; raising the city's wage tax rate leads to

significantly fewer jobs (raffle 5) and most likely fewer residents as well. Both candidates
in the recent mayoral race in Philadelphia understood this point. An increase in the Philadelphia

wage tax rate now appears off limits politically because of its strong adverse effects on the size

of city's real economy.
Second, in both Minneapolis and Philadelphia we observe statistically significant and

quantitatively important differences between the one-year (impact) response and the longer-run

(equilibrium) response of the city's property tax bases to rate changes; the longer-run negative

response is larger. The peaks of the short-run property tax revenue hills (not shown in Figure

2) occur well beyond the peaks of Figure 2's longer-mn hills. The peak of the Minneapolis
short-run revenue hill occurs at a tax rate of 11.27% and maximal revenues are $2064/resident.

The peak of the Philadelphia short-run property tax revenue hill occurs at a rate 5.22% and

maximal revenues are $649/resident. For a mayor to aggressively pursue these short-run

32

A direct estimate of the effects of city taxes on city population is not possible since all
annual population series available are unlikely to measure population variations with much
accuracy. Still, simple arc elasticities between census years can be calculated to provide an
order of magnitude estimate for the effects of tax rates on population. Given the central
importance of the wage tax to city jobs, we assume the wage tax is the most important tax
driving residents from Philadelphia. The simple arc elasticity of population with respect to the
avenge wage tax rate is - .37 for the decade 1970 to 1980 and -.63 for the decade 1980 to 1990.
A trend controlled estimate of the elasticity of city population with respect to wage tax rates can

be computed from the identity for the wage tax base (B
+ €N+Mr corresponding identity among elasticities: 8B.

w (N+M)/POP) and the

Our work provides trend
controlled estimates of e (-.07; Table 4), Cwr (-.20; an IV estimate of the effect of rates on the
avenge wage; available upon request), and tN+M. ( -.54; Table 5). These estimates imply
8POPr = -.67. Both the simple arc elasticity estimates and the trend-controlled elasticity imply
a strong negative effect of wage taxes on city population for Philadelphia. This makes sense
given that the only way to fully escape both the resident and non-resident portions of the tax is
to move your job and your residence outside the city.
37

revenues may lead his city into the unproductive range of the longer-mn revenue hill, however;
see Inman (1989). It appears the current Minneapolis and Philadelphia mayors have avoided this

temptation, at least for now, keeping their cities on the rising portion of their property tax
revenue hills.

Third, while our cities are near the tops of their revenue hills,jumps in tax base will shift
the hills upward and provide additional revenues at stable rates. There are two possible sources

for base increases: annual tax base growth andfavorable economic shocks (FUEL, STADIUM,

SDOW, and AHEALTH > 0). The annual growth in city tax bases is estimated by the constant
terms in each ABASE equation; multiplying the growth in base by the revenue maximizing tax
rate provides an estimate of the maximal potential growth in annual revenues. For Houston the

(IV) estimated maximal growth in revenues is $8.95/resident per year (s.c. = 15.75); for
Minneapolis maximal revenue growth is $6.71/resident per year (s.e. = 14.80); for New York

City maximal aggregate revenue growth is $23.56/resident per year (s.e. = 12.10); and for
Philadelphia maximal revenue growth is -$3.52/resident per year (s.e. = 11.71), falling because

of the estimated annual decline in the city's property tax base.33 Annual growth in tax bases
is estimated to add at most 1.5% (for New York City) to aggregate city revenues.

If our sample cities are

receive any revenue relief, it will have to come from

favorable, and generally large, shocks to each city's key economic sector.M For example, a

Calculations based on the estimated constant term for the IV estimates reported in Table
4. Estimates and calculations available upon request.
All calculations here are based upon the IV estimates of each tax base equation, with each

city's economic shock variable included. For Houston the estimated coefficient for 1FUEL
equals 732.0 (s.c. = 283.3) in the property base equation. For Minneapolis, the estimated
coefficient for STADIUM equals 869.7 (s.c. = 566.6) in the property base equation. For New
38

one standard deviation increase in crude oil prices from the mean of $15.20/barrel to
$23.07/barrel (aFUEL = $7.87/baste!) adds $5760/resident to Houston's property tax base (=
SFUEL• ÔBASE/3FUEL = $7. 87•732 (1V estimates)) and $127/resident to Houston revenues

using the city's revenue-maximizing tax rate (=

.022 45760).

For Houston, favorable oil

shocks are an important source of new city monies, here providing the city with an additional

14% in property tax revenues (= $127/$917). Of course, a one standard deviation decline in
oil prices will have an equally large but negative impact on Houston revenues. As noted earlier

Minneapolis's tax base benefited significantly from the seven years of state-funded downtown
construction (STADIUM), adding $10, 892/resident to the city's property tax base and potentially

$547/resident to city revenues evaluated at the maximal rate of .0503. Another construction

boom of this magnitude seems unlikely, however. The recent runup in the DOW has helped

New York City revenues, particularly income tax revenues. Our estimates suggest a one
standard deviation increase in the DOW of 1142 points will translate into an increase in New
York City's income tax base of $845/resident (

SDOW• olncomeBASE/aDOW = 1142 .74

(IV estimates)) for an annual 10 percent increase in city income tax revenues of $49/resident per

year when evaluated at the city's income tax revenue-maximizing rate (= .0579 4845).
Finally, Philadelphia revenues benefit from increases in national health care expenditures. A

one standard deviation increase in national health spending of $750/person is estimated to
increase Philadelphia's property tax base (the only significant effect) by $4470/resident (=

York City, the estimated coefficient for àDOW equals -.23 (s.e. = 1.04) in the property base
equation, -.05 (s.e. = .16) in the sales base equation, and .74 (s.e. = .56) in the income base
equation. For Philadelphia, the estimated coefficient for SHEALTH equals 5.96 (s.e. = 3.76)
in the property base equation, -.14 (s.e. = 4.20) in the gross receipts base equation, and -.76
(s.e. = 1.20) in the wage base equation.
39

AHEALTH 3PropertyBASEJÔHEALTH = $750 5.96 (IV estimates)) and the city's property
tax revenues by $137/resident evaluated at the estimated maximal rate (= .0306•4470), a 28%

jump in property tax revenues.

Fourth, no city should be at the top of its longer-nm revenue hill where the marginal
revenue from a small rate increase, and thus marginal public service benefits, are zero. Yet all

four of our cities are at, near, or even over the top, of their respective revenue hills.
Philadelphia wage taxation is the only exception. Why? Two answers suggest themselves.
First, when the dynamic structure of the local economy leads to a divergence of the short-run
and longer-run revenue hills, politicians seeking re-election in the short-run may not be able to

credibly promise to hold rates at a preferred longer-mn allocation; see Jnman (1989). In our

sample, however, the impact and longer-mn revenue hills diverge only for Minneapolis
(property) and Philadelphia (property), and even in these cities the longer-run effects are fully

felt within three to four years. Current voters are likely to bear, and therefore unlikely to
ignore, the negative effects on home values of short-term property tax rate increases. A second
explanation seems more promising — it may be simply that our cities' decisive voters want high

tax rates and a lot of public services. If so, evidence from our property tax base equations
(Table 1) suggest this decisive voter is not a value-maximizing homeowner. In our cities,

purchasers of city property place a negative net benefit on each marginal dollar of public
spending paid for through a dollar increase in property taxation; see Section IIll.B above. If
homeowners are not the decisive voters, who are? At least in Philadelphia, public employee
unions and residents of lower income neighborhoods are two likely candidates (Inrnan, 1995).

These two groups proved decisive in the recent mayoral victory of Democrat John Street, the

40

previous president of City Council who ran on a neighborhood spending platform. His
opponent, Republican Sam Katz made as his central campaign promises the expanded
contracting-oui of government services and the reduction in the city's wage tax rate from 4.6
to 4.0 percent. Street defeated Katz 51 %-49% largely because of the strong voter turnout and

support from the city's unions and lower-income neighborhoods.35

While local economics

determines a city's revenue hill, local politics determines where on that hill the city resides.

V. Conclusions
Understanding the equilibrium effects of local taxation on the local private economy is

important for elected city leaders, urban policy-makers, and academic economists alike. Our
analysis provides some important lessons for each group.

First, the mayors of each of our sanple cities are revenue constrained. Current tax rates
in Houston, Minneapolis, New York, and Philadelphia place each city very near the top of each
of its longer-run revenue hill(s). The Philadelphia wage tax is the one exception, but raising city

wage tax rates will cost the city jobs and residents. There is no obvious relief in sight. None
of our cities' tax bases show significant long-run growth. Favorable economic shocks have been

identified for each of our cities -- oil prices for Houston, downtown construction for

For a summary of the election see, the Philadelphia Inquirer, November 3, 1999. Mayor

Street is now in office, and union contracts come due this summer. A recent article in the
Philadelphia Inquirer on the coming labor negotiations quotes the Mayor's inaugural address as
saying: "We're going to work together. We're going to try to be fair in our relationships with
the unions and the great workforce of the city, and give them a quality of benefits that they are
entitled and that we can afford." In addition, the Mayor's address promises $250 million for
clean-up and physical improvements for the city's poorer neighbhorhoods. See the Philadelphia
Inquirer, January 25, 2000, p. R-1.
41

Minneapolis, a rising Dow for New York, and expanding health care spending for Philadelphia - but large upswings are needed for there to be any important revenue relief. Controlling local

expenditures seems essential for avoiding future fiscal crises.
Second, for New York City and Philadelphia, the two cities for which annual

employment data are available, we find city income and wage tax rates have important effects

on the location of jobs within the city. In New York City, a 10 percent increase in the city's
resident income tax leads to a 2.2 percent loss in total jobs and a 4.0 percent loss in

manufacturing jobs. In Philadelphia, the city's resident and non-resident wage tax has even

stronger negative effects. Here a 10 percent increase in the weighted avenge wage tax rate

leads to a 5.4 percent decline in total jobs and an 7.8 percent loss in manufacturing jobs.
Reducing these taxes will restore job opportunities to immobile, most likely poor, city residents

but at a likely cost of fewer city services. The estimated present value costs in lost revenues of

each city job created by a tax cut are $80,167/job in New York City and $90,229/job in
Philadelphia.

Third, when statistically significant, our longer-mn elasticities of base with respect to

rates, - .39

&L - 1.27,

generally exceed in absolute value the current estimates of the

elasticity of the U.S. federaj personal income tax base with respect to rates (= -.43, Gruber and
Saez, 1999) but are strikingly close to the elasticities obtained by Hines and Rice (1994) of -1.0

for small countries operating as international tax havens. Further, our estimated impact and
longer-run elasticities provide useful benchmarks for specifying Rosen-Roback style structural
models of fiscal policy in small open economies. The estimated impact effects on city property

values of changes in wage and income tax rates in New York and Philadelphia and in

42

neighboring Connecticut. and New Jersey are best understood using Figure 1 and a V0()
schedule which is rises steeply and a IT(•) schedule which falls modestly. V0(•) will be steep
when city households strongly value other goods more than living space, while fl(•) will be
weakly downward sloping when space, including vertical space, plays a relatively important role

in firm production.

Fourth, estimates of the city revenue hills provide the fiscal constraint necessary to
econometrically identify preferences of elected city officials. Our cities have all chosen to push

revenues to the top of their respective revenue hills. Why? The most likely explanation is a
political economy model which assigns a decisive role to voters with very high demands for
public dollars. The fact that property values fall as property rates increase suggest that in our
cities at least, these decisive voters are not value-maximizing homeowners.

43

-

REFERENCES

Amott, R. and J. MacKinnon (19Th, "The Effects of the Property Tax: A Genezal Equilibrium
Simulation," Journal of Urban Economics, 4, pp. 389-407.

Auerbach, A. (1995), "Tax Projections and the Budget: Lessons from the 1980's," American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 85, pp. 165-169.
Bartik, T. (1991), Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?, Upjohn
Institute, Kalamazoo, MI.

Bound, I., D. A. Jaeger, and R. M. Baker (1995), "Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation When the Correlatioin Between Instruments and the Endogenous Explantory
Variable is Weak," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, pp. 443-450.

Brueckner, J. (1981), "Labor Mobility and the Incidence of the Residential Property Tax,"
Journal of Urban Economics, 10, pp. 173-182.
Brueckner, J. (1982), "A Test for Allocative Efficiency in the Local Public Sector," Journal of
Public Economics, 19, pp. 311-31.

Caballero, R., E. Engel, and 3. Haltiwanger (1995), "Plant-Level Adjustment and Aggregate
Investment Dynamics," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 2, pp. 1-39.
Cullen, J. and S. Levitt (1996), "Crime, Urban Flight, and Consequences for Cities," NBER
W.P. No. 5737, Cambridge, MA: pp. 1-28.

Glaeser, E., H. Kallal, J. Scheinkman, A. Shleifer (1992), "Growth in Cities," Journal of
Political Economy, 100, pp. 1126-1152.

Glaeser, E. and M. Kahn (1999), "From John Lindsay to Rudy Giuliani: The Decline of the
Local Safety Net?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York: Economic Policy Review, 5, No.

3, pp. 117-132.

Goolsbee, A. (1999), "In a World Without Borders: The Impact of Taxes on Internet
Commerce," NBER WP. No. 6863, Cambridge, MA: pp. 1-29.

Grieson, R (1980), "Theoretical Analysis and Empirical Measurements of the Effects of the
Philadelphia Income Tax," Journal of Urban Economics, 8, pp. 123-138.
Grieson, R., W. Hamovitch, A. Levenson, and R. Morgenstern (1977), "The Effect of Business
Taxation on the Location of Industry," Journal of Urban Economics, 4, pp. 170-185.

1

Gruber, I. and E. Saez (1999), "The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and Implications,"
NBER Working Paper, pp. 1-32.

Gruenstein, 1. (1980), "Jobs in the City: Can Philazlelphia Afford to Raise Taxes," Business
Review: Federal Reserve Bank of Philo4elphia, May/June, pp. 3-11.
Gyourko, J. and I. Tracy (1989),"Local Public Sector Rent-Seeking and Its Impact on Local
Land Values," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 19, pp. 493-516.
Haughwout, A. (1998), "Aggregate Production Functions, Interregional Equilibrium, and the
Measurement of Infrastructure Productivity," Journal of Urban Economics, 44, pp. 216227.
Haughwout, A. and R. P. Inrnan (2000), "Fiscal Policy in an Open City Economy," Working
Paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Heckman, J. (1999), "Policies to Foster Human Capital," NBER W.P. No. 7288.

Bellman, D. and I. Naroff (1979), "The Impact of Crime on Urban Residential Property
Values," Urban Studies, 16, pp. 105-112.
Hines, I. and E. Rice (1994), "Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havesn and American Business,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, pp. 149-182.
Hines, J, (1999), "Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International Taxation," National Tax
Journal, 52, pp. 305-322.

Inman. R. (1979), "Dissecting the Urban Fiscal Crisis: Facts and Counterfacts," National Tax
Journal, 32, 127-141.

Inman, R. (1989), "The Local Decision to Tax: Evidence from Large U.S. Cities," Regional
Science and Urban Economics, 19, pp. 455-491.

Inman, R. (1995), "How to Have a Fiscal Crisis: Lessons from Philadelphia," American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 85, pp. 378-383.

Inman, R. and D. Rubinfeld (1997), "Rethinking Federalism," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 11, pp. 43-64.

Mark, S., T. McGuire, and L. Papke (1998), "The Influence of Taxes on Employment and
Population Growth: Evidence from the Washington D.C. Metropolitan Area," Working
Paper.

2

MacKinnon, J. (1991), "Critical Values for Co-Integration Tests," in R. Engle and C. W. J.
Gran get, Long-Run Economic Relationships: Readings in Co-Integration, Oxford
University Press, New York, pp. 267-276.
Polinsky, M. and D. Rubinfeld (1978), "The Long-run Effects of a Residential Property Tax and
Local Public Services," Journal of Urban Economics, 5, pp. 24 1-262.

Poterba, 1. (1996), "Retail Price Reactions to changes in State and Local Sales Taxes," National
Tax Journal, 49, pp. 165-176.

Roback, 1. (1982), "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life," Journal of Political Economy, 90,
pp. 1257-1278.

Rosen, 5. (1979), "Wage-based Indexes and the Quality of Life," in P. Mieszkowski and M.
Straszheim (eds.), Current issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, pp. 74-104.

Sinai, T. (1997), "Taxation, Mobility, and the Demand for Owner-Occupied Housing,"
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT.
Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997)., "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,"
Econometrica, 65, pp. 557-585.

Sullivan, A. (1985), "The General Equilibrium Effects of the Residential Property Tax:
Incidence and Excess Burden," Journal of Urban Economics, 18, pp. 235-250.

Thaler, R. (1978), "A Note on the Value of Crime Control: Evidence from the Property
Market," Journal of Urban Economics, 5, 137-145.

Vigdor, J. (1998), "Was Tiebout Wrong? Local Taxes and the Growth of Cities," Working
Paper, Harvard University.
Walsh, M. and J. Jones (1988), "More Evidence on the "Border Tax" Effect: The Case of West
Virginia, 1979-1984," National Tar Journal, 41, pp. 261-266.

3

Appendix A: Data Appendix
-Ease,Rates, and Economic Environment

Property Tax
Baser
ABaseR

r (%)

Rate Changes (+1—)

Houston

Minneapolis

New York

Philadelphia

(1969—1997)

(1973—1997)

(1962—1997)

(1971—1998)

$45,867
(8,757)
$218.3
(3,809.3)

$27,723
(7,838)
$29 12
(2,941.1)
3.61
(.68)

$16,275
(3,133)
$181.0
(987.5)

(.42)
.04
(.12)

$30,147
(5,027)
$333.0
(1,285.4)
3.19
(.54)
.02
(.27)

(.22)

(.23)

10/17

16/8

11/21

9/18

(1961—1997)

(1968—1998)

$8,213.69
(963.58)
$9.43
(630.31)

$17,707.1
(3,028.6)
$244.2
(1,568.2)
.35
(.05)

1.70

Sales/Gross Receipts lax
Base,,x
ABase5,x

r (%)

—01

3.55

(.64)
.05

ISr3,x (%)

2.77
(.34)
—.02

— .00

(.32)

(.04)

3/1

3/6

Income/Wage Tax

(1971—1996)

(1969—1998)

Basew,w+m

$10,420
(2,758.3)
$136.3
(1,472.9)

w,w+m (%)

4.10

(.39)

$13,431
(944.0)
$100.6
(376.0)
4.32
(.59)
.06
(.21)

5/4

3/3

(1972—1996)

(1971—1998)

3,970.375
(152,632)

762.835
(61.131)

Rate Changes (+/—)

(.40)
.09

STW,w+m (%)

Rate Changes (+1—)

Jobs
N+M

—13,216

(66,235)

—8.786

(12.680)
(continued)

A. I

Appendix A: Data Appendix (continued)

Economic Variables

UE (%)

SUE(%)
Z

c

Sc

Houston

Minneapolis

New York

Philadelphia

(1969—1997)

(1973—1997)

(1961—1997)

(1969—1998)

6.34

6.76

(1.28)
.05
(1.07)
$258.3
(92.6)
$3.40
(29.2)
$1.16
(.11)

(1.29)

6.11
(1.49)

—.00

—.02

6.36
(1.47)
.04
(1.02)
$821.8
(156.0)
$29.90
(80.83)
$1.17
(.12)

.—$.01

(.03)

r (%)

3.54

(3.29)

Sr (%)
in

.08

(2.46)
$7.86
(.36)

CRIME

ACRIME
FUEL

SFUEL

—$01
(.12)
535.6
(141.9)
17.07
(28.29)

(1.08)
$937.5
(93.5)

(.98)

(116.8)
$1.16
(.12)

$1,864.0
(369.3)
$48.86
(188.7)
$1.21
(.14)

—$.01

—8.01

—$3.72

(.03)
4.01
(3.52)
.16
(2.27)
$7.82
(.36)
—$04
(.10)
595.5
(101.2)
8.08
(33.34)

(.04)
3.49
(2.95)
.06
(1.93)
$7.84
(.34)
$.002
(.12)
546.0
(138.8)
11.93
(31.28)

(.03)
3.49
(2.95)
.06
(1.93)
$7.86
(.36)
—$.02

(.12)
573.1
(115.9)
10.07
(31.52)

15.20
(7.87)
.53
(2.37)

HEALTH

2,139.4
(749.9)

SHEALTH

75.86

(50.48)

DOW

3,141.5
(1,142.7)

SDOW

103.1

(450.4)
Means and standard deviations (within parentheses) are reported. All dollar variables are
in 994 doilan. The (+1—) report the number of ta rate increases (-i-) and decreases (—)
over each city's sample period. The variables UE (%), c, r, in, CRLME, FUEL, HEALTH,
and DOW are national values with means and standard deviations calculated for each city's
sample period.

A-2

Appendix B: First Stage Estimates for Local Tax Rates

Table B summari2es the first stage estimates of city tax rates for each of our sample
cities. The Table provides the coefficient estimates for the excluded, predetermined variables
for each city. Also included in each equation as exogenous regressors (but not reported in Table

B) are a constant term, a time trend variable and the time trend squared, the national rate of
unemployment lagged one period, and each city's federal and state aid less welfare spending

lagged one period. The excluded pre-determined variables are meant to capture exogenous
determinants of local tax rates operating either through the local political process or through state

regulations of local government finances.
Local political variables include an election cycle indicator variable (Elect) equal to 1 for

the two years before a mayoral election and 0 otherwise (when Houston had a two year mayoral

term, Elect equaled 1 for the one year before the election), an indicator variable for Mayor
Dinkins (Dinkins, New York only) who ran on a progressive tax platform, and the percent of

the Philadelphia City Council who are racial minorities (%M1nCC, Philadelphia only) to
represent the significant shift in Council composition following the 1979 Abscam scandal.
Variables meant to capture the influence of the state regulatory environment on local finances

include the percent of state income collected as states taxes other than state income taxation
lagged one period (r(-l)), the percent of general state and local spending done directly by the
state (%SLExpS), the percent of the state lower chamber who are Democrats (%LegDem), an
indicator variable equal to I if the state's Governor is a Democrat (GovDem), and, for Houston

only, future annexation measured by city land area with a one year lead (Land(+ 1)), for New

B-i

York City only, the level of MAc bonds outstanding lagged one period (MACDebt(-1)), and for

Philadelphia only, an indicator variable for the 1977 borrowing crisis in which Wall Street
required tax rate increases to balance a deficit budget (CrisLi7Y) and the 1985 state-mandated

reformof the city's business taxes requiring a reduction in the city's gross receipts tax rate
(S5BflRef). When statistically significant or nearly so, each variable influenced local tax rates
in the expected direction: Elect (-), Dinkins (- in r, + in r,j, %MinCC (-),
MACDebt (+), Crisis77 (+), and 8SBlJcRef (- in Tx,

r,. (-), Land (-),

+ or 0 for r and r,,..J. We are agnostic

as to the likely effects of %LegDezn and GovDem on city tax rates, holding constant state to city

aid (as our specification does). On the one hand, democratic state governments are likely to
increase local government mandates, particularly for services for the poor (+ coefficient as in
Minneapolis and New York City), but on the other hand, democratic states may wish to favor

democratic city administrations in ways not measured by grants-in-aid (e.g., providing more
state services within city boundaries, - coefficient as in Philadelphia). When significant, %SLErp

had a positive effect on Houston, Minneapolis, and New York property taxation, implying
cooperative, not competitive, fiscal federalism.
As a group the excluded predetermined variables are significant explanatory variables for

city tax rates. Though we cannot reject non-stationarity for the level series of tax rates and the

continuous value instruments in Table B, individually the variables are stationary in first
differences. Under the hypothesis that the system is 1(1), the Durbin-Watson test statistic for

the null hypothesis of non-stationarity of the residuals from the co-integrating regression is
appropriate (Engle and Granger, 1987). For each tax rate regression in Table B, the Durbin-

Watson test statistic allows us to• reject the null hypothesis of non-stationarity, or of no co-

B-2

integration, at the 1 percent level of significance (D.W. .511; Engle and (hanger, 1987).
For completeness, the Augmented Dickey-Fuller test statistics for the stationarity of the error
terms of the co-intergrating regression assuming higher-order autoregressive processes are also

reported (MacKinnon, 1991). Our tax rate regressions pass this more demanding test in four
of our eight specifications. Assuming a stable, co-integrating regression, the predicted tax rates
using the level regressions from Table B are then used to compute predicted first differences in

rates for lv estimation reported in Table 4.
The quality of the predictive equation will determine the degree to which our instruments

successfully control for simultaneous equation bias. As recommended by Bound, Jaeger, and
Baker (1995) and Staiger and Stock (1997) we report the partial R2 and the F statistics for the
first-stage estimates. The partial R2's measuring the variation in local tax rates explained by the
instruments alone all exceed .32, and all but Minneapolis are .50 or larger. P-values based upon

an F test for the statistical significance for each group of excluded predetermined variables
uniformly rejects the null hypothesis of no influence of the selected instruments; see Table B.

For less than perfect instruments (i.e., instruments potentially correlated with the error terms
of the tax base equations), the inverse of the reported F statistic (1/F) is an approximate measure

of the finite sample bias of our IV estimates of the effects of rate on base relative to the OLS
estimates of the same coefficients; see Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995) and Staiger and Stock

(1997). Thus IV estimates based upon first stage equations with values of F = 4 will correct
approximately 75% of any simultaneous equation bias. By this criterion, our IV estimates for

Minneapolis property taxation in Table 4 and for Philadelphia wage taxation in Tables 4 and 5
should be interpreted with care.

B-3

Appendix Table 13: IV First Stage Estimate for Local Tax Rates
Excluded
PredeLerniined

Houston

Minneapolis

'Tp

'j)

Elect

.016
(.031)
.084
(.086)

Tstate(1)
% SLEXpS

% LegI)ein

GovDein

Tp

—.104

(.125)

(.057)

.268
(.328)

.150
(.211)

3.673*

10.317

(1.456)

(8.802)

5.118
(3.601)

Ts

.072
(.075)
.090
(.267)
—2.663

Philadelphia
Tw

.024

(.076)

Tp

TX

Tw+14

—.026

— .012

—.001

(.051)

m433

425*

(.286)

(.207)

—1.711

(5.224)

(5.115)

—.203

(1.818)

2.633

3.358

(.807)

(1.414)

(2.044)

5.659*
(1.115)

(2.103)

(1.326)

.023

—.103

—.340

—.119

—.189

—.158

—.165

(.045)

Land(+1)

.075

New Yoik

(.204)

.462

(.233)

(.197)

(.253)

.0003*
(.0001)

.0004*
(.0001)

.0004*
(.0001)
.484*
(.110)

—1.821

(.095)

—.005k

(.009)
—.024

(.037)
—.540

(.343)
—.204

(.251)

.

(.017)

(.070)
.144
(.271)
1,952

(2.486)
—3.553

(1.822)
.048

(.126)

(.002)

MACDeh(—1)

l)iukins

—

-—

— 379*

(.098)

Crisis77

% MinOC

—

-—

—

—

—

— .098

(.148)

.671*
(.176)

—

—

8SlJTxltef

..—

—.466

.093*
(.032)
—.300

.669*
(.232)
—.300

(.876)

(.164)

.062

— .094*

.261

(.124)

(.023)

(.171)

(1.189)

ft2

.97

.70

.96

.80

.88

.85

.79

.95

ft2(partial)

.94

.32

.69

.78

.65

.76

.50

.83

5.73
(.001)

5,78

3.85

(.001)

(.011)

4.92
(.003)

(.088)

2.17

2.23

2.54

2.04

1.68

F

3.66

2.61

6.79

(p-value)

(.018)

(.072)

D.W.

1.66

1.27

(.001)
2.21

AUF

—3.50

—3.16

—4.42

2.15

—4.19

Appendix Table B Notes
errors for each estimated coefficient are reported within parentheses. In addition to the excluded
predetermined (instrumental) variables listed above, each local tax rate equation also includes as exogenous
variables a constant term, Time, Time2, UE(—l), and Z(—1). The reported test statistics include: R2,
R2 (partial) as the coefficient of determination corrected for degrees of freedom for the excluded predetermined
variables only; F as the F test statistic for the null hypothesis that the excluded predetermined variables jointly
have no influence on the local tax rate; p-value for the associated F statistics; D.W. as the Durbin-Watson test
statistic for serial correlation of the equation errors, and ADF as the augmented Dickey-Fuller test statistic
for stationarity of the error terms of the OLS regression.

*Coeffidents t statistic > 2.00. ADF test statistic rejecting non-stationarity at the .10 level of significance or
better (ADF <—5.20).

B-S

