NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO CEOs SET THEIR OWN PAY?
THE ONES WITHOUT PRINCIPALS DO

Marianne Bertrand
Sendhil Mullainathan

Working Paper 7604
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7604
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

An earlier version of this paper was circulated under the title "Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?" We are extremely
grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Rajesh Aggarwal, George Baker, Patrick Bolton, Peter Diamond, Robert Gibbons, Efi
Gildor, Denis Gromb, Brian Hall, Bengt Holmstrom, Caroline I-Ioxby, Glenn Hubbard, Lawrence Katz, Steve Kaplan,
Steve Pischke, Nancy Rose, David Scharfstein, Robert Shimer, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and seminar
participants at Berkeley, Columbia, Chicago, Harvard, MIT, Princeton, and the NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute 1999 for very helpful comments. We thank Ken Ayotte and Michael Mitton for excellent research assistance,
Michael Haid for giving us access to his data set of oil companies, and David Yermack for giving us access to his data
on executive compensation. Financial support was provided by the Russell Sage Foundation, the Princeton Industrial
Relations Section and the Princeton Center for Economic Policy Studies. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to
the source.

Do CEOs Set Their Own Pay? The Ones Without Principals Do
Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan
NBER Working Paper No. 7604

March 2000
JEL No. G3, J3, J4, L2

ABSTRACT
We empirically examine two competing views of CEO pay. In the contracting view, pay is
used to solve an agency problem: the compensation committee optimally chooses pay contracts which

give the CEO incentives to maximize shareholder wealth. In the skimming view, pay is the result of

an agency problem: CEOs have managed to capture the pay process so that they set their own pay,
constrained somewhat by the availability of cash or by a fear of drawing shareholders' attention. To

distinguish these views, we first examine how CEO pay responds to luck, observable shocks to
performance beyond the CEO's control. Using several measures of luck, such as changes in oil price

for the oil industry, we find substantial pay for luck. Pay responds about as much to a "lucky" dollar

as to a general dollar. Most importantly, we find that better governed firms pay their CEOs less for
luck. Our second test examines how much CEOs are charged for the options they are granted. Since

options never appear on balance sheets, they might offer an appealing way to skim. Here again we
find a crucial role for governance: CEOs in better governed firms are charged more for the options
they are given. These results suggest that both views of CEO pay matter. In poorly governed firms,
the skimming view fits better (pay for luck and little charge for options) while in well governed firms,

the contracting view fits better (filtering out of luck and charging for options).

Marianne Bertrand
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098
and NIBER

mbertran @princeton.edu

Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-380
Cambridge, MA 02173
and NBER
mullain@mit.edu

1 Introduction
There are two predominant ways to think about CEO pay. The first one, which we refer to as the
contracting view, relies on principal-agent models. Because CEOs often own very little of the firm

they control, shareholders face a classic moral hazard problem: CEOs may not always maximize

firm value in making their decisions. Under the contracting view, shareholders (acting through

the board or the compensation committee) use CEO pay to reduce moral hazard. Explicit pay
for performance, such as long term contracts or options, and implicit pay for performance, such
as a bonus payment, are all used by boards to increase CEOs' incentives to maximize shareholder

wealth.'
The second view, which we refer to as the skimming view, has been championed by practitioners

such as Crystal (1991). It also begins with the separation of ownership and control, but it argues
that this separation allows CEOs to gain control of the pay setting process itself. By packing the

board with their friends, or any other mean of entrenchment, many CEOs de facto set their own
pay. They skim what they can from shareholders, constrained perhaps by the amount of funds in

the firm, by an unwillingness to draw the attention of shareholder activist groups or by a fear of
becoming a takeover target. Within these constraints, however, they pay themselves as much as

possible. Whereas pay in the contracting view is an attempt to solve moral hazard, pay in the
skimming view is the result of moral hazard.
We propose two tests to differentiate these models. In the first test, we examine whether CEOs
'Murphy (1985, 1986) is a forerunner of the vast literature that has empirically analyzed CEO compensation
in the context of the principal-agent model. The resulting literature is summarized in Murphy (1999). The major
econometric work has been to test for value-optimizing incentive scheme by studying the correlation between pay
and perfbrmance. Jensen and Murphy (1990) use this framework to argue that political considerations constrain pay
so that incentives are too low. Joskow, Rose and Shepard (1993) empirically examine this argument in regulated
industries. Other tests of the agency framework can be found in Gibbons and Murphy (1990), who test for relative
performance evaluation and career concerns, Garen (1994) and Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a), who test for riskreturn tradeoffs, and Hubbard and Palia (1994) and Bertrand and Mullainathan (1998), who test whether pay
incentives substitute for other disciplining devices (competition and talceovers respectively).

3

are rewarded for observable luck. By luck, we mean changes in firm performance that are beyond

CEOs' control. In simple agency models, pay should not respond to luck since by definition the
CEO cannot influence luck. Tying pay to luck will not provide better incentives; it will only add

risk to the contract (Hohustrom, 1979).2 Under the skimming view, on the other hand, pay will
respond to luck since the CEO can divert those "lucky" dollars to pay herself as easily as she can
divert earned dollars.

To empirically examine the responsiveness of pay to luck, we use three different measures of

luck. First, we perform a case study of the oil industry where large movements in oil prices tend
to affect firm performance on a regular basis. Second, we use changes in industry-specific exchange

rate for firms in the traded goods sector. Third, we use year-to-year differences in mean industry

performance to proxy for the overall economic fortune of a sector. This last measure very much

resembles the approach followed in the relative performance evaluation literature. For all three
measures, we find that CEO pay responds to luck. In fact, we find that for all three luck measures

CEO pay is as sensitive to a "lucky dollar" as to a "general dollar."
This basic finding of pay for luck, however, can be explained by complicating the basic agency

model. For example, suppose boards wanted their CEOs to forecast or respond to luck shocks.
Tying pay to luck in this case may be necessary to provide better incentives. In. the oil industry,
rewarding the CEO after the fact for seeing an oil shock coming encourages him to keep his eyes

open before the fact. Alternatively, suppose the "value" of a CEO's human capital rises and falls

with industry fortunes. One would then find that pay correlates with luck because the CEO's
outside wage moves with luck.
While we will argue that these arguments may be incorrect, they motivate us to search for further
2Note our emphasis on observable luck. In any model, given the randomness of the world, CEOs (and almost
everybody else) will end up being rewarded for unobservable luck. Note also our emphasis on the fact that this
prediction holds in simple agency models. As we will discuss shortly, complications to the agency model can in
principle alter this result.

4

tests. We therefore examine another direct implication of the skimming model, that skimming will

be less important in well governed firms. Good governance will make it hard for the CEO to gain

control of the pay process. So if pay for luck comes from skimming, we expect to see less of it in
the better governed finns.
We test this hypothesis using several measures of governance: presence of large shareholders (on

the board and overall), CEO tenure (interacted with the presence of large shareholders to better

proxy for entrenchment), board size and fraction of directors that are insiders. Consistent with
skimming, we generally find that the better governed firms pay less for luck.3 These effects are
strongest for the presence of large shareholders on the board who reduce pay for luck by between
23 and 33%. Large shareholders are especially important as CEO tenure increases, consistent with
the idea that unchecked CEOs can entrench themselves over time. The findings on governance cast

doubts on the alternative interpretations which make pay for luck optimal through complications
to the agency model. If pay for luck were in fact optimal, we would not expect to see well governed

firms use less of it. For example, whether or not a large shareholder is present, CEOs would have

to be rewarded for a rise in the value of their human capital. These findings instead suggest that
at least some of the pay for luck in poorly governed firms is due to skimming by CEOs.

Our second test revolves around another aspect of CEO compensation that has received atten-

tion in recent years: the granting of new stock options. Principal-agent theory predicts that when
options are granted, other components of compensation should be adjusted downwards to leave the

CEO indifferent. In other words, the CEO should be charged for the options she is granted, if not
their Black-Scholes value then at least this value times a risk correction factor.4 Supporters of the
3Whenever we refer to "less pay for luck" we mean that there is less pay for luck relative to the amount of pay
for performance. Thus, these results would not be driven by well governed firms simply giving less overall pay for
performance.
4The basic idea is that options have value. For example, suppose a CEO is granted 10,000 options with a strike
price of 50, a horizon of 3 years and the firm is currently trading at 50. These options have value in and of themselves
because even if the firm under-performs relative to the market and earns a cumulative 3-year(nominal) return of only

5

skimming view, on the other hand, emphasize that stock options do not appear on balance sheets.
Because of accounting treatments, firms do not take a financial charge for granting options. CEOs

can therefore pay themselves through option grants without affecting the company's bottom line.

Under the assumption that shareholders only (or mostly) pay attention to the accounting bottom
line, the granting of new stock options would represent an easy way to skim more without attracting

shareholders' attention. No cut in the other components of pay would be necessary. Thus while
agency theory predicts a large charge for options, skimming predicts about no charge.

Unfortunately, a direct measure of how much CEOs are in fact charged for their options is

not possible because of a natural omitted variable bias. Thking our lead from the pay for luck
findings, we therefore focus on the question of how governance affects the charge for options. Using

the same measures of governance, we generally find that more poorly governed CEOs are charged

less for their new options grants. For example, for an options grant worth 1 million dollars (in
Black-Scholes terms), an extra large shareholder on the board increases the charge for options by

between 30 and 50 thousand dollars. As before, we also find that as a CEO tenure increases, the
charge for options diminishes in firms without a large shareholder.
In summary, this paper contains three main results. First, CEO compensation shows on average
a significant amount of pay for luck. Second, well governed firms display less pay for luck, suggesting

that it is possible to filter out luck. Third, CEOs in well governed firms are charged more for their

stock options grants. At a first glance, these results seem to provide support for the skimming
view. CEOs are rewarded for luck and seem to be able to skim using options. But notice that they

also provide support for the contracting view. Well governed firms do manage to filter out some
luck from performance and do manage to charge more for options. We feel that the results suggest
10%, he still gains (.1) * 50 * 10,000 = 50,000 dollars. Even if the option is granted out of the money, the same effect
will arise because the option may come into the money just because of movements in share price that comes from
the firm's natural volatility. Agency theory therefore predicts that CEOs should be charged for the gift implicit in
each option.

6

as a whole that both views of CEO pay are true. In practice, executive compensation seems to be

better characterized by either the skimming or the contracting model depending on the extent to
which there is an active "principal" (or principals) present to actually design pay contracts. Better

governance means that there is more of an active principal and optimal contracting fits better.
Worse governance means that there is less of an active principal and the CEO is more likely to set
his own pay.5

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We start by presenting our test of the lack of
performance filtering (section 2). We first present a very simple theoretical background (section

2.1), review the existing evidence (section 2.2) and explain the empirical methodology (section
2.3). We then establish the existence of pay-for-luck, both in the specific case of the oil industry
(section 3.1) and for more general sets of industries (section 3.2). In section 3.3, we demonstrate

the role of governance in limiting the extent of pay-for-luck. In section 4, we establish that the
same governance variables also matter in limiting the gift nature of new stock option grants. We
summarize and conclude in Section 5.

2 Pay for Luck Test: Background
2.1 Theoretical Background
Our first test focuses on whether CEOs are rewarded for observable luck. A simple theoretical
model will make precise what agency theory says about the reward for luck. Consider a standard
agency setup where risk-neutral shareholders, perhaps operating through the board, try to induce

a risk-averse top manager to maximize firm performance. Since the actions of the CEO can be
oThis confirms the sentiment that emerges from conversations with compensation consultants as they describe
being hired by two types of firms: the ones where they clearly have to respond to the CEO and the ones where they
clearly have to respond to the shareholders.

7

hard to observe, shareholders will be unable to sign a contract that specifies these actions. Instead,

shareholders will offer a contract to the CEO where her compensation level is made to depend
on the firm's performance. Let p represent firm performance and a the CEO's actions, which by
assumption are unobservable by the shareholders. Firm performance depends on the actions of the

CEO and on random factors. We split the random factors into two components: those that can be

observed by shareholders and those that cannot. For an oil firm, the price of crude oil would be
an observable random factor. Letting o be the observable factor and u be the unobservable noise
term, we assume that performance can be written as:

p = a + So + u
Under some technical conditions, Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987) calculate the optimal incentive

scheme for this model.6 Let s denote this incentive scheme. Since shareholders can only observe
two variables, p and o, the incentive scheme could at most depend on these two variables. In fact,
shareholders will only reward CEOs for performance net of the observable factor

s=a+$(p—So)=a+fi(a+u)

(1)

In other words, the optimal incentive scheme filters the observable luck from performance. This

is because leaving o in the incentive scheme provides no added benefit to the principal as, by
definition, the agent has no control over o. "Incentivizing" her on o has therefore no incentive
effects. Beyond providing no benefit, it actually costs the principal because not filtering out luck
increases the variance of the incentive scheme, thereby forcing the principal to increase mean pay
to compensate the risk averse agent.7
How might we expect filtering of luck to occur in practice? Explicit incentive contracts, such as
°Essentially, we need to assume that the CEO has CARA utility and that outcomes follow a Brownian process.
A much more general result can be fbund in Holmstrom (1979).
Tin Section 3.2.4, we will consider changes to this basic model that might alter these results.
8

options, rarely filter. For example, options are rarely ii ever indexed against market performance.
This need not be inconsistent with a lack of filtering, however. One might expect that the best way
to filter luck is through the use of subjective performance evaluation. In practice, we would expect

the board to be the primary mechanism for doing this. The board should use the discretionary
components of pay, such as bonus, salary or new options grants, to respond to luck shocks.

2.2 Existing Evidence
Previous work already hints at a relationship between pay and luck. First, Blanchard, Lopezde-Silanes and Shleifer (1992) find that windfall gains from court rulings raise the pay of CEOs.
Second, as we just mentioned, the stock options that are granted to CEOs are very rarely indexed

to the market. While interesting, these two facts are only suggestive. A court ruling may not be
luck, but rather the result of the CEO's work. And, as noted, while options may not be indexed
(perhaps for simplicity or tax reasons), the board can always reissue them or adjust other parts of
pay.

For many, the apparent lack of relative performance evaluation (RPE) is probably the best
existing piece of evidence of pay for luck.8 Even with this evidence though, some problems arise.

First, mean industry movements are a special form of luck. Filtering this specific kind of luck
may not be optimal from an agency theoretic point of view. In fact, Gibbons and Murphy (1990)
themselves note that relative performance evaluation can distort CEO incentives if they can "take

actions that affect the average output of the reference group."9 Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b)
also develop a specific model in which relative performance evaluation schemes may not be optimal
8While Gibbons and Murphy (1990) find some evidence for 11FF, some of their results are puzzling. For example,
there appears to be more filtering of general stock market shocks than of shocks specific to the relevant industry.
Most of the other work on the topic, such as .Janakiraman et al. (1992) and Aggarwal and Samwick (1999a), find no
evidence of 11FF.

°They list four different kinds of such actions: sabotage, collusion, choice of reference group and production
externalities.

9

for shareholders as they try to provide CEOs with the best incentives.10 Our test addresses these

criticisms. We will examine a variety of shocks, including but not restricted to mean industry
movements. We will verify that other shocks to performance that are even more objectively beyond

managerial influence, such as shocks to the price of crude oil or exchange rates shocks, also fail to
be filtered.

2.3 Empirical Methodology
Within the agency framework, most of the empirical literature estimates an equation of the form:
Yit =

a + t + ax * X + /3 * perft + cit

(2)

where Vu denotes total CEO compensation in firm i at time t, a are firm fixed effects, at are time

fixed effects, X are firm (and CEO) specific variables such as tenure or firm size, and perft represents a performance measure. The coefficient /3 captures the strength of the pay for performance
relationship.
Performance is typically measured either as changes in accounting profits or stock market returns

and we will use both measures.11 In measuring compensation,

one

problem permeates the

literature and our paper is no exception. Ideally, the compensation in a year would include the
change in value of unexercised options granted in previous years. Such a calculation requires data
on the accumulated stock of options held by the CEO each year, whereas existing data contains only

information on new options granted each year. Consequently, our compensation measure does not

include this component of the change in wealth. As we discuss in Section 3.2.1, this data problem
10The basic idea is that the mean performance in the rest of the industry may actually provide some information
about the CEOs effort to attenuate or strengthen the level of competition in that industry. For example, if product
market competition in an industry needs to be softened, shareholders might in an efficient contracting environment
reward the CEO when the rest of the industry is doing well as this might indicate that the CEO acted successfully
in attenuating the competitive pressures in that industry.
"These are flow measures. In practice, given the firm fixed effects, we will use market value and level of accounting
profits as measures of per fig.

10

should, if anything, bias our results towards overstating the case towards filtering and understating

the extent of pay for luck.

To estimate the general sensitivity of pay to performance, we will follow the literature and

estimate equation (2) using a standard Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model. To estimate the
sensitivity of pay to luck, we need to use a more complicated two stage procedure. In the first
stage, we will predict performance using luck. This will isolate changes in performance that are
caused by luck. In the second stage, we will see how sensitive pay is to these predictable changes
in performance. This two stage procedure is essentially an Instrumental Variables (IV) estimation
where the luck variable is the instrument for performance.'2
Letting o be luck, the first equation we estimate is:

per = a + at + ax * X + b * ot +

(4)

where ou represents the luck measure (on price for example). Again, this equation allows us to
predict a firm's performance using only information about luck. We then ask how pay responds to
this luck induced performance, perf1t:

Yit

= a + at + ax * Xft + fJLuc/ç * verf it + cjt

(5)

The estimated coefficient (3Luck indicates how sensitive pay is to changes in performance that come
from luck. Since such changes should be ifitered, basic agency theory predicts [3LUCk should equal
0.
'2One might wonder why we should use this procedure rather than simply include a directly into the pay for
performance equation (2) and run OLS to estimate:
Va = a + at + ax * Xit +fl *perft + 7 * o+ q

(3)

This equation is hard to interpret, however. Even if there is no pay for luck, the coefficient 0y will not equal —$ but
rather —/95, as we can see from equation 1. Since we we do not estimate 5, the estimated coefficient 7 can be small
either because there is pay for luck or simply because 5 is small. The first equation in the IV procedure, on the other
hand, scales the effect of luck on performance, circumventing this problem.

11

3 Testing for Pay for Luck
3.1 Oil Industry Study
We now turn to the oil industry to test whether in fact there is zero pay for luck. As Figure 1 shows,

the price of crude oil has fluctuated dramatically over the last 25 years. These large fluctuations

have caused large movements in industry profits. Over this period, a CEO of one of these firms

would have found that a measurable variable (oil prices) greatly influenced the performance of
his firm. Moreover, these large fluctuations in crude oil prices are likely to have been beyond the

control of a single US CEO. For example, the sharp decline in crude oil price at the end of 1985
was caused by Saudi Arabia's decision to reform its petroleum policy and to increase it production,

an action hardly attributable (and never attributed) to the CEOs of US oil firms. Similarly, the
large oil price increase between 1979 and 1981 is usually attributed to an internal policy change by

OPEC. Oil price movements therefore provide an ideal place to test for pay for luck: they affect
performance, are measurable and are plausibly beyond the control of the CEOs.
We use a data set on the pay and performance for the 51 largest US oil companies between 1977

and 1994 to implement the methodology of the previous section.13 Before moving to regression
analysis, it is useful to look directly at how pay fluctuates compared to the movements in Figure 1.
In Figure 2, we have graphed changes in oil prices for each year and changes in mean log pay in the

industry. Two striking facts emerge. First, pay changes and oil price changes correlate quite well.
In 12 of the 17 years, they are of the same sign: both are up or both are down. This is suggestive of

a large amount of pay for luck. The second fact comes from the remaining 5 years where they are
'3We are extremely grateful to Michael Haid for making the data set used in this section available to us. See
Haid (1997) for further details about the construction of the data set. Table Al in the appendix provides mean
and standard deviations for the main variables of interest. While the original data set covers 51 companies over the
period 1977 to 1994, information on CEO pay is available for only 50 of these original 51 companies. Moreover, CEO
pay is available from 1977 on for only 34 of these 50 companies. The final data set sve use coven 827 company/year
observations.

12

of opposite sign: all these 5 years are years in which oil price drops but pay does not. This hints at

an asymmetry: while CEOs are always rewarded for good luck, they may not always be punished
for bad luck. While we will not formally pursue the asymmetry, it is worth keeping in mind.
This figure, however, does not allow us to quantify the size of pay for luck: how does it compare

to the pay for general performance? It also does not control for other finn specific variables that
might be changing over time. Thble 1 follows the empirical methodology presented in Section 2.3,
which allows a more systematic analysis. The regressions use log(total compensation) as dependent

variable and include firm fixed effects, age and tenure quadratics and a performance measure as

dependent variables.14 We also allow for a year quadratic to allow for the fact that CEO pay
has been trending up during this period. Column (1) estimates the sensitivity of pay to a general
change in accounting performance. The coefficient of .82 suggests that if an oil firm increases its
accounting return by one percentage point, total compensation rises by .82 * .01

= .0082

1 log

points. Roughly, a one percentage point increase in accounting returns leads to a .8 percent increase

in pay. Note that the sign and magnitude of all the other covariates in the regression seem sensible.

Pay increases with age and to a lesser extent with tenure. Both the age and tenure profile are
concave (the negative coefficient on the quadratic term).
Column (2) estimates the sensitivity of pay to luck. As described, we instrument for performance

with log oil prices.15 This allows us to narrow down on movements in accounting returns that are

due to oil price changes. The coefficient in column (2) now rises to 2.15. This suggest that a one
percentage point rise in accounting returns due to tuck raises pay by 2.15 percent. Given the large
standard errors, one cannot reject that the pay for luck coefficient and pay for general performance

coefficient are the same. One can however strictly reject the hypothesis of complete filtering: oil
'4Thtal compensation in this table and all others includes salary, bonus, other incentive payments and value of
options granted in that year.
t5This table does not report the first stage regressions of performance measure on oil price. But as one would
expect from Figure 1, these regressions show very significant coefficients on oil price (p C .001).
13

CEOs are paid for luck that comes from oil price movements.

Columns (3) and (4) perform the same exercise but for a market measure of performance:
shareholder wealth. The coefficient of .38 on column (3) suggests that a one percent increase in
shareholder wealth leads to roughly a .38 percent increase in CEO pay. In column (4), we find that
a one percent increase in shareholder wealth due to luck leads to .35 percent increase in CEO pay.
Again, pay for luck matches pay for general performance.

3.2 More General Tests
The oil industry case study has been instructive about the magnitude of pay for luck. CEO pay
responds as much to a lucky dollar than to a general performance dollar. This is only one industry,

however, and one might ask how generalizable these results are. In this section, we will examine

luck shocks that affect a broader set of firms. We focus on two measures of luck: movements in

exchange rates and mean industry performance. By affecting the extent of import penetration
and hence foreign competition, exchange rate movements can strongly affect a firm's profitability.

Movements in mean industry performance also proxy for luck to the extent that a CEO does not
influence how the rest of her industry performs.'6

3.2.1 CEO Compensation Data
To implement these tests, we use compensation data on 792 large corporations over the 19841991 period. The data set was graciously made available to us by David Yermack and Andrei
Shleifer. It is extensively described in Yermack (1995). Compensation data was collected from
the corporations' SEC Proxy, 10-K, and 8-K filings. Other data was transcribed from the Forbes
magazine annual survey of CEO compensation as well as from SEC Registration statements, firms'
'6As we mention beibre, this last assumption is more questionable. In practice, we fInd that mean industry
movements operate exactly like the exchange rate movements (and like oil price movements).

14

Annual Reports, direct correspondence with firms, press reports of CEO hires and departures, and

stock prices published by Standard & Poor's. Firms were selected into the sample on the basis
of their Forbes rankings. Forbes magazine publishes annual rankings of the top 500 firms on four

dimensions: sales, profits, assets and market value. To qualify for the sample a corporation must
appear in one of these Forbes 500 rankings at least four times between 1984 and 1991. In addition,
the corporation must have been publicly traded for four consecutive years between 1984 and 1991.

Yermack data is attractive in that it provides both governance variables and information on
options granted, not just information on options exercised. It does not, however, include changes
in the value of options held. Our compensation measure, therefore, will not include the change in
value of pre-existing options. If anything, this biases us towards finding less pay for luck than there

is. Since options are not indexed, changes in the value of options held will covary perfectly with
luck. Including them would only increase the measured pay for luck. This data limitation therefore

pushes us towards favoring the filtering hypothesis, making our statistical rejection of complete
filtering that much stronger.
Thble 2 presents summary statistics for the main variables of interest in the full Yermack data.17

All nominal variables are expressed in 1991 dollars. The average CEO earns 900 thousand dollars

in salary and bonus. His total compensation is nearly twice that amount at one million and 600
thousand dollars. The difference indicates the large fraction of a CEO's pay that are due to options

grants. The average CEO is roughly 57 years old and has been CEO of the firm for 9 years. As
far as governance goes, the average firm in our sample has 1.12 large shareholders, of which less

than a fourth are sitting on the board. There are on average 13 directors on a board. 42 percent
of them are insiders.'8
171n practice, depending on the required regressors, the various tests in the following sections will be performed on
various subsamples of the original data. None of these main variables of interest significantly differ in any of these
subsamples.
'8mchnically, we define "insiders" to be both inside and grey directors. An inside director is defined as a director

15

3.2.2 Exchange Rate Movements as Measures of Luck
Our first general measure of luck focuses on exchange rate movements. We exploit the fact that
exchange rates between the US dollar and other country currencies fluctuate greatly over time. We
also exploit the fact that different industries are affected by different countries' exchange rates. For
example, since the toy industry may be more affected by Japanese imports while the lumber industry

may be more affected by Bolivia, these two industries may experience very different shocks in the

same year. This allows us to construct industry-specific exchange rate movements which we are
arguably beyond CEOs' control since they are primarily determined by macroeconomic variables.
The exchange rate shock measure is based on the weighted average of the log real exchange rates

for importing countries by industry. The weights are the share of each foreign country's import in
total industry imports in a base year (1981-1982). Read exchange rates are nominal exchange rates
(expressed in foreign currency per dollar) multiplied by U.S. CPI and divided by the foreign country

CPI. Nominal exchange rates and foreign CPI's are from the International Financial Statistics of
the International Monetary Fund.

Panel A of Table 3 examines the effect of this measure of luck. Note that since the exchange
rate measure can only be constructed for industries where we have imports data, the sample size
is much smaller here than for our full sample. All regressions control for firm and year fixed effects

as well as for quadratics in. tenure and age.19 Column (1) uses as dependent variable the level

(not the log) of cash (not total) compensation. Thus, relative to our standard specification, we
run this regression in levels and do not include value of options granted. Since profits are reported

in millions and pay is reported in thousands, the coefficient of .17 in column (1) suggests that
that is a current or former officer of the company. A grey director is a relative of a corporate officer, or someone who
has substantial business relationships with the company.
'9We do not report the coefficients on age and tenure to save space, but they resemble the oil industry findings:
positive but diminishing effects of tenure and age.

16

$1,000 increase in profits leads to a 17 cent increase in performance. Column (2) performs the same
exercise but now for pay for luck: we instrument for performance using the exchange rate shocks.2°

As in the oil case, we find a pay for luck coefficient that is of the same order of magnitude as the
pay for general performance coefficient.

Columns (3) through (6) run the more standard regression where we use the logarithm of pay
and an accounting measure of performance (operating income divided by total assets). In columns
(3) and (4) we use only cash compensation, while in columns (5) and (6) we use total compensation.

In both cases, we find the sensitivity of pay to luck to be about the same as the sensitivity of pay

to a general shock. When accounting performance rises by one percentage point compensation
(either total or cash) rises by about 2 percent, whether that rise was due to luck—exchange rate
movements—or not.

Columns (7) through (9) replicate these four columns but for market measures of performance.
Again, we find pay for luck that matches the pay sensitivity to a general shock. A rise in shareholder
wealth of one percent leads to a rise in pay (again either total or cash) of about .3 percent irrespective

of whether this rise was caused by luck.

Two important points should be taken away from this panel. First, to a first approximation, the
average firm rewards its CEO as much for luck as it does for a general movement in performance.

There seems to be very little if any filtering. Since we use a totally different shock, these findings
address theoretical concerns about the use of mean industry shocks (such as those raised in Gibbons

and Murphy (1990) and Aggarwal and Samwick (1999b)) and shows that the lack of filtering
observed in RPE findings generalizes to other sources of luck.

Second, there is as much pay for luck on totally discretionary components of pay (salary and
20First stage regressions are reported in 'JbIe A2. In practice we use as instruments a set of dummy 'ariab1es that
indicate any significant exchange rate appreciations or depreciations in the current and past year. The instruments
are jointly highly significant.

17

bonus) as there is on other components such as options granted. This rules out the notion that
pay for luck might arise because firms commit (implicitly or explicitly) to multi-year stock option
plans where the number of options grants is fixed ahead of time. As firm values rise, the prices of
options rise and so does the value of options grants (Hall, 1999). More generally, bonus is the most
subjective component of pay for performance sensitivity. To find pay for luck on this component is

quite suggestive. Boards are rewarding CEOs for luck even when they could filter it.

3.2.3 Mean Industry Movements as Measures of Luck
In Panel B of Table 3, we replicate Panel A except that our measure of luck becomes mean perfor-

mance of the industry, which is meant to capture external shocks that are experienced by all the
firms in the industry. More specifically, as an instrument for firm-level rate of accounting return

in a given year, we use the weighted average rate of accounting return in that year in the 2-digit
industry that firm belongs to, excluding the firm itself from the calculation.21 The weight of a given

firm in a given year is the share of its total assets in the "total" total assets of the 2-digit industry
the firm belongs to. Similarly, as an instrument for firm-level logarithm of shareholder wealth in

a given year, we use the weighted average of the log values of shareholder wealth in the 2-digit
industry in that year, again excluding the firm itself from the calculation and using total assets to
weight each individual firm.22

Like in Panel A, all regressions include firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. We also control

for a quadratic in CEO age and a quadratic in CEO tenure. The regressions include more than
twice the data points of Panel A because we can now use all firms, not only those in the traded
"We also investigated the use of 1-digit and 3-digit industry means as instruments and found qualitatively similar
results.
"These mean industry performance measures are constructed from COMPUSTAT. To maximize consistency of
the performance measures between Yermack's firms and the rest of industry, we also compute shareholder wealth and
income to assets ratios from COMPUSTAT for the firms in Yermack's. Because not all firms in Yermack's data are
present in COMPUSTAT in every year, we lose about 800 firm-year observations.

18

goods sector. Panel B shows a pattern quite similar to Panel A. The pay for luck relationship in
all specifications again roughly matches the pay for general performance. Besides reinforcing the

findings of Panel A, these latest findings suggest that previous RPE results arose probably not
because of mismeasurement of the reference industry or of the industry shock but because of true
pay for luck.

3.2.4 Could Pay for Luck Be Optimal?
Since the results so far clearly establish pay for luck or a lack of performance filtering, it is natural

to ask whether pay for luck could in fact be optimal. Are there complications to the agency model

that would generate pay for luck in an optimal contract? We could think of at least three.
First, we have assumed that o is contractible. If o cannot be contracted upon or measured well,
the empirical tests developed in section 2.3 are no longer valid. In practice, we do not believe this
is important for most of our findings. First, it is difficult to believe that non-contracting issues can
explain our results in the oil industry case study: the price of crude oil can easily be measured and
written into a contract. Second, even in the presence of non-contractibility, subjective performance
evaluation should effectively filter (see Baker, Gibbons and Murphy, 1994). The only problem with

subjective performance evaluation relates to commitment issues, but these are unlikely to be a
problem for the boards of directors of the large finns we study here.
Second, we have neglected the possibility of indirect incentives one may want to provide to the

CEO, for example to forecast, respond to, or hedge against luck.23 This kind of argument can be
most readily evaluated in our oil industry application. Suppose a particularly talented CEO in the
oil industry understood the political subtleties of the Arab countries and forecasted the coming of
"An argument similar to hedging has been made by Diamond (1998). Tying pa'to luck may generate incentives for
the CEO to change his conelation with the luck variable. In practice, diversification wouldseem to be in the interest
of management and not shareholders. Thfano (1996), for example, demonstrates that managerial characteristics, such
as share or option ownership, are quite predictive of risk management in a sample of gold firms.

19

the positive oil shock at the beginning of the 1980's. By increasing output from existing oil wells,
increasing inventories, or intensifying search for new wells, he could have increased his firm's profits

when the shock did come. Shouldn't shareholders reward this farsighted CEO? The important point
here is that those CEOs who were exceptional in having forecasted should indeed be rewarded. But

this is not what we test for. We use none of the firm to firm variation in response to the oil shock.
We merely test whether the average firm experiences a rise (or fall, for the negative shocks) in pay.

Put another way, our results suggest that a CEO who responds to the shock exactly the same way

as every other oil CEO is rewarded. This cannot be a reward for having forecasted well. Again,
one may want to reward CEOs for exceptional responsiveness to shocks, but there is little reason
to reward them for just average responsiveness.

Third, the reservation utility of the CEO could be affected by the random factor o. When the
oil industry enjoys good fortime, the human capital of oil CEOs may simply become more valuable.

Firms then pay their oil CEOs more simply to match their increased outside options. Thus, pay
for luck is optimal here not as an incentive device, but merely because the optimal level of pay
increases with luck. Some objections can be raised against this view as well. First, it is unclear why
CEO human capital should become more valuable as industry fortunes rise. For example, it may be

exactly in bad times that having the right CEO is most valuable. A priori, either relationship seems

plausible. Second, we have found some evidence of asymmetries in the pay-for-luck relationship

that are hard to reconcile with that view (and easy to reconcile with a skimming view). "Good
luck" seems to matter more than "bad luck". For example, average CEO compensation in the oil
industry always goes up when the price of crude oil goes up but does not always go down when the

price of crude oil goes down. Also, when we separate positive and negative mean industry shocks,

it appears that pay responds more to positive industry shocks than to negative industry shocks

20

(while there are no asymmetries in the sensitivity of pay to individual firm performance).24
Finally, one might argue that pay for luck is a form of risk sharing between CEOs and firms. If

firms are effectively risk averse, perhaps because of liquidity constraints, they may want to share

some of the risks they face with their CEO. This argument is best evaluated in the context of our

oil industry study. It is hard to imagine why the large oil producers we study, which are usually
awash in cash and have excellent bond ratings (perhaps because large holdings of pledgeable assets),

would need to share risk with the CEO. Even if these firms needed to lay off risk, they can readily
take futures positions in oil which would allow them to share the risk with a market better able to
take on the risk than the CEO. Similarly, exchange rate futures markets are active. Of course, one

could argue that for mean industry movements futures markets may not be as readily available.
But this explanation would then only apply to this third luck measure, whereas our results hold
similarly for all the measures.
While we have provided arguments against these various extensions of the simple agency model,

in the end we still believe that they merit serious consideration. They suggest to us that the pay
for luck finding does not per se rule out agency models. We deal with this issue by examining how
corporate governance affects CEO pay.

3.3 The Effect of Governance
The skimming view makes a further prediction. Since it emphasizes the CEOs' ability to gain
control of the pay process, corporate governance should play an important role in skimming. It is
exactly in the poorly governed firms where we expect CEOs to most easily gain control of the pay
process. This suggests that we should expect more pay for luck in the poorly governed firms.
To examine how pay for luck differs between well and poorly governed firms, we estimate two
24These results, not directly reported here, are available upon request from the authors. They hold quite strongly
for accounting measures of firm performance but are not present for market measures of firm performance.
21

equations. First, in order to provide a baseline, we ask how pay for general performance (not luck)
differs between well and poorly governed firms. We estimate an OLS equation similar to equation
(2) except that we allow the pay for performance coefficient to depend on governance:
1/it =

a + at + ax * X + aG * Govt + /3 * per + 'y * (Govt * per fit) + Cit

(6)

where Got, is a measure of governance. To understand this equation, differentiate both sides with
respect to per fit:
0Yit

5perft

=13+'y*Govt

The sensitivity of CEO pay to performance depends on the governance variable. A positive value
for -y would imply that better governed firms show greater pay for performance.

Equation (6) of course tells us nothing about pay for luck, merely about pay for performance.

To get at pay for luck, we re-estimate this equation using our two stage instrumental variables
procedureY We then compute an estimate of the effect of governance on pay for general performance, 5r and an estimate of the effect of governance on pay for luck, I'LUC*•

Our test then consists in comparing ' and 5'LUth• We will speak of more pay for luck in poorly

governed firms when poorly governed firms display more pay for luck relative to pay for general
performance. If poorly governed firms simply gave more pay for performance and pay for luck rose

as a consequence, we would not refer to this as more pay for luck. In practice, we will see that it
is pay for luck that changes with governance, while pay for performance hardly changes.
"An extremely important caveat here: our approach allows for the possibility that better governed firms may have
a different responsiveness of perfonnance to luck. Thchnically, performance per fit,the endogenous variable we need
to instrument, appears both directly and indirectly (the term Govg *per fit) in this equation. When we instrument,
we perform two first stages, one for the direct effect per ft and one fir the interaction term Gov * perfit. This
procedure is crucial because it allows the effect of luck on performance to depend on governance.

22

3.3.1 Large Shareholders
In Table 4, we implement this framework for the case of large shareholders. We ask whether the
presence of large shareholders affects pay for luck. Shleifer and Vishny (1986), among others, argue

that large shareholders improve governance in a firm. A single investor who holds a large block of
shares in a firm will have greater incentives to watch over the firm than a dispersed group of small
shareholders 26 In our context, the idea of large shareholders fits most naturally as this matches

our intuition of "having a principal around." Yermack data contains a variable which counts the
number of individuals who own blocks of at least 5 percent of the firm's common shares.27 We
further know whether these large shareholders are on the board or not. A priori, one might expect
that large shareholders on the board have the greatest impact. They can exert their control not just
through implicit pressure or voting, but also with a direct voice on the board. Since the information
is available, we will consider the effect of both all large shareholders and of only those on the board.

The first four columns of Table 4 use ail large shareholders as our measure of governance.
All regressions include the usual controls. Column (1) estimates how the sensitivity of pay to
performance depends on governance for accounting measures of performance. The first row tells us

that a firm with no large shareholders shows a sensitivity of log compensation to accounting return

of 2.18. An increase in accounting return of one percentage point leads to an increase in pay of
about two percent. The second row tells us that adding a large shareholder only weakly decreases

the sensitivity of pay to general performance, and this effect is not statistically significant. For
example, a one percentage point increase in accounting return now leads to a 2.09 percent increase

in pay when the firm has one large shareholder and not a 2.18 percent increase in pay. Column
20They also point out a possible opposite effect: very large shareholders may have a greater ability to expropriate
rents for themselves. This efièct is likely to be greatest in other countries where investor protection is weakest.
2tWhenever CEOs happen to own such a block, we exclude them from the count.

23

(2) estimates how large shareholders affect pay for luck.28 As before, the first row tells us that

there is significant pay for luck. The second row here tells us, however, that this pay for luck
diminishes significantly in the presence of a large shareholder. A one percentage point increase in
accounting returns due to luck leads to roughly a 4.6 percent increase in pay when there is no large

shareholder but only a 4.2 percent increase in pay when there is one more large shareholder. Each

additional large shareholder decreases this effect by .4 percent. This is a 10% drop in the pay for
luck coefficient for each additional large shareholder.

Columns (3) and (4) estimate the same regressions using market measures of performance.

In this case, the pay for general performance does not depend at all on the existence of a large
shareholder (a coefficient of .001 with a standard error of .007). We again find, however, that pay
for luck diminishes with the presence of a large shareholder. While the result is only significant at
the 10% level, the economic magnitude is larger. The pay for luck coefficient now drops

17%

for each large shareholder.

In columns (5) through (8) we repeat the above exercise but altering the governance measure.

We now focus only on large shareholders on the board. Comparing columns (6) and (2), we
see that the governance effect strengthens significantly with respect to the filtering of accounting
performance. We see that the pay for luck drops by 33 percent for each additional large shareholder.

The results are very statistically significant. On market performance measures, we find the effect

also rises but less dramatically. In column (8), the pay for luck drops 23 percent with each large

shareholder on the board. Moreover, this last result is insignificant. In summary, our findings in
Table 4 highlight how large shareholders (especially those on the board) affect the extent of pay
for luck. Firms with more large shareholders show far less pay for luck.
281n all that follows, we will use mean industry performance as our measure of luck since this produces the most
powerful first stages in the IV framework.

24

3.3.2 Entrenchment and Large Shareholders
The results in Table 4 simply compare firms with large shareholders to firms without. This ignores

the effects of CEO tenure, another important determinant of governance. A common belief is that

CEOs who have been with the firm longer have had a chance to become entrenched, perhaps by

appointing friends on the board. In this case, we would expect high tenure CEOs to show the
greatest pay for luck. Moreover, we would expect this effect to be strongest in those firms where
governance is weak and there is no large shareholder present to limit the increased entrenchment.

Hence, in the absence of large shareholders, we expect fairly strong governance early in a CEO's

tenure but this governance should weaken over time as he entrenches himself. In the presence of
large shareholders, we not only expect stronger governance but also that this stronger governance

should last throughout the CEO's tenure. It is harder for a CEO to begin stacking the board when
there is a large shareholder around. Thus we expect a rise in pay for luck with tenure in the absence

of a large shareholder, but less of a rise (or even no rise) in the presence of a large shareholder.

Thble 5. tests this idea. We first sort firms into two groups based on whether they have a
large shareholder present on the board.29 This produces 740 or so data points for firms with large
shareholders and 3880 or so data points for firms without large shareholders. For each set, we now
separately estimate regression 6 for these two groups with tenure as our governance measure.

Columns (1) and (2) focus on accounting measures of performance in firms without a large

shareholder. The second row tells us that while tenure does not affect pay for performance, it
greatly increases pay for luck. In fact, a CEO with (roughly) the median tenure of 9 years shows

about 4V

35%

greater pay for luck than one who just began at the firm. Let us contrast this

with columns (3) and (4) which estimates the same effect for firms with a large shareholder present.
We focus only on large shareholders on the board because these provided the strongest results in Thble 4. We
have used all large shareholders and found similar, though statistically weaker, results.

25

Here we find that tenure does not affect pay for luck at all, while, if anything, it seems to raise pay
for performance slightly.30 Thus pay for luck increases with tenure without large shareholders but

does not change with tenure with them.

Columns (5) through (8) repeat the tests of columns (1) through (4) but for market measures
of performance. Here the results are less stark but still very suggestive. Comparing columns (6)
and (5), we see that both pay for performance and pay for luck rise with tenure, but pay for luck

rises three times as fast (.003 versus .009). The coefficient on the pay for luck, however, is only
significant at the 10% level. The economic significance however stays large as a CEO with a tenure
of 9 years shows an increase in pay for luck of .0016*9

31%

but a rise in pay for performance of

only 10%. In columns (8) and (7), we see that if anything pay for luck and pay for performance
both diminish with tenure.

3.3.3 Other Governance Measures and Robustness Checks
While large shareholders correspond most closely to the idea of a principal, other governance

measures could aiso be used. Our data contain two variables that have shown to be important
governance measures in the past: the size of the board and the fraction of board members that are
insiders in the flrm.SL Small boards are thought to be more effective at governing firms. Yermack

(1996), for example, shows that smaller boards correlate with larger q values for firms. The first
four columns in Table 6 estimate the effect of board size on pay for luck. Columns (1) and (2) show

that for accounting measures, the direction of the effect is the opposite of what we postulated but
the coefficient is statistically insignificant. Note that the actual size of the coefficient is tiny: even a
30Gibbons and Murphy (1992) present evidence that CEOs with longer tenure have greater pay for performance
generally.

31We have also examined CEO ownership and whether the founder is present. We do not report these for space
reasons but both produce generally significant effects. Founders and CEOs with high insider ownership both show
greater pay for luck.

26

huge increase in board size of 10 board members leads only to a 2% drop in pay for luck. Columns

(3) and (4), however, show that there are significant effects for market measures of performance

and these are of the expected sign. Consider the difference between two boards, one of which
has 10 board members and one of which has 6. The big board firm shows a pay for performance
coefficient of .240 and a pay for luck coefficient of .229. The smaller board continues to show a pay

for performance coefficient of .228. But, it shows a pay for luck coefficient of .177. This represents

a drop of .229-77 30% in the pay for luck coefficient.
The other measure we examine is a measure of insider presence on the board. This variable
is measured as fraction of board members that are firm insiders or grey directors. Columns (5)
and (6) show that on accounting measures, insider presence dramatically increases the pay for luck

coefficient (significant at the 10% level). In a board with ten directors, turning one of the outside
directors from an outsider to an insider increases pay for luck by

20%. The effect on pay

for performance is negative and small. Columns (7) and (8) show that on market performance
measures, insider board presence again increases pay for luck, but while the coefficient continues
to be economically large it is statistically quite insignificant.

We turn to our last governance measure in columns (9) through (12), where we construct an
index that aggregates all the governance measures used so far: number of large shareholders, number

of large shareholders on the board, board size and insider presence on board. To form the index,

we demean each of the four governance variables, divide it by its standard deviation, and then
take the sum of these standardized variables. For board size, we use negative of board size in this

procedure. For fraction of insiders on the board, we use one minus that fraction. This guarantees
that the resulting governance index has larger values whenever the firm is better governed.32
32This particular way of proceeding will tend to count large shareholders on the board twice, once as on the board
and once as general large shareholders. This is a crude way of incorporating our prior belief (supported by the findings
in Table 4) that large shareholders on the board matter more. When we use either measure in the index alone, we flnd
qualitatively similar results. We have also estimated a regression in which we include all four governance measures

27

For accounting measures of performance (columns (9) and (10)), we again find that pay for
luck diminishes with the governance, while pay for performance does not change. The coefficient,

however, is only significant at the 10% level. To gauge the magnitude of these effects, consider

a one standard deviation increase in the governance index, about 2. Such an increase leads to a
10% fall in the pay for luck coefficient. When we use market measures (columns (11)
and (12)), increase in the governance index greatly reduces pay for luck but hardly affects pay for
performance. In this case, the coefficients are significant at the 5% level. Moreover their magnitude

is bigger. A one standard deviation increase in governance decreases pay for luck by 26%.

Finally, we investigate the robustness of our findings. The primary concern one might have

is that we have not adequately controlled for firm size. One might worry that large firms have
quite different pay for performance sensitivities than small firms (Baker and Hall, 1999). If this
also translates into different pay for luck sensitivities, the estimates above might confuse this size
effect for a governance "effect."33 A concrete version of this problem might arise in the risk sharing

hypothesis above. If larger finns are simply more able to bear risk then they may pay less for luck.

In Thble 7, we address this problem by controlling for size interacted with perfonnance. We

re-estimate equation 6 but this time include a term Size * perfit. Our measure of size in these
regressions is average log real assets of the firm over the period. We investigate two governance
measures: large shareholders on the board and the governance index.34 Columns (1) through (4)
are to be compared to columns (5) through (8) of Table 4. We see that the effect of governance on
the filtering of accounting rates of return in fact strengthens when these controls are added (—2.23
versus —1.48). The effects on market performance measures, however, weaken slightly (.059 versus
(and theft interactions) together. These regressions showed all the governance measures entering with the same sign
and only the large shareholder variables being statistically significant.
33We have also attempted other robustness checks. We checked whether pay for luck happened over longer time
horizons by aggregating our data over several years as well as looking at lags. We also allowed fbr interactions between
performance and year in our regressions. These modifications did not alter our qualitative findings.
34We have reestimated all the previous tables with these controls and found similar results.

28

.076). Columns (5) through (8) use the governance index and are to be compared to columns (9)

through (12) in Table 6. This comparison shows that the results weaken very slightly (—.197 versus

—.216) for accounting measures as well as for market measures (—.027 versus —.033). For both

governance measures, however, the results remain economically significant. In two of the cases
(column 4 and to some extent column 6), they remain statistically insignificant. In the other two,
they remain statistically significant.

3.3.4 Summary of Pay for Luck Findings
The pay for luck regressions have helped establish five main facts. The first three facts relate to
the direct finding of a pay for luck relationship. First, CEOs are rewarded for luck as much as they

are rewarded for general performance changes. Second, the pay for luck occurs for various luck
measures, such as oil price changes and exchange rate movements, and not only for mean industry

movements. Third, CEOs are as much rewarded for luck through changes in salary and bonus as
they are through changes in the value of options granted.

The last two facts relate to the effects of governance on the pay for luck relationship. Fourth,

the presence of large shareholders (and to a lesser extent, smaller boards or less insiders on the
board) reduces the extent of pay for luck. An additional large shareholder on the board reduces the
pay for luck by 23 to 33%, depending on the performance measure. Fifth, as CEO tenure increases,

pay for luck increases but only when there is no large shareholder present on the board.

29

4 Charge For Options
We now turn to a second prediction of the skimming view. The idea for this second test centers
around the fact that stock option grants never appear on balance sheets.35 Under the skimming

model, this makes options grants an attractive way to skim. If shareholders primarily focus on
the balance sheet bottom line, stock options might allow the CEO to take money out of the firm

without attracting shareholder attention. In skimming models, therefore, options represent "free
money." Because CEOs are not charged for them, they cannot lose. If the stock does well, they
make money. If it does not, they are no worse off.

In contrast to this prediction, agency models predict that CEOs should be completely charged

for their options. Consider a firm that for an erogenous reason increases the amount of stock
options it gives to its CEO. Further suppose that this increase in options is worth one million
dollars according to Black-Scholes. While these extra options incentivize the CEO, they are also
an increase in his overall utility. In expected value, he is been given one million dollars. Agency
theory predicts, therefore, that other components of pay would be adjusted downwards in order to
leave the CEO indifferent between the new and old compensation packages. Since the CEO is risk
averse, the million dollars in options is worth less to him than one million dollars in expected utility

terms. So other components of pay would go dowu by less, but they would go down nevertheless.
Examining whether CEOs are charged for options could therefore provide another test of skimming

against agency models.
35Accounting rules for stock options issued to employees were decided by the predecessor of the Financial Accounting

Standards Board, the Accounting Principles Board. They date back to 1972. See Murphy (1999) for more details.

30

4.1 Empirical Methodology
To implement this test, consider the following regression:

Other = a + at + ax * Xa + /3 * Optzon + ejt

(7)

where Othert is the level of CEO compensation for firm i in year 1, excluding the value of the new

option grants, a are firm fixed effects, at are time fixed effects, X are firm and CEO specific
characteristics and Option is the level of the new stock options granted in that year.
Directly testing whether CEOs are being optimally charged when they are granted new stock
options would require an exogenous shock to Optionj, the use of stock options in CEO compensation

packages. Under the optimal contracting model, we would then expect the coefficient on Optionj,

th to be negative but larger than —1. Moreover, the higher the CEO's level of risk aversion, the
smaller the absolute value of /3.

In practice, however, such a regression would be mispecified. Changes in options grants are

at least partly driven by a desire to give the CEO more overall compensation (perhaps because

of changes in the executive's performance or outside opportunities). This suggests that when
options rise, other components of pay will also rise. Because we cannot perfectly control for all
the factors that might induce a rise in overall compensation in

the estimated /3 will be biased

upward and could even be positive. We would then tend to erroneously reject the hypothesis
that individual rationality constraint holds in CEO compensation.36 The exogeneity assumption
required to estimate equation (7) is too severe.
Fortunately, we can get around this problem. As with the pay for luck coefficient, we can focus

not on the direct effect of Options on Other€t but on how this effect varies with the level of
"In practice, when we directly regress the level of option grants on the other components of compensation, only
accounting for CEO tenure and CEO age in addition to the firm and year fixed effects, we find a positive coefficient of
.046. Interestingly, when we add various firm performance measures (sales, income to assets ratio, level of shareholder
wealth) and also allow for industry specific shocks (interactions of time dummies with 2-digit SIC industries), the
coefficient on Optionit goes up, not down (.051).
31

governance. We thus propose to estimate instead the following regression:

Othert = a + at + ax *

+ a * Govt + fi * Optionj + 'y * (Optiont * Govit) + it

(8)

where Govt is the governance variable under study (ownership concentration for example) and

Option * Govt is the interaction of the governance variable with the value of the new options
granted. As before, differentiate both sides with respect to Option to get:

OOthert
aoptionit

=fi+7*Gov

showing that the charge for options depends on the level of governance. We propose to test whether

the coefficient 'y is negative indicating that CEOs are more charged for options when governance
increases.

Could the same biases that led to an upward bias of lead to a bias of'y? In short, if the omitted
variables problem affects both well governed and poorly governed firm equally, we have a valid test.

It is only when well governed firms are less affected by the bias that we would spuriously estimate a

coefficient of < 0. While it is typically quite hard to imagine why this particular omitted variable
bias structure should arise (or why it should be similar across governance measures), there is one
scenario where it might occur. Suppose following an increase in reservation utility or performance,

well governed firms tended to pay out a greater fraction of the subsequent pay increase as options.

In other words, suppose better governed firms used more options in their pay packages for the
marginal increase in compensation. This difference would lead to an apparently smaller coefficient
fi for them and lead to a bias downward on 7•37

We can actually test whether this is the case by computing whether in the data stock option

grants are a bigger fraction of total compensation for better governed firms. Thble A3 in the
appendix shows that, except for the presence of any large shareholder, the relative use of stock
3TFor details, an appendix is available from the authors.

32

options grants is not larger among the firms with better governance. In fact, it is 4% smaller for

the firms that have at least one large shareholder on their board than among the firms that do
not.38

4.2 Large Shareholders and the Charge for Options
In Table 8, we use large shareholders as our measure of governance and examine whether the CEOs

that are monitored by large shareholders are more charged for the options they are given. Columns

(1) through (4) use all large shareholders as the measure, while columns (5) through (8) use only

those on the board. In all regressions, the dependent variable is the real value of compensation
excluding the value of option grants. Included as regressors in each regression are year fixed effects,

firm fixed effects, a quadratic in age, a quadratic in experience and performance controls such as

real sales, income to assets ratio and shareholder wealth. Also included are, of course, the real
value of options grants, the corporate governance variable under study and the interaction of the
governance variable with the real value of options grants.

The first row of column (1) tells us that, in the absence of any large shareholders, each extra
dollar of option grants leads to another 5 cents in non-option based compensation. This positive
coefficient emphasizes the omitted variable bias that we face. The second row indicates a statistically significant coefficient on the large shareholders interaction term, suggesting large shareholders

lead CEOs to be more charged for the options for they are given. The economic size, however,
is small. Each additional large shareholders leads the CEO to be charged an extra cent for each
dollar in options he is given.
We verify the robustness of our findings to allowing the coefficients on the governance variable
381n fact, this pattern makes more sense from an agency standpoint. Assuming that governance and pay-forperformance are substitute incentive mechanisms, better governed firms would use less options. It also makes more
sense from a skimming standpoint. Poorly governed CF,Os would skim more, since they are charged less for them
and so would have options be a bigger part of total compensation.

33

and on the options grants variable to change over time. For example, one might be concerned that

the relative use of options has trended up over time and that the governance variable displays a
similar trend. Allowing for year dummies interacted with the options grants variable takes care of
this concern. Allowing the coefficient on large shareholders to change over time (column 2) does
not affect the basic finding. When we allow the coefficient on option grants to be time dependent
(column 3), the effect of large shareholders on the charge for options, while qualitatively unchanged,

drops in both economic and statistical significance. The same pattern holds in column 4 where we
allow both the coefficient on option grants and the coefficient on large shareholders to change over

time.

In columns (5) to (8), we focus on large shareholders that sit on the board and find somewhat
stronger results. The —.05 coefficient in column (6) suggests that one extra shareholder increases
the charge on options by 5 cents on the dollar. To assess the magnitude of these findings, consider
a CEO who gets one million dollars worth of options in each year. If we add a large shareholder on
to the board of his firm, the charge he faced on these options would increase by 50,000 dollars. The
effect becomes slightly smaller (about 3 cents on the dollar or 30,000 dollars in our example) when

we allow for the coefficient on option grants to be time-dependent, but it stays strongly significant
(columns (7) and (8)).

In summary, the results in Thble 8 confirm our previous finding of an important role of large
shareholders in increasing the rationality of CEO compensation. The contrast between large share-

holders sitting and not sitting on the board is stronger here than it appeared in our analysis of the

reward for luck. When it comes to financially charging CEOs for the options they are granted, a
large shareholder that is also a director appears much more effective than a large shareholder that

is not represented on the board.

34

In the reward for luck test, we examined CEO entrenchment by comparing the effect of CEO

tenure on pay for luck in firms with and without large shareholders on their board. We replicate
this exact same exercise in Thble 9 in our test of the charge for options grants. Columns (1) and

(2) examine the effect as a function of whether there is a large shareholder present. As before,
we separate firms into two groups based on whether they have or not a large shareholder on their

board. The patterns in Table 9 strikingly match the patterns in Thble 5. In the absence of large
shareholders on the board, CEOs get charge less and less for their options as their tenure increase.

Each extra year of tenure increases the coefficient on "value of options grants" by .4 and .8 cent,
depending on the specification. On the contrary, when large shareholders are present to limit board

capture, there is no evidence that longer tenure is associated with more uncharged options. In fact,

among the firms with such active boards, we find that the more experienced CEOs are the more
they are charged for new options grants.

To gauge the magnitude of this effect, let's compare two CEOs, one with 9 years of tenure and
one just beginning with the firm (0 years of tenure), Suppose both are given options grants of one

million dollars. The entrenched CEO would be charged 80,000 dollars less according to column

(1) for his options if there is no large shareholder present. If there is a large shareholder present
(column 2), he would be charged 40,000 dollars more. Thus the presence of a large shareholder
costs 120,00 dollars more to the entrenched CEO.

4.2.1 Other Governance Measures and Robustness
As with the pay for luck test, we replicate our results with other governance measures. Columns
(1) to (4) of Table 10 use board size. We find that larger boards charge CEOs less for the options

they grant. Consider again a grant of one million dollars worth of options. Relative to a board
with 6 directors, a board with 10 directors charges its CEO between 36,000 and 72,000 dollars less
35

(columns (1) and (4) ).

In columns (5) to (8), we examine the effect of insider presence on the board. Here we find a
sign on the interaction term that is contrary to our initial expectation and that is in fact significant

in columns (5) and (6). However, unlike what we observe for the other governance measures,
this result is not robust. When we allow the effect of options grants to vary by year, the effect
greatly diminishes. While it remains of the wrong sign, it is not statistically significant and it is
economically very small. Converting a board member to an insider in a 10 person board reduces

the charge for a million dollar option grant by only four thousand dollars. This is an order of
magnitude smaller than the effects we found earlier. Thus the results in columns (5) and (6) seem
to arise primarily from a spurious relationship between fraction insiders and time.

We then ask how a composite index of governance explains variation in the financial charge
for options across firms. As before, we construct this index by taking the unweighted average of
the standardized values of four governance variables: the number of all shareholders, the number

of large shareholders in the board, minus board size and the share of outsiders on the board.39

In all specifications (columns (9) to (12)), we find that better general corporate governance is

associated with a higher charge for options grants. The magnitude is again moderate. A one
standard deviation increase in the governance index (about 2) leads to an extra charge of between
36,000 and 56, 000 dollars for a million dollar grant in options.

Finally, assuming that the governance variables we have isolated in our data are correlated to
firm size, one might wonder whether we are able to explain any of the variation in the charge for
options grants beyond the variation that is related to firm size. We, therefore, reestimate equation

7 but with an additional control for Size *

ptionjt, where size is measured as in 'Ihble 7: average

39The variables are standardized by demeaning and dividing by standard deviations. Note the same caveat as
before holds. Large shareholders on the board count twice in this measure. As before, if we include only large
shareholders on the board, we find similar results.

36

log assets of the firm over the sample period. The addition of a size control does not change the
coefficients of interest at all. The results are shown in Table 11 for 2 of the governance measures:

large shareholders on board and the governance index. Comparing column (1) to column (6) and
column (2) to column (8) in Table 8 shows that the coefficient is roughly the same (—.040 versus
—.046 and —.031 versus —.030). Columns (3) and (4) can be compared to columns (10) and (12)

in Table 10. Again the coefficients are roughly similar and stay highly significant. Note that for
all the specifications in Table 11, we find some evidence that large firms charge less for the options

they grant.

To summarize, the results in this second test closely mirror our findings in the pay for luck
test.4° Firms with large shareholders charge their CEOs more for the options they are granted.
CEO tenure seems to decrease the charge for options if there are no large shareholder on the board,

but perhaps even increase it if there is any. We find qualitatively similar results for board size and
for the governance index. Finally, our results do not seem to be simply driven by firm size.

5 Summary and Conclusion
We began this paper in an attempt to "distinguish" between the agency and the skimming view of

CEO compensation. To this end, we examined whether CEOs are rewarded for luck and whether
they are charged for options. For each of these specific tests, we learned some lessons. In the pay

for luck test, we found a significant amount of pay for luck for a variety of measures. As noted,
this generalizes the findings of the relative perfonnance evaluation literature and suggests that the
lack of RPE is not a specific result due to strategic competitive effects in the product market. We
also found that better governed firms use significantly less pay for luck than worse governed firms.
4°The spurious estimates on fraction insiders is the exception.

37

Adding a large shareholder on the board, for example, decreased the pay for luck by 23 to 33%.
This finding weakens two prominent explanations of pay for luck: "Paying for luck is optimal" and

"Filtering out luck is too hard."
In the charge for options test, we found that better governance increased the charge for options.

A CEO who is given one million dollars in options would be charged between 30 and 50 thousand

dollars more for these options if his firm had a large shareholder present on the board. This
dependence of the charge for options on governance suggests that poorly governed CEOs are not
being charged enough for their options. Though we do not have direct evidence, the fact that options

do not appear on balance sheets may well be the culprit. Small shareholders, not involved in board

discussion and simply tracking the bottom line of their company's balance sheet, may simply not
be aware of new options grants. These findings suggest that a simple policy intervention, forcing
firms to put options on the balance sheets, could result in a curtailing of some skiimning of pay.

More broadly, though, the results in this paper encourage a revision of our views on CEO
pay. In contrast to the view painted in the introduction, the skimming and agency models are
not to be "distinguished" but rather serve as complementary views. Well governed firms conform

to the predictions of the agency theory, while poorly governed firms conform to the predictions
of the skimming theory. In other words, principal agent models work best when there are in fact
individuals around to act as principals.

38

References
Aggarwal, Rajesh and Andrew Samwick, "The Other Side of the Trade-Off: The Impact of Risk
on Executive Compensation," Journal of Political Economy, 1999a.
Aggarwal, Rajesh and Andrew Samwick, "Executive Compensation, Strategic Competition, and
Relative Performance Evaluation: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Finance, 1999b.
Baker, George, Robert Gibbons and Kevin Murphy, "Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal
Incentive Contract," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994.
Baker, George and Brian Hall, "Understanding Top Management Incentives: Firm Size, Risk and
CEO Effort," mimeo, Harvard Business School, Harvard University, 1998.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Executive Compensation and Incentives: The
Impact of Thkeover Legislation," NBER Working Paper no. 6830, 1998.
Blanchard, Olivier, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, "What Do Firms Do with
Cash Windfalls?," Journal of Financial Economics, 1992.
Crystal, Graef In Search of Excess: The Overcompensation of American Executives (W.W. Norton
Co., New York, N.Y.), 1991.
Diamond, Peter, "Managerial Incentives: On the Near Linearity of Optimal Compensation," Journal of Political Economy, 106 (5), 1998.
Garen, John, "Executive Compensation and Principal-Agent Theory," Journal of Political Economy, 1994.

Gibbons, Robert and Kevin Murphy, "Relative Performance evaluation for Chief Executive Officers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1990.
Gibbons, Robert and Kevin Murphy, "Optimal Incentives in the Presence of Career Concerns:
Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 1992.
Haid, Michael, Incentive Compensation and the Market for Corporate Control: Substitutive Forces
to Discipline Management of Publicly Held Organizations in the U.S.: Empirical Evidence
from the Oil Industry 1977 - 1994 (Raupt, Bern), 1997.
Hal!, Brian, "The Design of Multi-Year Stock Option Plans," Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
12(2), Summer 1999a.
Hall, Brian and Jeffrey Liebman, "Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1998.
Holmstrom, Bengt, "Moral Hazard and Observability," Bell Journal of Economics, 1979.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, "Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of Intertemporal
Incentives," Econometrica, 1997.
Hubbard, Glenn and Darius Palia, "Executive Pay and Performance: Evidence from the US Banking
Industry" Journal of Financial Economics, 1994.
Janakiraman, Surya, Richard Lambert and David Larcker, "An Empirical Investigation of the
Relative performance Evaluation Hypothesis," Journal of Accounting Research, 1992.

39

Jensen, Michael and Kevin Murphy, "Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives," Journal
of Political Economy, 1990.
Joskow, Paul, Nancy Rose and Andrea Shepard, "Regulatory Constraints on CEO Compensation,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1993.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, "The Efficiency of Equity in Organizational Decision Processes,"
American Economic Review, 1990.
Murphy, Kevin, "Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration: An Empirical Anaiysis,"
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 1985.
Murphy, Kevin, "Incentives, Learning, and Compensation: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation of Managerial Labor Contracts," Rand Journal of Economics, 1986.

Murphy, Kevin, "Executive Compensation," in 0. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of
Labor Economics, North Holland, 1999.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, "Large Shareholders and Corporate Control," Journal of Political Economy, 1986.
Tufano, Peter, "Who Manages Risk? An Empirical Examination of Risk Management Practices in
the Gold Mining Industry," Journal of Finance, 1996.
Yermack, David, "Do Corporations Award Stock Options Effectively?" Journal of Financial Economics, 1995.
Yermack, David, "Higher Market Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of Directors," Journal
of Financial Economics, 1996.

40

Table 1: Pay for Luck for Oil CEOs
(Luck Measure is log Price of Crude Oil)
Dependent Variable: Lu (Total Compensation)"
Specification:

Acc. Rate
of Return

General
(1)

Luck General Luck
(2)

.82
(.16)

2.15
(1.04)

—

—

Ln(Sh. Wealth)

(3)

(4)

.38

(.03)

.35
(.17)

Age

.05
(.02)

.07
(.03)

.05
(.02)

.05
(.02)

Age2*100

-.04
(.02)

-.05
(.02)

-.04

-.04
(.02)

.01
(.01)

.01
(.01)

(.01)

-.03
(.02)

-.03

—03

(.01)

(.02)

-.03
(.02)

Firm Fixed Effects
Year Quadratic

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Sample Size
Adjusted R2

827
.70

827
—

827

827

Tenure

Tenure2*100

(.02)
.01

.75

.01
(.01)

—

'Notes:
1. Dependent variable is the logarithm of total compensation. Performance measure is accounting rate of return in columns (1) and (2) and the
logarithm of shareholder wealth in columns (3) and (4). All nominal variables are expressed in 1977 dollaza.
2. Summary statistics for the sample of oil firms are available in Appendix Table Al.
3. The luck regression (colunins 2 and 4) instrument for performance with the logarithm of the price of a barrel of crude oil in that year, expressed
in 1977 doltsn.
4. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and a quadratic in year.
5. Standard errors are In parentheses.

41

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Full Yermack CEO Sample a
Mean

S. D.

Age of CEO

57.42

6.84

Tenure of CEO

9.10

8.08

901.69

795.15

6.62

.60

Salary and Bonus
Ln(Saiary and Bonus)

1595.85 3488.32

Total Compensation
Ln(Totai Compensation)

6.98

.81

Number of Large Shareholders (All)

1.12

1.42

.24

.74

13.45

4.54

.42

.19

Number of Large Shareholders on Board
Board Size

Fraction of Insiders on Board
°Notes:
1. Sample period is 1984.1991.
2. Alt nominal variables are expressed in thousands of 1991 dollars.

42

Table 3: Pay for LUCk"
Dep. Var.:
Spec.:

Cash Comp

Ln(Cash)

Ln(Tot Comp)

Ln(Cash)

Ln(Tot Comp)

General Luck General Luck General Luck General Luck General Luck
Panel A: Luck Measure is Exchange Rate Shock

Income

_____

.17
(.02)

.35
(.16)

——

Ln(Shareholder
Wealth)
Sample Size
Adjusted R2

1737
.75

1737

—

(1.28)

2.36
(.28)

4.39
(2.17)

—

—

—

2.13

2.94

(.16)
—

1729
.75

1729

—

1722
.58

1722

—

(.02)

.32
(.13)

.31
(.03)

.57
(.23)

1713

1713

1706

1706

.22

.75

—

.59

Panel B: Luck Measure is Mean Industry Performance
Income

.21

(.02)

I2c:7:

.34
(.10)

——

2.18

(.12)

—

Ln(Shareholder
Wealth)
Sample Size
.4djustedR2

4684
.77

4684
—

4648
.81

4.02
(.53)

2.07
(.21)

4.00
(.86)

———

4648
—

4624
.70

4624
—

.20

.22

(.01)

(.12)

4608

4608
—

.82

.25
(.02)

.29
(.19)

4584

4584

.71

1. Dependent variable is the level of salary and bonus in columns (1) and (2), the logarithm of salary and bonus in columns (3), (4), (7) and

(8) and the logarithm of total compensation in columns (5), (6), (9) sad (10). Performance measure is operating income before extraordinary
items in column. (I) and (3) (In millions), operating income to totsi assets in columns (3) to (6) and the logarithm of shareholder wealth in
columns (7) to (10) All nominal variables are expressed in real dollars.
2. In the luck regressions in Panel A, the performance measure Is Instrumented erith current and lagged appredation and depreciation dummies
and current and lagged excbange rate index growth. First-stage regressions are presented in Appendix Table A2.
3. In the luck regressions In Panel B, the performance measure is instrumented with the total assets-weighted average performance measure in
the firm's 2-digit industry (the firm Itself is excluded from the mean calculation).
4. Each regression includes firm fixed effects, year fixed effects and demographic controls (quadratics in age and tenure).
5. Standard errors are in parentheses.

43

Table 4: Large Shareholders and Pay for Luck
(Luck Measure is Mean Industry Performance)
Dependent Variable: Ln(Total Compensation)"
Governance Measure:
Spec.:
Income
Assets

Governance*
Income
Assets

General Luck General Luck General Luck General Luck
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

2.18
(.238)
-.094
(.094)

4.59
(.912)
-.416
(.204)

—

—

2.14

—

—

(.217)
-.181
(.176)

4.49
(.882)
-1.48
(.396)

.249

—

—

.001

.383
(.219)
-.066

—

—

(.007)

(.036)

(.240)

-.006
(.021)

.084
(.033)

4621
.694

4621

ln(Shareholder Wealth)

(.018)

Governance*
ln(Shareholder Wealth)
Governance

Sample Size
Adj. .112

Large Shareholders on Board

Large Shareholders

-.009
(.011)

.018
(.018)

-.017
(.049)

4610
.695

4610

4570
.706

.411

4570

(7)

(8)

.258

.318
(.199)
-.076
(.053)

(.017)
-.019
(.016)
.100

(.108)
4581
.706

.480
(.356)
4581

"Notes:
1. Dependent vsriable is the logarithm of total compensation. Performance measure is operating income to tots.l assets. All nominal variables
are expressed in real dollars.

2. In all the luck regressions, both the performs.nce measure and the interaction of the performance measure with the governance measure
are instrumented. The instruments are the easel-weighted average performance in the 2-digit Industry and the interactions of the industry
performance with that governance measure.
3. "Large Shareholders" indicates the number of blocks of at least five percent of the firm's common shares, whether the block holder is or is not
a director. "Large Shareholders on Board" indicates the number of blocks of at least five percent of the firm's common shares that are held by
directors of the board.
4. Each regression includes firm fixed effects, year fixed effects, a quadratic in age and a quadratic in tenure.
5. Standard errors are in parentheses.

44

Table 5: Tenure, Large Shareholders and Pay for Luck
(Luck Measure is Mean Industry Performance Mean Industry Performance)
Dependent Variable: Ln(Total Compensation)"

Any Large Shareholder on the Board?
Yes
No
Yes

No
Spec.:

CEO Tenure*

'z:

Gen Luck General Luck General Luck General Luck
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

2.14
(.30)

3.35
(.96)

1.28
(.65)

2.47
(2.60)

.00
(.02)

.13
(.05)

.063
(.045)

-.006
(.131)

—

—

—

Ln (Sh. Wealth)
—

CEO Tenure*
Ln (Sh. Wealth)
CEO Tenure

Sample Size
Adjusted fl2

——

—

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

.24

.27
(.05)

.53

(.02)

.26
(.24)

(.32)

.003

.009

-.005

-.013

(.001)

(.005)

(.003)

(.010)

-.00
(.01)

.010
(.011)

.016
(.016)

-.002
(.01)

-.045
(.04)

.044
(.020)

.084
(.059)

3884 3884

740
.757

740

3841
.715

3841

743
.700

743

.01
(.00)

.7030

"Notes:
I. Dependent variable is the logarithm of total compensation. All nominal variables are expressed in real dollars.
2. in all the luck regressions, both the perfonnance measure and the interaction of the performance measure with the CEO tenure are instrumented.
The instruments are the asset-weighted average performance in the 2-digit industry and the interactions of the industry performance w1th the
CEO tenure.
3. Sample in columns (1), (2), (I) and (6) is the set of firm-year observations for which there is no large shareholder sitting on the board of
directors; sample in columns (3), (4), (7) and (8) is the set of firm-year observations for which there is at least one large shareholder sitting
on the board of directors.
4. Each regression includes firm fixed effects. year fixed effects, a quadratic in age and a quadratic in tenure.

5. Standard errors are in parentheses.

45

Table 6: Corporate Governance and Pay for Luck
(Luck Measure is Mean Industry Performance)
Dependent Variable: Ln(Total Compensation)"

General Luck General Luck General Luck General Luck

Spec.:
Income
Assets

Governanee*

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

261

519

—

—

227

(.558)
-.045
.043

(1.62)

-.093
(.094)

—

—

230
(.453)

—

.216

.099

(.034)

(.210)

.002

.013

(.002)

(.006)

-.013
(.016)
4584
.706

-.080
(.041)
4584

ln(Sh. Wealth)
—

Governance*
Jn(Sh. Wealth)
Governance

.012
(.005)
4624
.695

Sample Size
AdJ. 112

—

.015

(.007)
4624

—

—

—

—

(8)

.241

.241
(.215)
.126
(.190)

(.029)
.027

(.05)

.158
(.129)
4624
.695

-.315
(.271)

4624

-.066
(.407)
4584
.706

-.742
(1.29)
4584

General Luck General Luck
(9)

(10)

2 07
(.210)
.007
057

4 23
(.865)
-.216
134

ln(Sh. Wealth)

—

—

Covernance*
ln(Sh. Wealth)

—

—

Income

Assets

Governance*
Income
Assets

Governance

-.016
(.007)
4610
.695

Sample Size
Adj. 112
1. Dependent nriable is the

(.853)

(1.24)
4.51
(2.69)

-.482

(7)

Governance Index

Governance Measure:
Spec.:

flaction Insiders

Board Size

Governance Measure:

(11)

(12)

.249

(.004)

.252
(.232)
-.033
(.015)

.010
(.027)

(.103)

(016)
-.003

.000

(.011)
4610

4551
.705

.210

4551

logarithm 0f total compensation. All nominal variables are deflated. Each regression includes firm fired effects, year

fixed effects, a quadratic in age and a quadratic in tenure.

2. "Board Sin" indicates the number of members of the board of directors, as listed In the proxy statement near the stan of the fiscal

yeas.

"fl-action insiders" is the fraction of inside and "grey" directors on the board of directors. "Governance Index" is the unweighted average of 4

standardised governance vsriables (number of large shareholders, number of large shareholders on board, minus board size and one minus fraction
insiders).

3. In all the luck regressions, both the performance mesaure and the interaction of the performance measure with the governance measure are
instrumented. The instruments are the asset-weighted average performance in the 2-digit industry and the interactions of the industry performance
with that governance measure.

4. Standard errors are in parenthesn.

46

Table 7: Corporate Governance and Pay for Luck
Robustness Checks
(Luck Measure is Mean Industry Performance)
Dependent Variable: Ln(Total Compensation)°
Governance Measure:

Spec.:
Income
Assets

Governance*
ln(Shareholder Wealth)

Covernance*
ln(Shareholder Wealth)

General Luck General

Luck General Luck

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

.288

369

—

—

123

(1.14)

(14.6)

-.118
(.18)

-2.23
(.52)

—

—

-570
(1.31)

—

—

.223

—

—

-.136

(.086)

(.334)

-.018

-.059

(.016)

(.053)

(7)

(8)

(6.17)

.056

-.197

(.061)

(.126)

—

—

—

General Luck

—

.251

-.194

(.098)

(.345)

-.003

-.027

(.004)

(.012)

-.010
(.021)

.127
(.038)

.094
(.109)

.365
(.357)

-.019
(.007)

-.002
(.010)

.007
(.029)

(.085)

Firm Size*Performance?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sample Size
AdJ. B2

4621
.695

4621
—

4581

4581

4610

4610

4551

4551

Governance

a

Governance Index

Large Shareholders
on Board

.706

—

.695

—

.705

.170

—

Notes:
1. Dependent variable is the logarithm of totel compensation. Performance measure is operating income to total assets. All nominal variables

are expressed in real dollars. Each regression includes finn fixed effects, year fired effects, a quadratic in age m.d a quadratic in tenure.
2. In all the luck regressions, both the performance measure and the interaction of the performance measure with the governance measure
are instrumented. The Instruments are the asset-weighted average performance in the 2-digit industry and the interactions of the industry
performance with that governance measure.
3. "Large Shareholders on Board" Indicates the number of blocks of at least five percent of the finn's common shares that are held by directors
of the board. aQmance Index" Is the unweighted average of 4 standardised governance variables (number of large shareholders, number
of large shareholders on board, minus board sire and one minus fraction insiders). 'Firm Size" Indicates average log assets over the sample
period.
4. Standard errors are in parentheses.

47

Table 8: How Much Are CEOs Charged for Options Grants?
The Role of Large Shareholders
Dependent Variable: Cash Compensationa
Governance Measure:
(1)

Large Shareholders
Mi
(2)
(3)

.055
(.006)

.055
(.007)

—

-.011
(.005)

-.011

Governance

(.005)

-.007
(.006)

Governance

-20.5

—

-25.0

Value of Options Grants

Value of Options Grants*

.046

(.003)
-.007

-.050

-.051

-.029

-.030

(.006)

(.008)

(.008)

(.010)

(.010)

—

11.9

—

-3.84

5085
.627

5085
.674

5085
.674

Sample size

5085

Adj. 112

.627

Yes

(25.8)

(27.4)

No

(.006)

.015

(8)

.046
(.003)

(.006)
1236.9
(196.9)
.043
(.006)
No
Yes

.027
(.006)
1203.1
(209.8)
.045

(billions)
Year F.E.*Governance?
Year F.E.*Vaiue of Options Grants?

—

.015
(.006)
1246.2
(197.0)
.043
(.006)
Yes
Yes

.027
(.006)
1195.3
(209.7)
.045
(.006)
No
No

Sh. Wealth

(5)

(12.3)

(13.1)

Sales

(4)

Large Shareholders
on Board
(6)
(7)

(208.3)
.046
(.006)
No
No

.027
(.006)
1222.4
(208.6)
.045
(.006)
Yes
No

(.006)
1251.2
(196.6)
.045
(.006)
No
Yes

5103
.630

5103
.630

5103
.674

.027
(.006)
1220.2

.015

.016
(.006)
1259.4
(196.8
.045
(.006)
Yes
Yes

5103
.674

0Notes:
I. Dependent variable is the level of salary, bonus and other compensations ascEnding the value of options granted- All nominal varhbles are
expressed in real terms (1991 dollss,).
2. targe Shareholders" indicates the number of block, of at least fIve percent of the firms common shares, whether the block holder is or is not
a director; Lsrge Shareholders on Board" indicates the number of blocks of at least five precent of the firms common shares that are held by
directors of the board.
3. Each regression includee firm fixed effects end year fixed effects. Demographic controls include a quadratic in CEO age and a quadratic in
CEO tenure.
4. Standard errors are in parentheses.

48

Table 9: Tenure, Large Shareholders and Charge for Options
Dependent Variable: Cash Compensation'

Any Large Shareholder on the Board?

Value of Options Grants

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-.025

.019

-.025

.014

(.004)

(.015)

(.004)

(.015)

.008
(.0004)

-.003

-.006

.004
(.0008)

-.006

(.002)

.004
(.0008)

(.002)

—

29.6

-.004
Value of Options Grants* .008
Tenure
(.0004) (.001)

34.3
(8.2)

40.6
(14.7)

—

Performance Controls?
Year F.E.*Tenure?
Year F.E.*Value of Options?

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes

Sample size
Adj. 112

4257

860
.676

4257
.674

Tenure

.674

Yes
No

(.002)

(7.5)

47.7
(14.2)

No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

860
.674

4257
.682

860
.701

4257
.682

850
.699

Yes
Yes

'Notes:
is the level of salary, bonus and other compensations excluding the value of options granted. All nominal variables are
expressed in real terms (1991 dollars).

1. Dependent variable

2. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. Performance controls are sales, income to assets ratio and the value of
shareholder wealth. Demographic controls include a quadratic in CEO age end $ quadratic in CEO tenure.
3. Standard errors are in parentheses.

49

Table 10: How Much Are CEOs Charged for Options Grants?
The Role of Other Governance Variables
Dependent Variable: Cash Compensation0
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-.214

—

(7)

—

.225
(.017)

-.214
(.012)

(.012)

.018
(.0007)

.018
(.0008)

.009
(.001)

.009
(.001)

-.27
(.02)

(.02)

-.04
(.03)

4.04
(5.78)

—

6.24

—

283.7

—

190.6

Performance Controls?
Year F.E.*Governance?
Year F.E.*Value of Options Grants?

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No
No

Yes
No

No

Sample size
Adj. R2

5104
.665

5104
.665

5104
.678

5104
.677

5104
.636

5104
.636

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Value of Options Grants

Value of Options Grants*
Governance
Governance

(.016)

-.008
(.005)

-.008
(.005)

Value of Options Grants*
Governance

-.028
(.002)

-.028
(.002)

-.018
(.003)

Governance

-11.7
(9.9)
Yes

—

-16.16

Sample size

-.27

-.04
(.03)

(150.0)

(157.6)

(5.67)

Value of Options Grants

Mi. 112

.226

Yes

5104
.673

Yes
Yes
Yes

5104
.673

Governance Index

Governance Measure:

Performance Controls?
Year F.E.*Governance?
Year F.E.Value of Options Grants?

(8)

Fraction Insiders

Board Size

Governance Measure:

(6)

Yes
Yes

(9.4)
Yes

-.019
(.003)

No

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

5084
.639

5084
.676

5084
.677

No
No
5084
.637

No

ONotes:
1. Dependent variable is the level of salary, bonus end other compensations excluding the value of options granted. All nominal variables are
expressed in reel terms (1991 dollars).
2. 5Bos.rd Siee' indicates the number of members of the board of directors, as listed in the proxy statement near the start of the fiscal year.
5Faction Lusiders" is the fraction of inside and 'grey" directors on the board of directors. Oovernance Index" is the unweighted average of
4 standardized governance variables (number of large shareholders, number of large shareholder. on board, minus board size and one minus
insiders presence). Performance controls are sales, income to assets ratio end the value of shareholder wealth. Demographic controls include a
que4ratic in CEO age and a quadratic in CEO tenure.
3. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year fixed effects.
4. Standard errors are in parentheses.

50

flble 11: How Much Are CEOs Charged for Options Grants?
Robustness Checks
Dependent Variable: Cash Compensation"
Governance Measure:

Large Shareholders
on Board
(1)
(2)

Value of Options Grants

-.279

—

-.181
(.052)

-.024

-.017

(.008)

-.031
(.011)

(.002)

(.003)

5.59
(27.2)

-4.33
(25.7)

-13.7
(9.9)

-17.1
(9.4)

.039

.022
(.006)

.021

.011

(.006)

(.006)

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

5103

5084
.638

5084

(.051)

Value of Options Grants*
Governance

-.040

Governance

Value of Options Grants*
Size

(.006)

Performance Controls?
Year F.E.*Value of Options Grants?

Yes

Sample size

5103
.633

Adj. R2

Governance
Index
(3)
(4)

No

.6

.680

"Notes:
1. Dependent variable is the level of salary, bonus and other compensations etctuding the value of options granted. All nominal variables are

expressed in real terms (1001 dollars).
2. "Large Shareholders on Board" Indicates the number of blocks of at least five precent of the firm's common shares that are held by directors
of the board. "Governance Index" is the unweighted average of 4 standardised governance variables (number of large shareholders, number
of large shareholders on board, minus board site and one minus fraction Insiders on board). "Site" is time average of log real total assets for
each firm
3. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. Performance controls are sales, income to assets ratio and the value of
shareholder wealth. Demographic controls include a quadratic in CEO age and a quadratic in CEO tenure.
4. Standard errors are in parentheses.

51

Appendix Table Al: Summary Statistics
50 Largest US Oil Companies CEOs
Mean

S.D.

Age of CEO

58.562

7.892

Tenure of CEO

10.181

9.781

608.269

597.194

6.125

.722

Total Compensation
Ln(Totai Compensation)

1. Data set is 50 of the 51 largest (35 oil companies over the period 1977-1994.

2. Total Compensation is deEned ea the sum of salary and bonus (cssh end stock bonus), company contributions to thrift plans, other annual income and the value of the options granted to the CEO during
that year, in thouse.nds of 1977 dollars,

52

Appendix Table A2: Pay for Luck: First-Stage Regressions
(Luck Measure is Exchange Rate Shocks)"
Dep. Var.:

Income

Inc. to
Assets

2% <Appr. <4%
(Current)
2% < Appr. <4%
(Lagged)

Appr. > 4%
(Current)
Appr. > 4%
(Lagged)

2% < Depr. <4%
(Current)

2% <Depr. <4%
(Lagged)

Depr. > 4%
(Current)
Depr. > 4%
(Lagged)

Exch. Rate Index Growth
(Current)
Exch. Rate Index Growth
(Lagged)

Ln(Sh. Wealth)

(1)

(2)

(3)

-56.588
(26.408)
-15.428
(24.271)
-68.903
(32.039)
-12.045
(30.646)
76.642
(24.647)
85.858
(25.942)
45.482
(27.761)
76.345
(29.791)
-19.273
(167.134)
216.140
(175.302)

-.006

-.039
(.047)
-.027
(.048)
-.034
(.058)
.053
(.055)
.153
(.045)
.114
(.047)
.094
(.050)
.046
(.054)
-.077
(.302)
.237
(.316)

(.004)
.004
(.004)

-.013
(.005)
.006
(.005)

-.000
(.004)
.010
(.004)
.007
(.005)
.017
(.005)

-.000
(.030)
.038
(.031)

Sample Size
Adjusted R2

1737
.622

1729

.700

1713
.873

F-stat

3.48
(.000)

2.6
(.004)

2.47
(.006)

(prab > F — stat)
"Notes

1. Dependent variable is the level of income in column (1), the ratio of operating income to tote] seats

in column (2) and the log value of shareholder wealth in column (3). Income end shareholder wealth
are expressed In millions of 1977 dollars. 2% C Apr. C 4% is dummy variable that equals 1 if the
industry-specific exchange rate index appreciated by mote than 2% and less than 4% since the previous
year. All the other appreciation and depreciation dummies are defined in a similar way
2. Each regression includes firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. All regressions also include a quadratic
in CEO age and a quadratic in CEO tenure.
3. The 3 regressions are the first-stage regressions associated with columns (2), (4), end (8) in Panel A of
TabLe 3.

4. Standard errors are in parentheses.

53

Appendix Table A3: Mean Ratios of Options Grants to Total
Compensation for High and Low Governance
Governance Category

Mean

S. D.

No Large Shareholders

.16

.20

At Least One Large Shareholder

.18

.22

No Large Shareholders on Board

.18

.22

At Least One Large Shareholder on Board

.14

.22

Board Size Above Median

.18

.21

Board Size Below Mediam

.17

.22

flaction Insiders Above Median

.17

.22

Fiaction Insiders Below Median

.18

.21

Governance Index Above Median

.17

.22

Governance Index Below Median

.17

.21

°Notes
'Large Shareholders" indicates the number of blocks of at least five percent of the firm's common shares, whether the block holder is or is not
a director. "Large Shareholders on Hoard" indicates the number of blocks or at least five precent of the firms common shares that are held
by directors of the board. "FMction Insiders" is the fraction of inside sad "grey" directors on the board of directors. 'Governance Index' is

the unweighted average of 4 standardized governance variables (number of large shareholders, number of large shareholders on board, minus
board size and one minus insider presence on board).

54

1977 Dollars per Barrel
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

21.0349 -

0
C

3I..

0
0
a,
a
a.
a,

5.47517 I

II

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94
I

year

FIGURE 1: Real Price of a Barrel of Crude Oil

51 Largest
Oil Companies
I
I

8.08356 -

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

C

I.
3
a'

a
C
C

3

0
C)
C)

IC

0
a'

2.75434 I

I

I

-I

I

I

I

I

I

i

i

i

i

I

77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94
p

I

year

FIGUREj: Mean Rate of Accounting Return
sTaTa

• Change in Total Comp.

• Change In Oil Price

.418984

4-

C
C)

2
C)

0

-.666937 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994

FIGURE: Oil Industry CEO Pay and Crude Oil Price

sTaTa'

4

