NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO LIVING WAGE ORDINANCES REDUCE URBAN POVERTY?
David Neumark
Scott Adams
Working Paper 7606
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7606
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

This research was funded by a grant from the Michigan Applied Public Policy Research Funds. We thank
Jared Bernstein, Robert Pollin, David Reynolds, and Peter Schmidt for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by David Neumark and Scott Adams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Do Living Wage Ordinances Reduce Urban Poverty?
David Neumark and Scott Adams
NBER Working Paper No. 7606
March 2000
JEL No. J23, R0, I32
ABSTRACT
Many cities in the United States have recently passed living wage ordinances. These
ordinances typically mandate that businesses under contract with the city or, in some cases, receiving
assistance from the city, must pay their workers a wage sufficient to support a family financially.
To date, there has been no empirical analysis of the actual effects of living wages on the expected
beneficiaries–low-wage workers and their families. In this paper, we estimate the effects of city
living wage ordinances on the wages and hours of workers in cities that have adopted such
legislation. We also look at the effects of the ordinances on employment and poverty rates in these
cities.
Our findings indicate that living wage ordinances boost wages of low-wage workers. The
estimated elasticities are small, however, which seems consistent with the fact that living wages have
limited coverage, and may also have limited compliance and enforcement. In addition to the wage
effects, we find weak negative hours effects of living wage ordinances on low-wage workers, and
strong negative employment effects. Finally, our estimates of the effects of living wages on poverty
rates indicate that living wage ordinances may help to achieve modest reductions in urban poverty.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu

Scott Adams
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824

I. Introduction
Since December 1994, many cities in the United States have passed living wage ordinances. These
ordinances typically mandate that businesses under contract with the city or, in some cases, receiving
assistance from the city, must pay their workers a wage sufficient to support a family financially. Baltimore
was the first city to pass such legislation, and at least 26 cities and a number of other counties and school
districts have followed suit. Living wages are increasing in popularity,"...at the rate of a new ordinance a
month," according to a New York Times article published on November 19, 1999. Given this, an empirical
investigation of the effects of living wages on low-income workers is in order, to evaluate the claims of
beneficial effects made by advocates of these ordinances.
The minimum wage requirements that are set by living wage ordinances are typically linked to
definitions of family poverty. Many ordinances explicitly peg a wage to the level needed for a family to
reach the federal poverty line (e.g., Milwaukee, San Jose, and St. Paul). Thus, when the federal government
defines new poverty lines each year, the living wages in these cities increase. Other localities set an initial
wage that is increased annually to take into account increases in the cost of living (e.g., Baltimore, Los
Angeles, and Portland). Although these latter ordinances may not explicitly state the basis for setting the
initial wage, poverty is undoubtedly an underlying factor. The one thing that all of the living wage
ordinances have in common, however, is a minimum wage requirement that is much higher than the
traditional minimum wages set by state and federal legislation.
Another feature of living wage ordinances is that they are not flexible regarding family size, even
though poverty levels vary dramatically depending on the number of children and adults in a household. As
an example, consider a city that sets its wage floor to the federal poverty threshold for a family of four with
two children, which was $16,530 in 1998. This implies an hourly wage of $8.27 for a typical worker that
logs 2,000 hours in a year.1 The poverty level for a single adult, however, is only $8,480. The ordinances do

1

The wage floor in this example is about average compared to the actual ordinances, which range
from a low of $6.22 an hour to a high of $10.00 an hour. See Table 1 (discussed below) for detailed
information on ordinances that have been adopted thus far.
1

not allow companies to pay single adults a lower wage. Similarly, the ordinances do not take account of the
income of other family members. Thus, for example, if two adults are working for a covered contractor or
grantee, both would receive the minimum wage, placing their incomes at well over two times the poverty
level.
Coverage by living wage ordinances is far from universal. Some cities only impose wage floors on
companies under contract with the city (e.g., Milwaukee and Boston). Others also impose the wage on
companies receiving business assistance from the city (e.g., Detroit and Oakland). Still, other cities also
impose the requirement on themselves and pay city employees a living wage (e.g., San Jose). This lack of
universal coverage limits the applicability of what is known about the effects of traditional minimum
wages–which have near-universal coverage–to the effects of living wage laws. Thus, a separate study of
living wages is necessary. To date, there has been no analysis of the actual effects of living wages on the
expected beneficiaries, low-wage workers and their families. In this paper, we estimate the effects of city
living wage ordinances on the wages and hours of workers in cities that have adopted legislation. We also
look at the effects of the ordinances on employment rates and poverty rates in these cities. Given the fact that
an increasing number of cities have passed living wage laws recently, and, according to the Employment
Policies Institute,2 campaigns for such legislation are under way in at least seventy other cities, it is critical to
analyze the effects of these laws on low-wage workers and poor families. Only then can policy-makers,
employer organizations, labor unions, and voters make informed judgments regarding the merits of this
policy innovation.
II. Theoretical Predictions
Although city living wage ordinances have received little attention from academic researchers, the
effects of standard federal or state minimum wages have been studied extensively, both theoretically and
empirically. However, there are important reasons why the effects of living wage ordinances may be quite
different. As a result, original research on living wage ordinances is needed to draw reliable conclusions.
2

The Employment Policies Institute maintains a comprehensive listing of current and planned living
wage initiatives on their web page (www.epionline.org).
2

Nonetheless, the existing work on standard minimum wages provides a useful “road map” for analyzing the
consequences of living wage ordinances.
Living wage ordinances are sure to be binding for some employers with grants or contracts with their
city. However, quantitative measurement of the fraction of the workforce of employers with either contracts
or grants that is likely to be bound by the minimum wage requirement, and the extent to which their current
wages fall short of the required wage, is likely to prove a difficult task.3 Nonetheless, proceeding from the
point of view that, qualitatively, some employers will face higher costs for some workers, standard economic
analysis makes some predictions regarding the effects of these ordinances.
Whether in the for-profit or non-profit sector, employers are assumed to minimize the costs of
production, which depends in perhaps complex ways on the relative prices of the different inputs used to
produce the particular good or service in question, as well as the technology for producing this good or
service. Even if we know relatively little about the specific constraints and choices facing an employer,
theory predicts that a government-mandated increase in the price of one of its inputs–in this case the price of
low-skilled labor, which we conceptualize as labor that would be paid a wage below the minimum living
wage requirement in the absence of the living wage ordinance–leads to two sets of effects. The first set of
effects occurs as employers substitute away from the now-more-expensive input, and toward other inputs.
For example, depending on the good or service under consideration, employers may employ fewer lowskilled workers (or, more precisely, use fewer low-skilled hours), and more high-skilled labor. Alternatively,
they may mechanize some tasks previously performed by low-skilled labor, substituting toward capital. Even
if we cannot predict the inputs towards which employers will substitute, we can nonetheless say that there
will be substitution effects away from low-skilled labor.
The second set of effects occurs because this substitution away from low-skilled labor and towards
other inputs raises costs of production and results in scale effects. This follows from the assumption that
employers were minimizing costs in the first place, which implies that the input choices (conditional on
3

For an ambitious effort in the context of a proposed living wage ordinance in San Francisco, see
Alunan, et al. (1999).
3

output) after the imposition of the minimum wage requirement must be higher cost, or they would have been
chosen initially. When costs rise, though, the price charged for the good or service will rise. In a private
market, this will reduce demand for the product and, hence, use of all its variable inputs. These scale effects
differ from substitution effects in that they entail an overall scaling back of the employer’s outputs and
inputs, whereas substitution effects concern changing the mix of inputs. However, both effects reduce
employment of low-skilled labor.4
However, this is one of many instances where we have to consider some unique features of living
wage ordinances; in particular, the city is a purchaser of goods and services from contractors (and possibly
also grantees). Thus, it is not necessary that its demand curve for particular services slopes downward, or at
least not appreciably over some range, either because the city finds it possible to raise taxes to cover higher
costs, or because some services have to be purchased in quantities that may be largely insensitive to price
(such as snow plowing). Of course, this is unlikely to hold in practice, because a city government has some
limits on its ability to raise taxes. In addition, living wage ordinances do not apply only to the labor done in
fulfillment of city contracts. Rather, city contractors or grantees are likely to have to pay higher wages to
workers who are producing goods and services sold on the private market as well, where the law of demand
surely applies. The bottom line is that despite the fact that we are considering to a large extent purchases of
services by the city, scale effects are still likely to exist, although perhaps tempered compared to the private
market. Thus, the effects on employers are likely to entail lower output, higher output price, reduced
employment of low-skilled labor, and ambiguous changes in the use of other inputs, although increased use
of these inputs seems relatively more likely, to the extent that scale effects are moderated.
The responses considered to this point, however, are “first-round” effects. Unlike an increase in the
national minimum wage, which covers nearly all employers and leaves them essentially no choice but to pay
the higher wage, employers affected by living wage ordinances may in some cases find it more profitable to
terminate contracts, grants, abatements, etc., with the city. This is more likely to occur, of course, when the
4

In contrast, substitution and scale effects may have opposite effects on the use of other inputs such
as high-skilled labor.
4

costs imposed by the minimum wage requirement would be greater. In particular, firms are more likely to
take this step the greater their reliance on low-skilled labor, ceteris paribus.
These “second-round” responses have a couple of negative implications. First, those firms most
likely to “select out” of city business are those employing the highest shares of low-skilled labor–precisely
the workers whom these ordinances are intended to help in the first place. Second, as some firms terminate
contracting with the city, fewer firms are left to bid on city contracts, which may–if the number of remaining
firms becomes sufficiently small–lead to less competitive bidding and therefore higher prices for city
services. Thus, although working out the precise effects of these second-round responses is complex, it
appears most likely that they reinforce the first-round effects by raising prices of city-purchased services even
more, and reducing employment of low-skilled workers among covered employers.5
We have already explained why economic theory predicts that employment of low-skilled labor by
employers covered by living wage ordinances falls as wages are forced up. This implies that there are
winners and losers among the set of low-skilled workers employed by covered employers. Those who remain
employed earn a higher wage; it was this higher wage that spurred the employment reductions. However,
other low-skilled workers are no longer employed at these firms, or work fewer hours. What is likely to
happen to these workers, and how are their economic fortunes likely to change?
It is once again instructive to draw insights from the standard minimum wage literature. In recent
years in the U.S., the fraction of employers covered by minimum wage laws is well over 90%, so that
coverage is widely regarded as near-universal. In this case, workers disemployed as a result of a minimum
wage increase do not find alternative employment, and instead become non-employed.6 However, an earlier
minimum wage literature considered the situation in a period when minimum wage coverage was less
universal, so that there was a sizable uncovered sector in which workers disemployed by minimum wages
5

On the other hand, the decision of some employers to select out of city contracts and grants may
increase private-sector competition and lower prices there.
6
Whether or not they are unemployed depends on whether they continue to seek work, as the
definition of unemployment includes both being available for work and looking for work. Because the
decision to look for work may depend on a variety of factors, analyses of minimum wages–and the analysis
of the living wage ordinances in this paper–focus on employment vs. non-employment.
5

might seek alternative employment (e.g., Mincer, 1976). In this situation, some of the labor disemployed in
the covered sector is likely to shift into the uncovered sector; this is an outward shift in the supply of labor to
the uncovered sector. By definition, in that sector wages are free to adjust in response to the greater number
of workers seeking employment, so the result is twofold. First, wages in the uncovered sector fall for all
low-skilled workers in that sector.7 Second, this results in lower costs of production, leading to lower output
prices and higher employment and output. However, employment will not expand enough in the uncovered
sector to offset fully the employment decline in the covered sector.8
Are there any differences when we consider living wage ordinances? As we see it, there are two.
First, as a purely quantitative matter, we suspect that even under broad definitions of coverage by living wage
ordinances, a relatively small fraction of workers is likely to be covered. As a consequence, although
possible, we regard it as relatively unlikely that there would be substantial lowering of wages of low-skilled
workers in the uncovered private sector, although this may occur in a subset of industries or occupations in
which workers disemployed from the covered sector happen to be highly concentrated. Second, one
substantive difference from the traditional model is that the sector of the economy that is not covered by the
living wage ordinance nonetheless is covered by the federal (and state) minimum wage. This introduces a
wage floor in the sector that is not covered by the living wage ordinance, which may restrict the ability of
wages to fall in this sector. If this wage floor becomes binding, it will restrict the extent to which
employment can expand in the uncovered sector, thus exacerbating the overall disemployment effects of the
ordinance, while moderating any wage declines.
We have seen to this point that among the low-skilled workers who are the intended beneficiaries of
living wage ordinances, there are likely to be winners and losers. The biggest winners are those whose wages
are forced up by the minimum wage requirement, and who retain their jobs (and hours) with covered

7

An exception is when workers leave the uncovered sector to “queue” for covered-sector jobs in
sufficient numbers (Mincer, 1976). However, this requires–among other conditions–that work in the
uncovered sector deters search in the covered sector.
8
Formally, this is because when the supply of labor shifts out in the uncovered sector, the decline in
wages leads some workers to choose non-employment (or reduced hours).
6

employers. The biggest losers are those who lose their jobs with covered employers, and end up working at
lower wage jobs in the uncovered sector, or perhaps end up non-employed. There are some additional
possible winners and losers. First, as low-skilled workers disemployed from the covered sector shift to the
uncovered sector, wages there may be bid down somewhat, although we suggested that the magnitudes
involved are likely to be small. Second, high-skilled workers could gain or lose, depending on whether lowand high-skilled labor are “substitutes” or “complements” in production. That is, when low-skilled labor
shifts to the uncovered sector, this could either decrease (the substitutes case) or increase (the complements
case) the productivity of high-skilled labor in that sector.9
To summarize, standard economic analysis predicts that the effects of living wage ordinances on
workers varies substantially across subgroups of workers. In particular, it yields the following set of
predictions. First, wages should rise for some low-skilled workers employed by covered employers. Second,
there should be some disemployment or negative hours effects for other low-skilled workers originally
employed by covered employers. Third, there may be lower wages for low-skilled workers generally.
Finally, predictions for the effects on wages of high-skilled workers are ambiguous.
III. Empirical Evidence from the Minimum Wage Literature
Before turning to new empirical evidence on the effects of such ordinances, we briefly review the
available evidence on the effects of standard minimum wages. This review is instructive as to the potential
for such ordinances to achieve their policy goal of reducing urban poverty.
The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages
Labor economists have written innumerable papers testing the prediction that minimum wages reduce
employment of low-skilled workers. Earlier studies used time-series data to study the effects of changes in
the national minimum wage.10 The consensus view from these “first generation” studies was that the
9

Combined with this effect, we noted in discussing economic consequences for employers that the
net impact of scale and substitution effects for these workers in the covered sector was ambiguous, although
an increase in employment and hence wages is probably more likely. Since there is no binding wage floor for
high-skilled workers in either sector, we would expect labor to flow across these two sectors so as to equalize
wages.
10
Brown, et al. (1983) is a good example of such a study.
7

elasticity of employment of low-skilled (young) workers with respect to minimum wages was most likely
between –0.1 and –0.2 (Brown, et al., 1982).
More recent studies have used panel data covering multiple states over a period of years to study the
effects of changes in minimum wages at the state level (e.g., Neumark and Wascher, 1992; Card and Krueger,
1994). Evidence from these “second generation” studies has spurred considerable controversy regarding
whether or not minimum wages actually reduce employment of low-skilled workers, with some labor
economists arguing that the new evidence shows that the predictions of the standard model are wrong, and
that minimum wages do not reduce and may even increase employment (Card and Krueger, 1995). On the
other hand, much recent evidence using similar sorts of data confirms the prediction that minimum wages
reduce employment of low-skilled workers, and concludes, paralleling the earlier time-series evidence, that
the elasticity of employment of low-skilled workers with respect to the minimum wage is in the –0.1 to –0.2
range, with estimates for teenagers–who have often been the focus of minimum wage research–closer to –0.1
(Neumark and Wascher, 1996 and forthcoming). As further evidence, a leading economics journal recently
published a survey of economists’ views of the best estimates of various economic parameters. Results of
this survey, which was conducted in 1996–after most of the recent research on minimum wages was wellknown to economists–indicated that the median “best estimate” of the minimum wage elasticity for teenagers
was –0.1, while the mean estimate was –0.21 (Fuchs, et al., 1998). Thus, although there may be some
outlying perspectives, economists’ views of the effects of the minimum wage are centered in the range of the
earlier and many of the more-recent studies.
Minimum Wages and Low-Wage Workers
When we turn from such estimates to asking whether minimum wages raise incomes of low-wage
workers, it is often assumed that an elasticity as small as –0.1 or –0.2 implies that raising minimum wages
entails minor disemployment effects and hence is sound public policy.
However, the argument that “small” minimum wage effects imply that minimum wages raise incomes
of low-wage workers is flawed. One problem with using a –0.1 or –0.2 elasticity to make this argument is

8

that such estimates are taken from studies of the employment effects of minimum wages for entire age groups
and are not equivalent to–as some have asserted–the elasticity of demand for minimum wage workers. An
estimate of the effect of a minimum wage increase on total employment in any particular age group is really
the effect on the low-wage individuals in the group for whom the new minimum wage raises wages, averaged
over all workers in this age category; as high-wage workers are for the most part unaffected by changes in the
minimum wage, the aggregate elasticity will likely understate the employment effect on the affected
workers.11
Another consideration is that there may be wage increases for workers a bit above the minimum
wage, whether stemming from relative demand shifts to slightly higher-wage workers, or relative wage
constraints faced by employers (Gramlich, 1976; Grossman, 1983). Such effects are potentially quite
important in assessing the consequences of minimum wages for low-wage workers (and low-income
families), since in the U.S., because of the relatively low level of the minimum wage historically, many
workers earning above the minimum would nonetheless be considered low-wage workers, and a sizable
proportion of them are in poor and near-poor families. On the other hand, the focus on employment effects
ignores hours effects, which could be more widespread than disemployment effects but equally damaging to
earnings. Finally, the conventional elasticity uses the legislated minimum wage increase as the denominator,
whereas the wage increases received by workers below the new minimum are typically smaller, since many
of these workers earn wages above the old minimum initially. Reducing the denominator in the elasticity
also increases its absolute magnitude.
Recent research has considered the effects of minimum wages on employment, hours, wages, and
ultimately labor income of workers at different points in the wage distribution (Neumark, et al., 1999). This
research indicates that workers initially earning near the minimum wage are adversely affected by minimum
wage increases, while, not surprisingly, higher-wage workers are little affected. Although wages of lowwage workers increase, their hours and employment decline, and the combined effect of these changes is a

11

See Neumark and Wascher (1997) for a thorough discussion of this point.
9

decline in earned income.
Minimum Wages and Low-Income Families
While there are few poor or low-income families with high-wage workers, there are many highincome families with low-wage workers (such as teenagers). For example, while one-third of workers likely
to be affected by the 1990 increase in the federal minimum wage were in poor or near-poor families (defined
as those with family incomes up to 1.5 times the poverty line based on their family’s size), roughly another
one-third were in families with incomes exceeding three times the poverty line (Burkhauser, et al., 1996). If
the job loss from a minimum wage increase is concentrated among teenagers in relatively affluent families,
while, conversely, the wage gains from the legislated increase are concentrated among single-parent heads of
households, then it is considerably more likely that a minimum wage increase would help poor or low-income
families. On the other hand, the opposite scenario is also possible, with the job loss concentrated among lowwage workers in low-income families, in which case poor families would be especially hurt by minimum
wage increases.12
Theoretical economic analysis offers no sharp predictions as to whether minimum wages will benefit
poor or low-income families; this is purely an empirical question. Recent research indicates that past
experience with minimum wage increases in the U.S. is at odds with the prediction that raising the minimum
will help lift families out of poverty. Rather, raising the minimum wage does not reduce the proportion of
families living in poverty, and if anything instead increases it, thus raising the poverty rate (Neumark, et al.,
1998).
In summary, the evidence from standard minimum wages indicates that minimum wage hikes fail to
accomplish their principal policy goal of raising incomes of poor or low-income families. This raises a
caution flag for those who claim that living wage ordinances are likely to help reduce urban poverty.

12

This ambiguity in whether minimum wages particularly help poor or low-income families is also
apparent in many living wage ordinances. As noted above, the minimum wage requirements set by these
laws frequently impose a wage floor pegged to the federal poverty level for a family with a given number of
children, without regard to the income earned by other family members. Thus, there will no doubt be at least
some beneficiaries in families whose incomes are well above the poverty line.
10

However, as pointed out numerous times already, these results for minimum wages do not necessarily
generalize to living wage ordinances, which differ from standard minimum wage increases in potentially
important ways. In the next section, therefore, we turn to empirical evidence on the effects of living wage
ordinances.
IV. Empirical Evidence on the Effects of Living Wage Ordinances
Existing Research
Because of the recentness with which living wage laws have spread in popularity, little empirical
research has been conducted on their effects. Most importantly, no one has attempted an empirical analysis
of the actual effects of living wage laws on low-wage workers and their families.
The best-known work on living wages is the book by Pollin and Luce (1998, hereafter PL). Although
the primary purpose of their book was to advocate living wages as a viable poverty-fighting tool, it is a useful
starting point for research on the subject. First, PL argue that living wage ordinances will deliver a higher
standard of living for low-wage families. Second, they posit that such legislation will reduce government
subsidy payments to working families. To support these two claims, they perform a calculation based on a
typical Los Angeles family of four with a single wage earner that experiences a wage gain equal to the
change from the California minimum wage to the Los Angeles living wage. In this calculation, the family’s
disposable income increases by $2,500 per year, and as a result of the higher income, the value of the food
stamps and Medicaid that they receive falls, and their earned income tax credit becomes smaller.13
Additionally, they argue that these benefits will occur with relatively small added labor costs to firms.14
13

In addition to these benefits for families, PL also use interviews with three Los Angeles employers
that paid employees relatively high wages before the living wage ordinance was passed, to show that paying a
high wage to workers may be beneficial to firms. Specifically, the interviews suggest that worker turnover
and absenteeism is lower because the firms’ workers are happier receiving higher wages than their
counterparts at other firms. This evidence is purely anecdotal, however. These firms are arguably making a
profit-maximizing decision to pay their workers higher wages, and thus their experience does not necessarily
predict what would happen to other firms if external legislation mandated raising wages.
14
To measure the added labor costs per firm, PL use CPS Outgoing Rotation Group files to determine
the percentage of workers in an industry that would be affected by a living wage (i.e., those earning below
the Los Angeles living wage). They then use employer-level data to estimate the average number of
employees per firm in the same industries. Merging this information allows for the calculation of a per firm
average number of workers that would be affected by a living wage increase, and, thus, the increase in labor
11

There are several problems with this work. Foremost among these is that the calculations are
hypothetical, and done in the absence of any evidence based on data before and after the passage of living
wage ordinances. Most importantly, PL do not attempt to estimate whether there are disemployment effects
or hours reductions from living wages; if either results from a living wage increase, then some families may
suffer potentially sizable income declines.15 In addition, their calculations are based on a typical Los Angeles
family, but they admit that only 42% of those earning at or below the Los Angeles living wage are the single
wage earner in a family. Moreover, the average family size for these workers is 2.1, indicating that on
average people are not supporting a family of four on living wages. Thus, their estimates of disposable
income gains cannot be read as expected effects of living wages on families of four with a single worker
earning a low wage. These same facts imply that their estimate of the reduction in benefits that would be
received from the government for workers affected by the living wage is wrong, as these benefits are
conditional on the number of dependents and income of other workers in the family. In short, PL’s work
cannot be viewed as reliable empirical evidence on the effects of living wages on low-income families.16
Despite the fact that PL’s work cannot serve as a basis for evaluating the impact of living wages, its
calculations have been used to evaluate ordinances in New Orleans, Miami-Dade County, and Detroit
(Reynolds, 1999). Not surprisingly, given the assumptions, these studies reach similar conclusions. For
example, for Detroit Reynolds argues that the costs to employers operating under a city contract would
increase by only 5% to 9% of the cost of the contract. For those receiving financial assistance as part of the
Empowerment Zones program or the Industrial Facilities Tax Exemption, the added costs would be under 1%
of the firm’s annual budget. While the costs are small, Reynolds asserts that there will be a financial benefit

costs per firm.
15
PL cite only Card and Krueger’s work specifically in concluding that living wages have no
employment effects, and they also state, “Numerous other studies, examining the detailed changes in specific
labor markets throughout the country due to an increase in the minimum wage, have produced results similar
to those in Card and Krueger’s analysis of New Jersey and Pennsylvania” (p. 41). Given that much recent
evidence contradicts this, however, the possibility that workers will lose their jobs or face hours reductions as
a result of living wage ordinances cannot be dismissed.
16
In partial acknowledgment of this, PL call for further research on living wages repeatedly in their
book.
12

accrued by about 2,300 Detroit workers who will each see annual income gains for their families of between
$1,300 and $4,400 annually. Reynolds claims that the benefits outweigh the costs, although the basis for this
claim is unclear.
There have also been attempts to predict the loss of jobs that will result from living wages. For
instance, two studies use existing estimates from the minimum wage literature and apply them to living
wages. Tolley, et al. (1999) report that over 1,300 jobs will be lost in Chicago from the city's living wage
ordinance.17 Recall the point made earlier, though, that empirical estimates from minimum wage studies may
not carry over to living wages. The Employment Policies Institute (1999) estimates that if all of California
adopted a living wage, there would be over 600,000 lost jobs and $8.3 billion in lost income. These
calculations assume that every firm in California would be subject to a living wage law despite the fact that
no such state-level laws exist (or are even in the planning stages, to the best of our knowledge). Also, no
current city and county ordinances cover all workers. Finally, their calculation of income lost due to a living
wage assumes that workers who are laid off will not find jobs elsewhere; we suggested earlier that
employment in the uncovered sector is a likely outcome of realistic living wage laws for at least some of
these workers.
In addition to the specific shortcomings of each of the studies mentioned thus far, the unifying
problem is that they all fail to attempt to study what has actually happened in localities where living wages
have been adopted. Thus, they are not particularly useful in assessing the impact of living wages on lowincome families.
Only two studies look at living wage effects after adoption of legislation, focusing on the contracting
side. Both focus on the experiences of Baltimore, the first city to adopt a living wage. Weisbrot and SforzaRoderick (1996), who review costs of and bidding for city contracts via an analysis of 23 matched pairs of
pre-living wage and post-living wage contracts in Baltimore, conclude that the real cost of city contracts
17

They also estimate that the cost to the city would be near $20 million per year, including
enforcement costs of $4.2 million. The latter figure comes from the Office of Management and the Budget,
but actual figures reported by Los Angeles and Baltimore suggest enforcement costs well under $1 million
(Reynolds, 1999).
13

actually declined as a result of living wage ordinances, thus apparently debunking a central argument of
living wage opponents.18 Also, there was a small decline in bids per contract, but this was not statistically
significant. The estimated costs of monitoring and enforcement were small as well.19
Niedt, et al. (1999) conducted a second study of the effects of the Baltimore living wage ordinance
and arrive at similar conclusions to those of Weisbrot and Sforza-Roderick (1996) in regard to cost increases
for cities and the number of bids per contract. They also suggest that there has been a financial gain for a
small amount of workers, but they do not quantify what this gain was or apply any estimation technique to
arrive at this conclusion. Based on interviews with workers, they argue that there has been no reduction in
employment. Once again, however, no attempt is made to estimate a direct effect of the living wage on lowwage workers or low-income families.20
This review suggests a need for considerably more analysis of the effects of living wage ordinances
on workers and families, studying the actual experiences of cities where living wages have been enacted.
Proponents of the living wage make strong claims that poverty will be reduced, and opponents make strong
claims that many low-wage workers will lose their jobs as a result of living wages, making poverty increases
more likely. Empirical evidence is required to resolve these questions.
Our Approach
Our ultimate goal in studying the effects of living wage ordinances is to determine whether or not
there is evidence that these ordinances help poor or low-income families. However, we are also interested in
examining other effects of these ordinances, to assist in understanding how they affect low-wage workers as
well as their families.
18

Although they provide no evidence of the impact on the wages of workers or the incomes of
families, they do state that employment levels did not change as a result of the living wage ordinance. They
base the claim solely on interviews with 31 firms conducted shortly after the passage of the legislation.
19
A critique of this study by the Employment Policies Institute (1998) questions these results.
Among the many problems cited, it is claimed that one of the 23 contracts matched by Weisbrot and SforzaRoderick was just an extension of a pre-existing contract and not subject to the living wage law.
Additionally, many contracts considered as post-living wage contracts actually started before the law went
into effect. Finally, bid information was overstated. The study claims that correcting all of these errors
reverses the findings of the study.
20
Moreover, none of the existing studies of living wage ordinances appear in peer-reviewed journals.
14

To obtain evidence on these issues, data will be used from a set of cities, some of which passed
living wage ordinances in the 1990s, and some of which did not. To infer the wage, hours, employment, and
income effects of living wage ordinances, changes in these outcomes for workers and families in cities
passing these ordinances will be compared with changes in similar periods for workers and families in cities
not passing such ordinances. The latter serve as a control group that is essential to draw any reliable causal
conclusions. Otherwise, there is a greater likelihood that passage of living wage laws in various cities is
spuriously correlated with other changes (such as overall economic activity) that may influence these
outcomes. When a control group of workers in cities that did not pass such laws is used in the analysis, only
the relative change associated with living wage laws is causally attributed to such laws. Aside from the
identification of “treatment” and “control” groups of workers, because living wage ordinances are not
randomly assigned the statistical analysis will also control for some other sources of city-specific economic
changes.

Living Wage Laws
To begin, we used multiple sources including personal communications with municipalities to
assemble information on living wage ordinances. Although few laws were passed prior to 1996, most came
into effect in 1996 or after. For this reason, and because cities cannot be identified in our central data set for
a period in 1995, we restrict much of the analysis to 1996 and after.21 Table 1 lists information on living
wage laws in all cities, including the wage floors and their effective dates, information on who is covered by
these laws, and other details. Not all of these are used in our empirical analysis, as some of the smaller
municipalities cannot be identified in our data. These include: Cambridge; Duluth; Hayward; Jersey City;
Madison; New Haven; Pasadena; Somerville; West Hollywood; and Ypsilanti. We assume that the
populations of these municipalities are sufficiently small so as not to contaminate the control group

21

Specifically, for part of 1995 SMSA codes are unavailable for the outgoing rotation groups due to
phasing in of a new CPS sample based on the 1990 Census.
15

appreciably.22
Initially, we simply look at the effects for all workers, individuals, or families within a city. This
provides a broad view of the effects of living wage laws, which precludes testing some predictions of the
theory, such as differential effects for covered and uncovered workers. On the other hand, it offers two
advantages relative to attempts to isolate effects for covered workers. First, it avoids issues of the
endogeneity of the decision or outcome regarding work in the covered sector. Second, although not
explicitly stated, we presume that the goals of advocates of living wage laws are to help low-income workers
or families generally in a particular city, rather than to help subgroups of these at the possible expense of
other subgroups. Thus, our more sweeping approach may say less about some of the underlying economics,
but more about the success of the policy. Nonetheless, for some specifications we also attempt to identify
those workers more likely to be covered by living wage ordinances in cities, and to estimate the different
effects of living wages for covered and uncovered workers.
Data
The data used come from the Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) files
extending from January 1996 through October 1999 and the Current Population Survey Annual Demographic
Files (ADFs) from 1996 through 1999. The ORG files provide data on wages, employment, hours, etc., for
individuals, and it is possible to combine data on individuals in the same family. The ORG files include
approximately 13,000 households per month, or about 570,000 observations overall on individuals. In these
files, residents of all “Standard” metropolitan statistical areas (SMSAs), encompassing all large- and
medium-sized cities in the U.S., can be identified. We extract data on these residents for our empirical
analysis. Ideally, we would like to know where they work rather than where they live, but such information
is not available. Also, the correspondence between cities and SMSAs is imperfect, but because suburban

22

Some living wage ordinances specify two different wage floors, one (lower) applicable when health
insurance is provided, and another when it is not. We always report results using the wage floor applicable
when health insurance is provided. The estimates were very similar when we re-estimated the models using
the higher wage floor.
16

residents may work in the city, this is not necessarily inappropriate.23 The variables constructed from the
ORGs are listed and described in Table 2. Their uses in the empirical analyses are described below. Since
January 1996, the design of the CPS has resulted in the large and medium-sized metropolitan areas in the
sample being self-representing (Bureau of the Census, 1997).24 This is yet another reason for only using
information from this month on.
For several reasons, most of our analysis uses the ORGs, rather than the ADFs. First, as Table 1
shows, there is variation in the months in which living wage ordinances pass. If we primarily used the ADFs,
we would restrict ourselves to a single “reading” per year and would lose a lot of variation in living wages
across observations. Second, the ADFs would give us fewer observations overall. Whereas the ORGs have
information on wages only for one-fourth of the sample, because we get these data in each month the ORGs
provide a sample three times as large. Third, the ADFs are released slowly, while the monthly ORG files are
released quickly. For example, the March 1999 files were not released until October 1999. In addition, the
March files cover the previous year, so not until the March 2000 data are released would we be able to study
the living wage ordinances put into place in 1999. Finally, as discussed below, for some of the analyses of
arguments proffered by advocates of living wage ordinances, the monthly files provide more appropriate
data.
Undeniably, however, the ADFs do have some advantages over the ORGs when analyzing the effects
of living wages on poverty. First, the ADFs allow for a more accurate measurement of family income
because non-earned family income information is included. Thus, we can more accurately determine the
percentage of families in poverty for SMSAs in a given year. Second, with the ADFs we are able to match
families and their income information from 1995 to city living wage information. This is because family
income information in 1995 is reported in the 1996 ADF, which falls after the sample redesign that rendered
SMSAs self-representing. For these reasons, we supplement the estimates of living wages on poverty that

23

For expositional ease, we often refer to cities rather than SMSAs.
In an small number of cases, though, outlying counties are excluded from the CPS sampling frame
for an SMSA, in which case the data are representative of the remainder of the SMSA.
24

17

use the ORGs with estimates that use the ADFs.
Wage Effects
We begin the analysis by asking whether there is evidence that living wage laws succeed in boosting
wages of low-wage workers. If they do not, of course, then it is unlikely that any positive (or negative)
effects will flow from them. This may seem like a trivial question, with the answer certain to be in the
affirmative, but indeed there is no research documenting the extent of compliance with these laws.25 In
contrast, compliance with standard minimum wage laws has been studied and documented (Ashenfelter and
Smith, 1979), as have the effects of minimum wages on the wage distribution.
To study this question, we estimate a wage equation for various ranges of the wage distribution in
SMSAs.26 Specifically, we look at workers that fall below the 10th percentile, between the 10th and 25th
percentile, between the 25th and 50th percentile, and between the 50th and 75th percentile of their city's
wage distribution in a particular month.27 Pooling data across months, we estimate the following regression
for each percentile range

where wp is the hourly wage for individuals in the specified range (p) of the wage distribution, X is a vector
of individual characteristics,28 wmin is the higher of the federal or state minimum wage, and wliv is the living

25

One reason compliance may be an issue is a lag between initial passage of an ordinance and the
adoption and dissemination of guidelines to contractors and others. For example, Detroit’s ordinance passed
via a referendum in the fall of 1998, but as far as we have been able to ascertain, the city still has not decided
on details regarding its implementation.
26
For the estimation of wage effects, as well as hours and employment effects, we restrict our sample
to workers with an hourly wage greater than one dollar and less than or equal to 100 dollars. Also, we limit
the sample to those between the ages of 16 and 70 years of age, inclusive.
27
When cities have very few observations for a given month, determining whether a worker falls in a
particular range of the wage distribution is impossible or unreliable. We therefore restrict our sample to only
workers in larger cities (i.e., those SMSAs with more than 25 observations in every month). A complete list
of cities that we include in our analysis of the ORG files is included in Appendix Table A1.
28
These include dummy variables for gender, race, educational attainment, and marital status.
18

wage.29 The subscripts i, j, s, and t denote individual, city, month, and year. Y, M, and C are vectors of year,
month, and city (SMSA) dummy variables. , is a random error term.30
It is essential to control for minimum wages, because many cities with living wages are in states with
high minimum wages, and we want to estimate the independent effects of living wages. In addition, we have
strong expectations that we should see wage effects (and other effects in later analyses) for the lowest-wage
workers stemming from minimum wages, so this serves as a check on the validity of the data.
The living wage variable that multiplies ( measures the percentage gap between the living wage and
the minimum wage; if there is no living wage (or if the living wage were below the minimum wage, which
does not occur in our sample), this variable is set to zero. If living wages boost the wages of low-wage
workers, we would expect to find positive estimates of ( when we are looking at workers in relatively low
ranges of the wage distribution.31 Finally, we also estimate specifications in which we lag wmin and wliv by six
or 12 months, to allow for a slower, adaptive response to changes in minimum wages and living wages.32
29

In the few cases of SMSAs that straddle states with different minimum wages (Charlotte,
Philadelphia, Portland, and Providence), we use a weighted average of the minimum wages in the two states,
weighting by the shares of the SMSA population in each state.
30
We also estimated the wage equations using the specified wage percentiles for the city (i.e., 10th,
25th, 50th, and 75th) as dependent variables, rather than the individual-level data on individuals in these
ranges. In these estimations we weighted because we have different numbers of observations per SMSAmonth cell, and we expect estimates to be less precise in cells with fewer observations. In the standard case
where the data are means over individuals in a cell, this weighting entails multiplying the observations by
(Njst)½. Because the variance of the sample mean for a cell is proportional to 1/Njst, under the assumption that
the true variance of the dependent variable is constant across cells (i.e., state-month observations), this
transformation results in homoscedastic errors. When our dependent variable is a percentile for a cell rather
than a mean, a closely related but slightly different assumption is needed. The variance of the pth percentile
is

where f(p) is the density evaluated at p (Mood, et al., 1974). Thus, as long as the density is the same across
cells, the same weighting is appropriate. Regardless, the results were qualitatively very similar to those
reported in the paper using individual-level data.
31
Among the SMSAs with a living wage effective in a particular month, the living wage was below
the 10th percentile in 13.3% of cases, between the 10th and 25th percentile in 65.7% of cases, between the
25th and 50th percentile in 19.2% of cases, and between the 50th and 75th percentile in 1.7% of cases.
32
While independence across cities and months in our sample can be assumed, it is highly unlikely
that observations on individuals within a given city-month cell are independent. Because of this, the standard
19

Table 3 reports estimates of this equation. All coefficient estimates and standard errors are
multiplied by 100. Looking first at minimum wages, Table 3 reveals that the estimated wage effects are quite
sharp initially for both workers below the 10th percentile and workers between the 10th and 25th percentiles,
with elasticities of .14 and .15, respectively. No significant effects show up at higher ranges of the wage
distribution. The effects at the lower percentiles dissipate over time. Six months following a minimum wage
increase, the estimated elasticities for workers below the 10th percentile and between the 10th and 25th
percentiles have fallen to .09 and .06, respectively, with neither estimate statistically significant.33 After 12
months, the estimated elasticities are nearly zero for all ranges of the wage distribution. This dissipation of
the minimum wage effects is consistent with results reported in Neumark, et al. (1999) using a quite different
empirical framework, who suggest that this occurs as nominal wages catch up for other workers. This
replication of those results for minimum wages helps to establish the validity of our data set. However, the
minimum wage effects are not central here, so in the remaining analyses of wage effects, we focus mainly on
the impact of living wages.
Table 3 reveals no contemporaneous effects of living wages for the 0th-10th percentile range and the
10th-25th range. Six months after a living wage increase, the estimated effect for the 0th-10th percentile
range is positive, but small and not statistically significant. At a lag of one year, however, we find more
strongly significant effects for the 0th-10th percentile range, with an elasticity of .08. The lagged effect is
not unreasonable. Compliance may well be weaker or slower for living wages than for minimum wages.
Moreover, living wage laws are new for most cities in our sample, and implementation of the laws may
therefore be a rather drawn-out process, or cities may only enforce compliance as contracts are renewed (as
happened, for example, in Baltimore and San Jose). In addition, the rather small elasticity (compared to
contemporaneous minimum wage effects) is not surprising, since coverage is much more restricted. Finally,
errors that would be obtained from estimating equation (1)’s parameters by ordinary least squares will be
incorrect. We therefore estimate robust standard errors that relax the assumption of independence (and
homoscedasticity) within city-month cells. Corrected standard errors are reported in all tables.
33
Curiously, in the six-month lag specification there is a negative estimated effect for workers
between the 50th and 75th percentile, almost significant at the 10% level. However, this does not show up
for the contemporaneous or 12-month lag specification.
20

there is a smaller positive impact for workers in the 10th-25th percentile range, significant at the 10% level.
As we might expect, though, there is never any evidence of wage effects in the higher percentile ranges. In
general, these data detect moderate wage-increasing effects of living wage ordinances, especially about one
year after implementation.34,35
As further verification that we are truly detecting effects of living wage ordinances, we next attempt
to estimate wage effects for covered and uncovered workers. As discussed earlier, coverage of living wages
is not universal. Moreover, theory makes no definitive predictions on what the expected direction of the
effects of living wages on workers in the uncovered sector will be. Nonetheless, we would expect positive
effects to be stronger for covered workers, and indeed regard no effect as the most likely outcome for
uncovered workers.
Using the limited information we have on workers and the scope of city ordinances, we attempted to
identify those individuals most likely to work for a company under contract with the city, and therefore
covered by their city's living wage legislation. For workers in cities where businesses receiving financial
assistance from the city are covered, virtually any non-government worker may work for a company that is
subject to the legislation. Therefore, we characterize all private sector workers as being "covered" in these
cities. Table 4 details our best attempt at identifying all potential covered workers.
Next, in equation (1) we replace the living wage variable with a pair of interaction terms–a dummy
variable indicating that a worker is covered and a dummy variable indicating non-coverage, each multiplied
by the living wage variable. These reveal the respective effects of living wages on covered and uncovered
workers. We also add a series of dummy variables representing the worker subgroups that are covered by
living wages. Since our estimated definition of coverage differs somewhat by city, we had to add separate
34

We experimented with lags of different lengths. This relationship is relatively robust, with
estimated effects strengthening through about one year as the lag is lengthened.
35
As mentioned earlier, some cities' living wage laws cover only workers at companies under contract
with the city, while other cities' laws extend coverage to workers at companies receiving business assistance
from the city. We estimated separate effects for these two types of living wage laws. Although the lagged
effects on low-wage workers of both types of legislation are positive, we found stronger wage effects in cities
where those receiving business assistance are subject to the laws. This is sensible given the fact that many
more workers are expected to be subject to the legislation in these cities.
21

dummy variables for each group. These dummy variables pick up wage differences between the types of
workers that are covered and the types that are not covered, which are separate from any living wage effect.
Estimates obtained should be interpreted with caution, however. Some living wage ordinances are not
explicit about what types of workers are covered. For many localities, we had to make strong assumptions
concerning the types of industries in which covered individuals work. Table 4 shows that we chose the
broadest definitions of potential coverage, so as not to exclude those that are potentially affected. Actual
coverage rates should be much lower than those we report. Nonetheless, we believe we have distinguished
between workers more and less likely to be covered.
With the potential problems of our approach noted, the top panel of Table 5 reports the results. For
workers below the 10th percentile of their city's wage distribution, those that are identified as covered by
legislation appear to experience positive wage effects. These are significant at the 5% level when living
wages are lagged by 12 months. For those between the 10th and 25th percentiles of the wage distribution,
positive living wage effects that are significant at the 10% level are observed when living wages are lagged
by 12 months. Wald tests of the equality of coefficients reveal that the differential effects of legislation on
covered and uncovered workers are not statistically significant, however. Essentially no differing effects are
detected at higher levels of the wage distribution. Overall, despite the imprecision of the estimates, the
results are most consistent with those workers more likely to be covered by living wage ordinances receiving
the bulk of the wage gains.
Next, we exclude from the sample completely those cities with living wage legislation that applies to
all firms receiving business assistance from the city. Given the difficulty of predicting the types of workers
that would be directly affected by the legislation in these cities, the coverage rates in our sample are most
likely too high. Thus, we redo the above approach, estimating effects of living wage laws on workers in
cities where only contractors are subject to the legislation. The bottom panel of Table 5 reports the results.
Although no effects are statistically significant at the 10% level, the point estimates are similar to those
estimated using the entire sample, with if anything sharper differences between the effects on covered and

22

uncovered workers. Thus, the evidence is broadly consistent with low-wage covered workers receiving most
of the wage gains.
Effects on Poverty-Level Earnings
As suggested in the introduction, living wage laws are designed to enable a person to earn enough to
lift his or her family out of poverty. Our next analysis describes evidence on whether living wage ordinances
are likely to achieve this goal. We consider two types of hypothetical families: families with one parent and
two children; and families with two parents and two children. We then ask whether an individual’s earnings
(assuming a full year of work) are below the poverty line for each of these two types of families, defining
variables P1 and P2 that are, respectively, dummy variables denoting whether a worker's earnings would place
him or her below the poverty line for one- and two-parent, two-child families.36 We estimate regressions of
the form

In this regression, estimates of ( that are less than zero indicate that living wages increase the
probability that an individual’s earnings would be sufficient to lift his or her family out of poverty, and
similarly for T and minimum wages. What this regression is telling us, essentially, is whether changes in
wages induced by living wages push earnings over particular thresholds relevant to the policy debate. We do
not contend that this is the most meaningful analysis of living wages, but it does parallel the calculations used
by advocates of living wages. Here we ignore employment effects, as the calculations are done only for those
with a wage, and ignore hours effects, except for hours variation across hourly workers.
Estimates of equation (2) are reported in Table 6. We find no significant effects of living wages in
providing income sufficient to lift families out of poverty, for either one- or two-parent families. In contrast,
we do find evidence from the specifications with contemporaneous effects or six-month lags that minimum
36

Following Census Bureau recommendations, we used the CPI to inflate 1998 poverty lines for

1999.
23

wage increases could accomplish this goal, with the effects significant at the 5% level. However, once we
look a year after the minimum wage increase, the estimated effects are no longer significant, consistent with
the dissipation of wage effects reported in Table 3.37
Of course, these estimates relate to “hypothetical” families. We could find different answers once
we look at actual families, and at earnings of all family members. In addition, these estimates ignore
employment effects, because they apply to workers only. Finally, these estimates do not allow us to discern
the effects of living wage ordinances on hours. We therefore next turn to evidence on hours and employment
effects, before concluding with evidence on whether living wage ordinances increase the proportion of
families whose actual earnings or income exceed the poverty line for that specific family.
Hours and Employment Effects
The specifications we use to study effects of living wage ordinances on hours and employment
parallel closely the wage specifications in Table 3. In particular, we define the same ranges of percentiles of
the wage distribution, and estimate hours and employment equations for individuals in these ranges. The
only complication, however, is that we want to include non-workers in these calculations, but need to impute
a wage percentile for them. We do this in a simple fashion with well-known limitations, imputing wages for
everyone in the sample, and using percentiles of the imputed wage distribution for everyone.38
Results are reported for hours in Table 7 and for employment in Table 8. Turning first to the
minimum wage, the shorter-term results are consistent with initial hours and employment reductions for the
lowest-wage workers (although not significant), and increases in hours and employment for those between
the 10th and 25th percentiles, consistent with substitution towards slightly higher-wage workers; this
parallels findings reported by Neumark and Wascher (1996). With respect to living wage ordinances, in
Table 7 we find essentially no evidence of contemporaneous effects of living wages on hours for those at or

37

The results were nearly identical using as dependent variables the percentage of families in the citymonth cell below the poverty line. Also, when we allowed differential effects of living wages for covered
and uncovered "families," all the estimated impacts were similarly statistically insignificant.
38
If we used actual wages for workers and imputed wages for non-workers, we would rarely have
non-workers in the extreme percentiles of the wage distribution.
24

below the 10th percentile of the wage distribution. But the point estimates at lags of six months and 12
months are negative, with the latter significant at the 10% level. The employment results in Table 8 are a bit
stronger, with strongly significant negative effects at a 12-month lag for the lowest-wage workers; the
estimates imply that a 10% increase in the living wage lowers the employment rate by .9 percentage point.
There are no significant effects of living wages at the higher percentiles. The evidence of possible
employment and hours reductions among low-skill workers stemming from living wages will likely work
against the positive effects on wages reported earlier, when we look at effects on poverty.
Effects on Poverty
Finally, we turn to evidence on the effects of living wage laws on the proportion of families in
poverty using both the ORGs and the ADFs. For the analysis using the ORGs, we match up all individuals in
the same family in the CPS files, compute monthly family earnings, multiply by 12 to obtain an estimate of
annual earnings, and ask whether this is above or below the poverty line for that family. Note that the
resulting definition of poverty does not correspond to the “official” definition, because we use data on
earnings only, and not unearned income, transfers, etc.39 Thus, the results speak to the ability of families to
earn their way out of poverty, which in some ways may be a more interesting policy question. We then
compute the proportion of families whose earnings are below the poverty line in each SMSA-month cell, and
estimate the following equation

Note that the level of observation is now at the SMSA-month level, as the dependent variable Pjst is the
poverty rate in city j, month s, and year t. Thus, we estimate the equation by least squares, weighted by the
39

We exclude families with members aged 65 years or older. This is because those who are at least
65 are more likely to receive income separate from earnings (e.g., Social Security). Thus, determining
whether their family's income falls below the poverty threshold is problematic. When we leave these families
in the sample, however, there is no substantial change in the estimated effects of living wages on poverty.
25

square root of the cell size to ensure homoscedastic errors (see footnote 30).
The estimates of this equation are reported in Table 9, and can be summarized briefly and succinctly.
The analysis using the ORGs provides no evidence that living wage ordinances reduce poverty. The
estimates for the contemporaneous and six-month lag specification are near zero and insignificant. The
estimate for the 12-month lag specification is where we would expect to find effects, if there are any, since it
was in this specification that we found positive wage effects, but also negative hours and especially
employment effects. Of course, these effects are offsetting with respect to family earnings. The estimated
net impact is actually positive, consistent with a slight increase in poverty, but the estimate is not statistically
significant.
Note that the failure to find significant effects of living wages in the ORGs, whether positive or
negative, is not because the data are uninformative. First, we are able to detect statistically significant
impacts of living wages on wages and employment. Second, the standard errors on the estimated effects of
living wages in Table 9 are not large. For example, in the 12-month lag specification, the standard error
implies that if a 25% increase in the living wage produced a change in the poverty rate of .73 percentage
point, or .0073, the effect would be statistically significant. Thus, we read the evidence as indicating no
sizable effect of living wage laws on the proportion of families with below poverty-level earnings.
Next, we turn our attention to estimates of living wages on the percentage of families in poverty
using the ADFs. In order to provide a basis for comparison between the ORG results and the ADF results,
we first reestimate the poverty effects reported in Table 9 excluding the 1999 ORG files, since the latest
available ADF is for 1999, which contains information on 1998 income. Estimates from the 1996-1998
ORGs appear in column (1) of Table 10. The estimated effects of living wages on the percentage of families
in poverty are negative, but they are not statistically significant, still suggesting little effect of the legislation
on poverty, although more consistent with beneficial effects than the corresponding estimates in Table 9
using 1999 data.
We next estimate poverty effects using the 1997-1999 ADFs, which contain information on family

26

earnings and incomes from 1996-1998. We do this for the same SMSAs included in our analysis of the
ORGs. Together, this analysis is the closest correspondence we can achieve with our ORG data. As with the
ORGs, we first construct an annual family earnings measure by summing individual annual earnings of the
members of the family. Next, we determine the percentage of families in an SMSA whose annual earnings
fall short of the federal poverty threshold. Column (2) presents the estimates of the effects of minimum
wages and living wages on poverty.40 The effects of the January living wage–corresponding to the 12-month
lag–on the percentage of families in poverty in the SMSA is negative and stronger, but still not significant.
In order to obtain estimates using more information, we next expand the SMSAs used in the analysis beyond
those used in the ORG analysis. In particular, because the ADF is an annual file, there is a much larger set of
SMSAs for which we have at least 25 observations. Column (3) reports estimates for this larger data set,
which are not substantially different from the column (2) results; indeed the standard errors are no smaller, in
part perhaps because experiences are more diverse across some of the smaller SMSAs that are picked up in
column (3), and in part because these additional SMSAs receive little weight. Finally, in column (4) we use
the largest sample, adding data from 1995 (for which identifying SMSAs in the ADF is not problematic,
unlike the ORGs). Again the results are similar. Overall, while these estimates using family earnings from
the ADFs do not indicate statistically significant beneficial effects of living wages in the 12-month lag
specification on which we focus, they do indicate stronger effects, in this direction, than those obtained using
the ORGs.
Finally, in the remainder of the table we turn to the most useful purpose of the ADFs–analyzing total
family income. If fighting poverty is the goal of living wage estimates, these estimates are perhaps more
appropriate than the estimates obtained using just total family earnings. Not only do they take into account

40

Since the ADFs contain earnings and income information from the prior calender year, the
estimated effects of the December living wage, the June living wage, and the January living wage,
correspond roughly to the effect of the contemporaneous living wage, the living wage sixth months ago, and
the living wage twelve months ago in the ORGs, respectively. The same is true of minimum wages.
Estimates were also obtained using a weighted average of the applicable minimum and living wage in the
SMSA over the year. As might be expected, the estimated effects were quite close to the estimated effects
using the June minimum wage and living wage.
27

both the gains in family earnings that result from living wages as wages of family members increase and the
declines in family earnings that result when employment or hours are reduced by the legislation, but they also
take into account differences in transfer income or other income received as a result of the changing wages,
hours, or employment status of family members. Paralleling the earlier columns, column (5) begins with an
analysis of living wage legislation and family income from 1996 through 1998, for the SMSAs we studied
using the ORGs. In this case, in the 12-month lag specification for which we detected wage, hours, and
employment effects in the ORGs, the results indicate that the effect of the living wage on the percentage of
families in poverty in an SMSA is negative and nearly significant at the 10% level; the coefficient estimate of
-3.50 implies that a 25% increase in the living wage reduces the poverty rate by .88 percentage point, or
.0088. Column (6) reports results from expanding to the larger set of SMSAs, and column (7) from further
expanding the data set to include 1995. The estimated negative effect of living wage ordinances on poverty
rates is robust; more importantly, it is slightly larger in these latter columns, and is statistically significant at
the 10% level.41
These results obtained using the total family income information from the ADFs stand in contrast to
the results for minimum wages; in Table 10, the signs of the estimates are consistent with minimum wages
increasing poverty one year after they rise; this result holds more strongly in research using a much larger
span of years (Neumark, et al., 1998). There is some evidence, however, that living wages are at least
modestly successful at reducing urban poverty in the cities that have adopted such legislation. The contrast
with minimum wage results may be explained by less elastic response of labor demand by cities than by
general employers, or by other differences between living wages and minimum wages discussed in Section II.
The stronger results for family income than for family earnings are consistent with the following explanation.
Living wage laws are successful at boosting the wages of some workers in low-income families. For those
who remain employed without hours reductions, any reductions in transfer income that result from higher
earnings may be sufficiently small that total income rises by more than earnings. For those whose hours are

41

This evidence is slightly stronger if we do not exclude families with members aged 65 or over.
28

reduced or whose employment is ended, transfer income may soften the blow to earnings, permitting some
families to avoid falling into poverty. Thus, while theory makes no predictions regarding the effects of living
wages or minimum wages on poverty, it appears that–in contrast to minimum wages–living wages may help
to achieve the goal of reducing urban poverty.
V. Conclusions
Living wage ordinances mandate wage floors that are typically much higher than the wage floors set
by state and federal minimum wage legislation. These are frequently tied to the federal government’s
definition of poverty. While traditional minimum wage legislation is nearly universal in coverage, living
wages apply to a subset of firms. Only businesses under contract to provide services to the city and, in some
cases, firms receiving assistance from the city for the purpose of economic development or job creation, or
city employees, are subject to the requirements of these ordinances. Thus, theoretical predictions of the
effects of traditional minimum wage laws and the extensive empirical literature that tests these predictions
can only serve as a rough guide to studying the effects of living wages. Their unique features require
separate empirical examination.
To date, there has been no attempt to estimate the actual impact that living wage ordinances have had
on their expected beneficiaries–the low-wage and low-income families in the cities where these ordinances
have been enacted. In this paper, we present evidence on the effects of these city ordinances on wages,
hours, employment, and poverty. This is done by comparing the changes in these outcomes for workers in
cities that have adopted living wages to workers in cities that have not. By using the latter as a control group,
we hope to infer the causal relationship between the legislation and the outcomes for low-income families.
Our findings suggest that there are no contemporaneous effects of living wage ordinances on the
wages of low-wage workers. There are, however, lagged effects on wages that are positive and significant.
The estimated elasticities are relatively small, which seems consistent with the fact that living wages have
limited coverage, and may also have limited compliance and enforcement. In addition to the wage effects,
we estimate that the contemporaneous effects on hours worked are not significantly different from zero, and

29

the lagged effects are negative but only marginally significant for low-wage workers. We estimate lagged
effects on the employment rates of low-wage workers, however, that are negative and strongly significant.
Finally, our estimates of the effects of living wages on city poverty rates indicate that living wage ordinances
may result in modest reductions in urban poverty.
Living wages have only been in existence for a short time, however, and as yet in a small number of
cities. While the wage gains, employment declines, and poverty rate declines that we estimate as effects of
living wage ordinances are striking, more work will need to be done to evaluate whether these hold in a
larger sample of cities that have adopted such legislation over a longer period of time.

30

References
Alunan, Susan, Lisel Blash, Brian Murphy, Michael J. Potepan, Hadley Roff, and Odilla Sidime-Brazier.
1999. “The Living Wage in San Francisco: Analysis of Economic Impact, Administrative and Policy Issues.”
Mimeograph, San Francisco Urban Institute, San Francisco State University.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Robert S. Smith. 1979. “Compliance with the Minimum Wage Law.” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 2, April, pp. 333-50.
Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1983. “Time-Series Evidence on the Effect of the
Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 18, pp. 38192.
Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, pp. 487-528.
Bureau of the Census. 1997. CPS Technical Paper 63: Design & Methodology (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of
the Census).
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 1996. ""Who Gets What" from
Minimum Wage Hikes: A Re-Estimation of Card and Krueger's Distributional Analysis in Myth and
Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 49,
No. 3, April, pp. 547-52.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
Wage (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the FastFood Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.” American Economic Review, Vol. 84, pp. 772-93.
Employment Policies Institute. 1998. The Baltimore Study: Omissions, Fabrications, and Flaws (Washington,
D.C.: Employment Policies Institute).
Employment Policies Institute. 1999. The Employment Impact of a Comprehensive Living Wage Law:
Evidence from California (Washington, D.C.: Employment Policies Institute).
Fuchs, Victor R., Alan B. Krueger, and James M. Poterba. 1998. “Economists’ Views About Parameters,
Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
36, pp. 1387-1425.
Gramlich, Edward M. 1976. “Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employment, and Family
Incomes.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, pp. 409-51.
Grossman, Jean Baldwin. 1983. “The Impact of the Minimum Wage on Other Wages.” Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. 18, No. 3, Summer, pp. 359-78.
Mincer, Jacob. 1976. “Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages,” Journal of Political Economy, 84(4, Pt.
2), pp. S87-S104.
Mood, Alexander, Franklin A. Graybill, and Duane C. Boes. 1974. Introduction to the Theory of Statistics
(New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company).

Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 1999. “Minimum Wage Effects Throughout the
Wage Distribution.” Mimeograph, Michigan State University.
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 1998. "The Effects of Minimum Wages on the
Distribution of Family Incomes: A Non-Parametric Analysis." NBER Working Paper No. 6536.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. “The New Jersey-Pennsylvania Minimum Wage Experiment: A ReEvaluation Using Payroll Records.” Forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1997. "Do Minimum Wages Fight Poverty?" NBER Working Paper
No. 6127.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996. "Reconciling the Evidence on Employment Effects of
Minimum Wages--A Review of Our Research Findings." In Marvin Kosters, ed., The Effects of the
Minimum Wage on Employment (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute), pp. 55-86.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1992. "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages:
Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46(1), pp. 55-81.
New York Times. 1999. "Making a Living," (November 19, 1999), p. C1.
Niedt, Christopher, Greg Ruiters, Dana Wise, and Erica Schoenberger. 1999. “The Effects of the Living
Wage in Baltimore.” Economic Policy Institute Working Paper No. 119.
Pollin, Robert, and Stephanie Luce. 1998. The Living Wage: Building a Fair Economy (New York: The New
Press).
Reynolds, David. 1999. The Impact of the Detroit Living Wage Ordinance (Detroit: Center for Urban Studies
and Labor Studies Center, Wayne State University).
Tolley, George, Peter Bernstein, and Michael D. Lesage. 1999. Economic Analysis of a Living Wage
Ordinance (Washington, D.C.: Employment Policies Institute).
Weisbrot, Mark, and Michelle Sforza-Roderick. 1996. Baltimore’s Living Wage Law: An Analysis of the
Fiscal and Economic Costs of Baltimore City Ordinance 442 (Washington, D.C.: The Preamble Center for
Public Policy).

Table 1 - Summary of living wage information
City

Date enacted (wage requirement)

Coverage

Baltimore

Passed in December 1994 but wage requirements were as
follows:
July 1995 (6.10)
July 1996 (6.60)
July 1997 (7.10)
July 1998 (7.70)
July 1999 (7.90)

Construction and service contracts > $5000

Boston

September 1998 (8.23)

Contractors > $100,000; subcontractors > $25,000
(> 25 employees)

Buffalo

Passed in July 1999 but does not appear to be in effect yet
(6.22 starting in 2000); therefore not coded as a living
wage in our data

Contractors and subcontractors > $50,000
(> 10 employees)

Cambridge

September 1998 (8.23)

City employees, contractors and subcontractors
> $10,000; recipients of business assistance
> $10,000

Chicago

July 1998 (7.60)

Contractors and subcontractors > 25 employees

Dayton

April 1998 (7.00)

City employees

Detroit

November 1998 (100% of poverty line with health
benefits; 125% without)

Contractors, subcontractors, and financial
assistance recipients > $50,000

Duluth

July 1997 (6.50 with health benefits; 7.25 without)

Recipients of grants, low interest loans, or direct
aid > $25,000; 10% of employees exempted

Durham

January 1998 (7.55)

Contractors and city employees

Hayward (CA)

April 1999 (8.00 with health benefits; 9.25 without;
adjusted annually on April 1 for cost of living in Bay
Area)

City employees; contractors and subcontractors >
$25,000 – maintenance, custodial, landscaping,
laundry, temporary, pest, security, and social
service

Jersey City

June 1996 (7.50 with health benefits)

Contractors – clerical, food service, janitorial, and
unarmed security

Los Angeles

April 1997 (7.39 with health benefits; 8.64 without
benefits; indexed annually for inflation)

Service contractors > $25,000; assistance >
$100,000 or $1 million lump sum

Madison

March 1999 (100% of poverty level for family of four in
1999; 105% in 2000; 110% in 2001)

Service contractors and subcontractors > $5,000;
assistance> $100,000; non-union city employees

Milwaukee

November 1995 (set to poverty level for family of three
on March 1 of each year; assumes 2,080 annual hours)

Contractors and subcontractors > $5,000

Minneapolis

March 1997 (100 % of poverty level for family of four
with health benefits; 110% without benefits)

Assistance > $25,000, as of December 1998; >
$100,000 initially

New Haven

April 1997 (7.96; revised every 5 years)

Service contractors

Table 1 (continued)
City

Date enacted (wage requirement)

Coverage

Oakland

April 1998 (initially set to 8.00 with health benefits
and 9.25 without; upwardly adjusted by prior
December 31 to December 31 change in the Bay Area
CPI)

Contractors > $25,000; assistance > $100,000

Pasadena

September 1998 (7.25 with health benefits; 8.50
without)

Contractors > $25,000; city employees

Portland

July 1996 (7.00)
July 1998 (7.50)
July 1999 (8.00)

Custodial, security, and parking attendant contracts

San Antonio

July 1998 (9.27 to 70% of service employees in new
jobs; 10.13 to 70% of durable workers)

Businesses receiving tax breaks

San Jose

November 1998 (9.50 with health benefits; 10.75
without; reset each February to the new poverty level
for a family of three and adjusted upward for higher
San Jose cost of living – currently a 45.2% premium)

Service contractors > $20,000; assistance > $100,000
(excludes trainees and workers under 18); city
employees.

Somerville (MA)

May 1999 (8.35 with health benefits)

City employees, contractors and subcontractors

St. Paul

September 1998 (100% of poverty level for family of
four with health benefits; 110% without benefits)

Recipients of assistance > $100,000

Tucson

September 1999 (8.00 with health benefits; 9.00
without health benefits)

Contractors; recipients of economic development
assistance > $100,000 annually

West Hollywood

October 1997 (initially, 7.25 with health benefits; 8.50
without; adjusted annually as the City Employees
Retirement System benefits are adjusted)

Service contractors > $25,000 and entering into a
contract of at least 3 months

Ypsilanti (MI)

May 1999 (8.50 with health benefits; 10.00 without)

Contractors > $5,000 (> 10 employees); non-profits
receiving > $10,000 in assistance

Note: Some cities are listed in some sources as having living wage ordinances, but instead have prevailing wage laws (e.g., New
York, Gary, and Memphis). Other cities, like Des Moines, have an average wage goal policy, rather than a living wage. In addition
to the cities in the table, the Employment Policies Institute lists at least nine counties and one school district that have adopted similar
living wage ordinances. At least 70 other cities (as well as a number of counties and school districts) have campaigns underway to
enact similar living wage provisions. Among these are Cincinnati, Cleveland, Dallas, Denver, Houston, Philadelphia, San Francisco,
Seattle, and Washington. Much of the information for this table was obtained through correspondences with city governments. Some
data, however, was obtained through information made publicly available by the Employment Policies Institute (www.epionline.org)
and the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (www.acorn.org). The consistency of information provided by
these two organizations and the city governments gives us confidence in the accuracy and completeness of the above table.

Table 2 - Variables used in the analysis of the effects of living wages
Variable
Definition/construction
Hourly wage

earnings per hour for hourly workers;
usual weekly earnings/usual hours at main job
per week for everyone else

Poverty threshold

the yearly income determined by the U.S.
Census Bureau below which a family with a
set number of adults and children are in
poverty

Hours worked

the usual hours that one works at his main job
per week

Employment

dummy variable set equal to one if individual
currently has a job; set to zero otherwise

Annual earned income
for individuals

hourly wage × usual hours at main job × 52

Annual earned income
for a family

sum of the annual earned income of all family
members in the CPS

Minimum wage

the minimum wage effective on the first of the
month in the state in which the SMSA is
located (weighted average of minimums if
SMSA straddles states)

Living wage

the living wage effective in an SMSA

Year dummy variables

separate dummy variables for each year from
1996 to 1999

Month dummy variables

separate dummy variables for each calendar
month (11)

SMSA dummy variables

separate dummy variables for each SMSA

Table 3 – Contemporaneous and lagged effects on log wages of workers in various percentile ranges of the
wage distributions of SMSAs
Percentile range of SMSA’s wage
distribution

Below 10th

10th – 25th

25th – 50th

50th – 75th

14.00

14.89

2.34

-1.55

(5.81)

(4.64)

(4.79)

(4.96)

-1.55

-1.69

-2.42

-1.57

(2.24)

(1.73)

(1.60)

(1.73)

8.80

5.83

-5.71

-8.20

(6.01)

(4.94)

(5.18)

(5.07)

1.70

0.43

-0.79

0.10

(2.58)

(1.89)

(1.71)

(1.88)

3.12

1.36

-1.59

-1.10

(6.79)

(5.47)

(5.39)

(5.38)

8.40

3.78

-1.57

-1.35

(2.72)

(2.22)

(2.12)

(2.39)

32,344

41,620

69,173

69,900

Specification 1:
Minimum wage (ω)

Living wage (γ)

Specification 2:
Minimum wage 6 months ago
Living wage 6 months ago

Specification 3:
Minimum wage 12 months ago
Living wage 12 months ago

Sample size

Note: Reported are the estimated effects of minimum wages and living wages effective in an SMSA on the
log wages of workers in various percentile ranges of SMSAs. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. All estimates are multiplied by 100. The sample includes information on workers in 63
SMSAs across 46 months (January 1996 - October 1999). SMSAs are included if there are more than 25
observations for the SMSA in each month of the sample. Thus, the sample excludes individuals in small
SMSAs and those not living in SMSAs.

Table 4 – Summary of the construction of “covered” worker variable
Coverage specified in
legislation

Private industries classified as covered in our
sample

Public sector
workers
classified as
covered

Prop.
covered

Construction and
service contracts >
$5000

Construction, transportation (excluding U.S.
Postal workers), communications, utilities and
sanitary services, custodial, protective service,
parking, certain professional and social services

...

0.14

Boston

Contractors >
$100,000;
subcontractors >
$25,000

Same as Baltimore

...

0.17

Chicago

Contractors and
subcontractors

Same as Baltimore

....

0.14

Durham

Contractors and city
employees

Same as Baltimore

City
employees

0.22

Contractors and
subcontractors >
$5,000

Same as Baltimore

...

0.13

Custodial, security,
and parking attendant
contracts

Custodial, protective service, parking

...

0.01

Contractors,
subcontractors, and
financial assistance
recipients > $50,000

All

...

0.89

Los Angeles

Service contractors >
$25,000; assistance >
$100,000 or $1
million lump sum

All

...

0.87

Minneapolis

Assistance >
$25,000, as of
December 1998; >
$100,000 initially

All

...

0.86

Oakland

Contractors >
$25,000; assistance >
$100,000

All

...

0.82

San Antonio

Businesses receiving
tax breaks

All

...

0.80

Cities where only
contractors are subject to
living wage law:
Baltimore

Milwaukee

Portland

Cities where those
receiving business
assistance are also subject
to living wage law:
Detroit

San Jose

Service contractors >
All (excluding workers under 18)
City
0.95
$20,000; assistance >
employees
$100,000 (excludes
trainees and workers
under 18); city
employees
Note: The “Coverage specified in legislation” column repeats information from Table 1. Three-digit industry codes in the CPS were
used to identify non-public sector workers that were most likely subject to living wage legislation. “Certain professional and social
services” include health services, libraries, educational services, job training, child care, family care, residential care, miscellaneous
social services, museums, architectural and surveying, accounting and auditing, research and testing, management and public
relations, and miscellaneous professional and related services. City workers were those that are classified as local government
workers in the CPS. Only information for those cities that are large enough to make our sample cut for the wage analyses are included
in this table.

Table 5 – Contemporaneous and lagged living wage effects on log wages of covered sector and uncovered
sector workers in various percentile ranges of the wage distributions of SMSAs
Percentile range of SMSA’s wage

Below 10th

10th – 25th

25th – 50th

50th – 75th

-2.53

-0.73

-1.55

-1.67

(2.94)

(1.97)

(1.76)

(1.91)

-0.72

-2.24

-2.96

-1.51

(2.60)

(1.93)

(1.78)

(1.83)

-0.52

0.17

-0.71

-0.62

(3.58)

(2.18)

(1.87)

(2.08)

3.10

0.55

-0.74

0.67

(2.95)

(2.16)

(1.95)

(2.04)

3.71

3.16

0.04

-1.02

(4.20)

(2.80)

(2.23)

(2.32)

10.69

4.17

-2.54

-1.62

(2.96)

(2.43)

(2.51)

(2.83)

-0.31

-0.19

-1.35

-1.73

(3.51)

(2.49)

(2.31)

(2.61)

3.40

-1.26

-4.29

-1.92

(6.13)

(3.29)

(2.89)

(2.94)

0.09

0.25

-2.16

-1.35

(4.12)

(2.71)

(2.43)

(2.75)

5.60

-1.96

-5.31

-1.06

(6.41)

(3.60)

(3.27)

(3.00)

2.80

2.53

-0.36

-0.70

(4.92)

(3.46)

(2.85)

(2.84)

10.47

0.53

-4.80

-1.16

(6.83)

(4.65)

(3.62)

(3.35)

distribution

Entire Sample:
Contemporaneous effects:
Uncovered workers
Covered workers
6 month lagged effects:
Uncovered workers
Covered workers
12 month lagged effects:
Uncovered workers
Covered workers

Sample excluding cities receiving
business assistance:
Contemporaneous effects:
Uncovered workers
Covered workers
6 month lagged effects:
Uncovered workers
Covered workers
12 month lagged effects:
Uncovered workers
Covered workers

Note: Contemporaneous effects, and effects lagged by 6 and 12 months, are estimated from separate
specifications, as in Table 3. See Table 3 notes for further details.

Table 6 – Contemporaneous and lagged effects on the probability that a worker’s earnings are
below particular poverty lines
Assumed family size of wage

Single parent, 2 children

2 parents, 2 children

-5.39

-2.04

(2.32)

(2.65)

0.87

0.97

(0.84)

(0.97)

-6.16

-1.26

(2.44)

(2.82)

0.53

0.93

(0.87)

(1.06)

-0.22

0.41

(0.26)

(3.06)

-0.65

-0.05

(1.06)

(1.24)

earners

Specification 1:
Minimum wage
Living wage
Specification 2:
Minimum wage 6 months ago
Living wage 6 months ago
Specification 3:
Minimum wage 12 months ago
Living wage 12 months ago

Note: Reported are the estimated effects of minimum wages and living wages effective in an
SMSA on the probability that a worker’s earnings are below the specified poverty line, if
each wage earner was the only source of income in a family, using linear probability models.
Poverty thresholds are imputed for 1999 using the CPI. Robust standard errors are reported
in parentheses. All estimates are multiplied by 100. The sample includes information on
workers in 63 SMSAs across 46 months (January 1996 - October 1999). The sample size is
272,024. See Table 3 notes for further details.

Table 7 – Contemporaneous and lagged effects on hours worked by individuals in various ranges of the
imputed wage distribution of SMSAs
Percentile range of SMSA’s imputed
wage distribution

Below 10th

10th – 25th

25th – 50th

50th – 75th

-0.65

2.92

1.24

1.13

(2.55)

(2.48)

(1.90)

(1.77)

-0.45

-0.44

0.58

0.80

(0.93)

(0.94)

(0.69)

(0.64)

-0.68

5.52

0.12

-0.28

(2.37)

(2.48)

(1.95)

(1.80)

-1.25

-0.75

0.91

0.20

(0.98)

(1.01)

(0.72)

(0.70)

2.02

-1.70

3.46

-1.39

(2.58)

(2.62)

(2.08)

(1.86)

-2.22

-0.97

0.07

0.22

(1.20)

(1.17)

(0.92)

(0.87)

51,071

73,454

122,361

123,253

Specification 1:
Minimum wage
Living wage

Specification 2:
Minimum wage 6 months ago
Living wage 6 months ago

Specification 3:
Minimum wage 12 months ago
Living wage 12 months ago

Sample size

Note: Reported are the estimated effects of the minimum wage and living wage effective in an SMSA on
the weekly hours of individuals in the range of an SMSA’s imputed wage distribution specified at the top
of each column. The wage distribution is imputed using basic respondent characteristics. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. All estimates are multiplied by 100. The sample includes information
on workers in 85 SMSAs across 46 months (Jan. 1996 - October 1999). See Table 3 notes for further
details.

Table 8 – Contemporaneous and lagged effects on the probability of employment in various ranges of the
imputed wage distributions of SMSAs
Percentile range of SMSA’s imputed
wage distribution

Below 10th

10th – 25th

25th – 50th

50th - 75th

-4.08

4.99

5.09

2.48

(7.20)

(6.08)

(4.44)

(3.90)

0.74

-2.10

0.60

1.71

(2.68)

(2.35)

(1.54)

(1.41)

-6.49

12.51

-2.29

-0.13

(7.17)

(6.20)

(4.62)

(3.96)

-2.16

-1.52

2.10

0.71

(2.90)

(2.51)

(1.58)

(1.55)

6.35

-5.84

5.37

-0.66

(7.63)

(6.36)

(4.78)

(4.24)

-9.25

-1.87

0.82

0.65

(3.60)

(2.83)

(2.10)

(1.90)

51,071

73,454

122,361

123,253

Specification 1:
Minimum wage
Living wage

Specification 2:
Minimum wage 6 months ago
Living wage 6 months ago

Specification 3:
Minimum wage 12 months ago
Living wage 12 months ago

Sample size

Note: Reported are the estimated effects of the minimum wage and living wage effective in an SMSA on
the employment of individuals in the range of an SMSA’s imputed wage distribution specified at the top of
each column, using linear probability models. See Table 3 and Table 6 notes for further details.

Table 9 – Contemporaneous and lagged effects on the percentage of families with
earnings below the poverty line
Specification 1:
Minimum wage

-2.55
(3.38)

Living wage

-1.03
(1.19)

Specification 2:
Minimum wage 6 months ago

-5.72
(3.29)

Living wage 6 months ago

0.04
(1.27)

Specification 3:
Minimum wage 12 months ago

-0.46
(3.54)

Living wage 12 months ago

0.44
(1.48)

Note: Reported are the estimated effects of minimum wages and living wages
effective in an SMSA on the percentage of families with poverty-level earnings.
Poverty thresholds are imputed for 1999 using the CPI. Standard errors are in
parentheses. The level of observation is at the SMSA-month. The regressions are
estimated by least squares, weighted by the square root of the cell size. There are
2,300 observations (53 SMSAs across 46 months, Jan. 1996 – Oct. 1999). See Table
3 notes for further details.

Table 10 – Contemporaneous and lagged effects on the percentage of families with earnings or income below the poverty line
Effects on the percentage of families with total earnings below the poverty line in an
SMSA-month (for ORGs) or SMSA-year (for ADFs)
(1)

(3)

(3)

(4)

Effects on the percentage of families with total income below
the poverty line in an SMSA-year (for ADFs)
(5)

(6)

(7)

Specification 1:
Minimum wage (December of

-0.17

-2.41

-4.86

-4.07

-9.22

-8.42

-6.99

prior year for ADFs)

(3.85)

(7.18)

(6.71)

(5.79)

(6.62)

(5.85)

(5.05)

Living wage (December of prior

-1.57

1.11

0.68

0.96

1.12

0.12

0.37

year for ADFs)

(1.54)

(1.68)

(1.76)

(1.63)

(1.54)

(1.54)

(1.42)

Specification 2:
Minimum wage 6 months ago

-5.06

4.59

0.86

1.36

-1.50

-0.90

-0.08

(June of prior year for ADFs)

(4.04)

(5.95)

(5.39)

(4.94)

(5.55)

(4.73)

(4.31)

Living wage 6 months ago (June

-1.08

-1.04

-0.94

-1.08

0.71

-0.12

-0.46

of prior year for ADFs)

(1.77)

(2.19)

(2.31)

(2.08)

(2.04)

(2.02)

(1.82)

Minimum wage 12 months ago

2.40

10.76

6.14

3.23

3.89

4.79

3.24

Specification 3:
(January of prior year for ADFs)

(4.45)

(8.50)

(7.43)

(6.49)

(7.91)

(6.51)

(5.65)

Living wage 12 months ago

-1.48

-2.74

-2.64

-2.84

-3.50

-3.72

-3.64

(January of prior year for ADFs)

(1.98)

(2.31)

(2.44)

(2.37)

(2.15)

(2.14)

(2.07)

Data set
Sample restrictions

ORG
>=25 per cell

ADF
ADF
ADF
ADF
ADF
ADF
SMSAs from
>=25 per cell
>=25 per cell
SMSAs from
>=25 per cell
>=25 per cell
ORGs
ORGs
Years that sample covers
96-98
96-98
96-98
95-98
96-98
96-98
95-98
Number of observations
1908
159
654
872
159
654
872
Note: Reported are the estimated effects of minimum wages and living wages effective in an SMSA on the percentage of families with poverty-level earnings or income. Standard errors are in
parentheses. The level of observation is at the SMSA-month for Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) samples and at the SMSA-year for Annual Demographic File (ADF) samples. The regressions are
estimated by least squares, weighted by the square root of the cell size. Given that the ADF surveys are conducted in March and information on family earnings and income refer to the prior calendar
year, the applicable contemporaneous and lagged minimum and living wages are noted in parentheses in the left-hand column. The ADF regressions include year dummy variables instead of month
dummy variables. See Table 3 and Table 9 notes for further details.

Appendix Table A1 – SMSAs used in the various samples
Akron

Cincinatti*+

Kansas City*+

Oklahoma City*+

St. Louis*+

Albany

Cleveland*+

Las Vegas*+

Omaha*+

Salt Lake City*+

Albuquerque*

Columbus*+

Little Rock

Orange County
(CA)

San Antonio*+

Allentown

Dallas *+

Los Angeles*+

Orlando*+

San Diego*+

Anchorage*

Dayton

Louisville*

Philadelphia*+

San Francisco*+

Atlanta*+

Denver*+

Miami*+

Phoenix*+

San Jose*+

Austin

Detroit*+

Middlesex (NJ)*

Pittsburgh*+

Seattle*+

Baltimore*+

Fargo

Milwaukee*+

Portland (OR)*+

Springfield (MA)

Bergen-Passaic*+

Fort Lauderdale*+

Minneapolis*+

Portsmouth (NH)

Tampa*+

Birmingham

Fort Worth*+

Monmouth (NJ)*

Providence*+

Tucson

Boise*+

Grand Rapids*+

Nashville*

Provo

Tulsa

Boston*+

Greenville (SC)*

Nassau*+

RaleighDurham*+

Washington*+

Buffalo*+

Hartford*

New Orleans*+

Reno

West Palm Beach

Burlington (VT)*

Honolulu*+

New York*+

Richmond

Wichita

Charleston (WV)

Houston*+

Newark*+

Riverside*+

Wilmington*

Charlotte*+

Indianapolis*

Norfolk

Rochester*+

Youngstown*

Chicago*+

Jacksonville+

Oakland*+

Sacramento+

Winston-Salem*+

Note: The SMSAs listed appear in at least the sample that is used to estimate hours and employment
effects. An asterisk (*) denotes that the city is in the sample that is used to estimate the wage effects as
well. A plus (+) denotes that the city is in the sample that is used to estimate the poverty effects in Table 9,
and in columns (1), (2), and (5) of Table 10; in the other columns the set of SMSAs is much larger than that
listed in this table.

