NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DESIGNING STABILIZATION POLICY IN A MONETARY UNION

Russell Cooper
Hubert Kempf

Working Paper 7607
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7607

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

We are grateful to the CNRS and the NSF for financial support. Comments from seminar participants at
Boston College, Boston University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, MeMasterUniversity, the University of Pittsburgh, theEuropean University Institute (Florence),
CREST (INSEE), GREMAQ (Universite de Toulouse), GREQAM (Université Aix-Marseille-il), Université
de Lyon and EUREQua (Université Paris-i Panthéon-Sorbonne)are gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
2000 by Russell Cooper and Hubert Kempf. All, rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.

Designing Stabilization Policy in a Monetary Union
Russell Cooper and Hubert Kempf
NBER Working Paper No. 7607
March 2000
JIELNo.E50, F33,F41

ABSTRACT
While the European Monetary Union (EMU) is now a reality, debate among economists

nonetheless continues about the design and desirability of monetary unions. Since an essential
element of a monetary union is the delegation of monetary power to a single centralized entity, one
of the key issues in this debate is whether a monetary union will limit the effectiveness of stabilization

policy, If so, monetary union will not necessarily be welfare improving.

In this paper, we study a two-country world economy and consider various designs of
monetary union. We argue that the success of monetary union depends on (i) the commitment
ability of the single central bank, (ii) the policy flexibility of the national fiscal authorities and the

central monetary authority and (iii) the cross country correlation of shocks. If, for example, the
central bank moves before the fiscal authorities, then a monetary union will increase welfare as long
as fiscal policy is sufficiently responsive to shocks. However, if the fiscal authorities have a restricted

set of tools and/or the monetary authority lacks the ability to commit to its policy, then monetary
union may not be desirable.

Russell W. Cooper
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 BSR
Boston, MA 02215
and NEER
rcooper@bu.edu

Hubert Kempf
EUREQua
Universite Paris I Pantheon-Sorbonne
106 Boulevard de l'Hopital
F-75013 Paris, France
kempf@univ-parisl.fr

1 Overview
While the European Monetary Union (EMU) is now a reality, the debate nonetheless con-

tinues about the desirability and design of monetary unions. Many countries, such as Ar-

gentina, are considering the dollarization of their economy as a possible policy. Further,
some economists are advocating the creation of a North American Monetary Union.1
The framework for these discussions essentially remains that outlined by Mundell [1961J:

the gains to monetary union arise from eliminating barriers to transactions while the costs
reflect the reduced effectiveness of stabilization policy once monetary policy is delegated to
a single central bank.2 In his evaluation of the EMU, Feldstein [1997] perfectly exemplifies

the dilemma about the evaluation of a monetary union when he writes:
"My own judgement is that, on balance, a European Monetary Union would
be an economic liability. The gains from reduced transaction costs would be

small and might, when looked at from the global point of view, be negative.
At the same time, EMU would increase cyclical instability, raising the cyclical
unemployment rate".

'While certainly relevant in some aspects, this framework misses an important element:
the design of monetary union. Clearly there is more to monetary union than the adoption of

a single currency. The success of any monetary union, in particular the EMU, will depend
in large part on the appropriate design of monetary policy, including its interaction with

national fiscal policies.3 Existing (and defunct) monetary unions have experienced very
different macroeconomic performances, particularly with regard to the stabilization of output

and inflation. We contend that the issues of stabilization policy and design of a monetary
union are closely interrelated: the stability of member economies within a monetary union
On North American Monetary Union, see Buiter [1999], Grubel 119991 and the references therein.
2These issues are paramount in the so-called Delors report (Emerson et al., [1992]) which provided the

official arguments in favor of EMU. These same point reappear in the analysis of the proposed North
American Monetary Union as discussed by Buiter [1999].
3Designers of monetary unions have been cognizant of these issues. For the EMU, the Maastricht treaty
contains several clauses specifying in detail the institutional set-up of the EMU. The European system of
Central Banks, including the European Central Bank, is strongly independent of any government; its prime

objective is price stability; the ECB cannot bail-out any fiscal authority. Further, the Amsterdam fleaty
contains a "Growth and Stability Pact" which, in effect, strongly constrains the ability of member countries
to run fiscal deficits. A detailed system of punishments has been established in the event a country incurs a
deficit which is "excessive" in light of current economic conditions.
3

depends on the manner in which the stabilization instruments are aUocated. Thus the tradeoff, as framed by Mimdell, misses this crucial dimension.

In the debate over monetary union, a number of interrelated questions naturally emerge.

First, when is it in the intereit of a set of countries or regions to share a common currency
and to delegate monetary policy to a single central bank? Second, how should the monetary

authority operate vis-a-vis the independent fiscal authorities, either national or regional?
Third, can this monetary/fiscal system adequately respond to shocks? Under what conditions

will stabilization policy be effective in a monetary union?

We address these questions using a multiple country, overlapping generations model.4
The model has two key ingredients: (i) the presence of country specific shocks which generate a basis for stabilization policy and (ii) strategic interaction between the multiple fiscal

authorities and the single monetary authority. Thus our approach is quite different from
Mundell [1961] which rested on price inflexibility in a static economy without any explicit
representation of welfare and without any recognition of the vital importance of the interactions between fiscal and monetary policy.
We find

-

that if the monetary authority has the ability to move prior to the fiscal author-

ities, then it is able to select a monetary policy that will support the first-best allocation
of risk. In this case, monetary union creates benefits of reduced transactions costs without
jeopardizing stabilization policy: the supposed trade-off does not exist and monetary union
is welfare improving.

We explore two alternative, less successful, designs of monetary union. In one, some
policymakers, either the fiscal or monetary authorities, are unable to adequately respond

to economic events. These types of restrictions, in effect, limit the scope for successful
stabilization and thus create a cost to monetary union. For the second, the central monetary

authority does hot have the ability to credibly commit to its policy. This weak central bank

responds to the budget decisions of the independent fiscal authorities. As a consequence,
each member country forces money creation by the central bank as a means of financing

its fiscal deficit. In these cases, a monetary union can reduce welfare relative to a world
economy with multiple currencies.
4The model adds uncertainty and interaction between fiscal and monetary authoriti to the framework
in Cooper-Kempf [19981.

4

2 First-Best Allocation
This section of the paper presents our model of the world economy and solves for the firstbest allocation. This forms a benchmark to which we can compare the allocations obtained
by different monetary/fiscal systems.

2.1 Basic Environment
All agents live for two periods and reside in one of two countries. By assumption, labor is
immobile.5 In each country, a single, nonstorable good is produced. Agents work in youth,

producing the country specific good and consume the goods produced in both countries in
their old age.

Agents differ within countries due to their employment status: each period a random
fraction qj of them have an employment opportunity while the remainder are unable to
produce.6 This device allows us to include real shocks to the model and motivates government

intervention through the provision of unemployment insurance.7 We assume that q is a
serially uncorrelated shock with E[qt] = 4e(O, 1).

With regard to their preferences, agents consume the good produced at home and the
one produced abroad. As in Cooper-Kempf [1998], we introduce individual specific shocks
into preferences to motivate the gains from monetary union. More formally, individuals in
the home country have preferences represented by the following utility function:
Uth = U

(ci,ci,n) = Ot+iln (c1) + (1 — Gt+ijln (ci1) —g (n) .

(1)

The superscript i corresponds to thç status of the agent, whether she is employed (i = E)
or unemployed (i = U), c1 is the level of consumption of the home good when old, and
c1 is the level of consumption of the foreign good when old, and n is the supply of labor
by agent i, necessarily equal to zero if i = U. The function g (.) represents the disutility of
5Thus, relative to the discussion in Mundell [1961], our results are biased against finding gains to monetary
union.
6Here and throughout the paper, we generally refer directly to home country variables and denote those
for the foreign country with * superscripts.
7Clearly this is just one of a multitude of possible shocks. This specification was chosen partly for
tractability and partly due to the fiscal obligation that arises from the provision of unemployment insurance,
a natural and quite visible form of stabilization policy.

5

work, and is assumed to be increasing, convex and continuously differentiable. Finally,
is an individual specific taste shock that influences the marginal rate of substitution between

home arid foreign goods, where Ot. is an i.i.d random variable with mean Given the
specification of the utility function, it is natural to restrict 9+e[O, 1]. This shock is realized
in period t + 1, after the labor supply decision.
The production function is the identity function and there is no capital. As agents are
identical at the time of their labor supply decision, they will work the same amount, denoted

as n1. Hence per capita output of the home good in period t is simply ngqt. Throughout
the paper, unless specifically noted otherwise, there are analogous expressions for the foreign
country.

2.2 Planner's Problem
The planner's objective is to maximize a weighted average of the welfare of the agents in
each generation and in each country. As the countries are completely symmetric, the planner

gives equal weight to them.8 Further, we assume that the planner treats each generation
equally. Since there is no physical capital and preferences are intertemporaily separable, we
look at allocations within a period where the planner decides on the employment levels of

generation i agents and the consumption levels for generation t — 1 agents. In doing so,
the planner is assumed to know the current state of the economy, including the realized

tastes for each agent and the employment rates in the two countries. Put differently, the
planner chooses state contingent consumption allocations for old agents and employment

levels for young agents where the aggregate state is denoted by a = (q_i, q.1, q, q) and 9
(9*) represents the realization of the taste shock for an arbitrary home (foreign) agent.9

Formally, at the start of any period, the planner selects a contingent consumption profile
for home and foreign old agents given by:

c(s,9) = (c(s 9) cEf(s G),cl(s,G),c(s,O))

c(s,O) = (c*fl(s,9*),c0(s,9*),ctt(s,9*),c'(s,9.))
8Thus the model abstracts from any political considerations that might lead to unequal treatment of
countries and/or generations.
9lIere q (q*) denotes a current value and q_1 (q:1) the past value. In principle, the planner could make
consumption dependent on past employment status as well.

6

respectively. Further, the planner chooses (n(s), if(s)), the state contingent employment
levels of the current generation. Note that these functions are not time dependent as we
focus on stationary solutions.
The planner solves

mx

c(s,9),c (s,8 ),n(s),cr(s)

E(B,g,g.){q_jUE + (1 — q_1)U"' + q. 1u*E + (1 —
—qg(n(s)) — qg(rC(s))}

(2)

subject to:
E9,9 [q_ic(s, 0) + (1 — q_1)c1'4(s, 6) + q11c"(s, 0) + (1 — q.1)c1'(s, 0)] = n(s)q (3)

Eg,gt[q_1c(s,0) + (1— q_1)é" (s,9) + qic*(s,0*) + (1 — qt1)c."(s,9.)j = n(s)q (4)
for all s.

The resulting allocation has two important aspects: optimal risk sharing across agents
and an efficient level of employment. Formally:

Proposition 1 The first-best allocation is characterized by:
0

=

9

=

l—6

cEh1(s,0)

d-"(s,9)

c"(s,O)

1—0

= 1—0 =

9*

cW(s,9)

cUf(s,9)

c*Ef(s,6*)

=

1—0

c(s,0)

()

-

9*

=

c*Uf(s,0)

(6)

and

g'(n)nq = 1 = g(n*)n*q*.

(7)

Proof. See appendix. •
From this proposition, the planner allocates the given amount of the two consumption
goods across the agents so that the ratio of marginal utilities of consumption between any
two agents is state independent. This is the familiar expression of optimal risk sharing. For

our economy this implies that any two agents with the same realization of tastes should
consume identical consumption bundles independent of nationality or employment status.
For the employment decision, recall that young agents do not know their tastes. Thus for
the planner, the employment levels may only depend on (q, q).
7

3 A Multi-Currency World Economy
We now consider decentralized environments. Our starting point is a multiple currency world
economy in which both fiscal and monetary policies are determined by national governments.
A key issue is the financing of obligations to the unemployed and risk sharing across countries

since this is the essence of "stabilization policy" in our environment.
This section presents a baseline model of a two-country world economy in which the governments in each of the two countries independently choose their fiscal and monetary policies.

In order to capture potential gains to monetary union from a reduction in trading frictions,

there is an incomplete markets feature in our model. In each period, .goods markets open
before exchange markets. Thus, old agents are unable to adjust their currency portfolios in
response to taste shocks. As we shall see, this leads to a misallocation of resources.10

3.1 Individual Optimization
The agent's decisions over employment and consumption goods are constrained by her income

and by cash-in-advance constraints as both goods must be purchased in the corresponding

currency." We show these constraints in detail for an agent in the home country. Let i
represent the income of a home agent of generation t with employment status i = E, U..

Further, let m and m represent the holdings of home and foreign currency by a home
agent of generation t with employment status i = E, U. The constraints of a home agent
are then given by:

m + etmV =

I

(8)

and:

= mr

=

(9)

for i = P2, U. According to (8), income earned in youth is held either as home cunency or
foreign currency, where e is the period t price of foreign currency in terms of home currency.
'°Clearly the assumed timing of markets is key to our results. In our framework, the cost of going to an
exchange market for old agents is thus infinite. As we shall s, the implications of this infinite cost can be
parametethed by the uncertainty over tastes.
'Cooper-ICempf [1998] argue that the cash-in-advance constraints can be generated endogenously by
allowing individual governments to choose over legal restrictions regarding the type of currency used in their
home markets. Here, for tractability, we impose these constraints directly. Notable contributions by Lucas
[1990j, Fuerst [1992] and Christiano and Eichenbaum [1992] also use a particular sequencing of exchanges to
limit transactions through the introduction of costly market participation.

8

Equations (9) relate the holdings of the different currencies to the consumption of final goods

and thus reflect the cash-in-advance constraints.
Given income levels, the consumption levels of the individuai agents are:

ih —
—

e_Iit

anua

Pt+i

— \Ji
it
•f
_.
—
4+1
*

-

Pt-i-i

for i = E, U. In contrast to the planner's solution, consumption is independent of the realized
taste shock. It is in this sense that multiple currencies lead to the misallocation of resources

and thus a gain from monetary union.

Governments are assumed to levy taxes on labor incomes, where rr denotes the period
t tax rate. Thus the income of a representative employed agent is given by: (11)

Using this definition of income, the first order condition with respect to employment by a
representative generation t agent is:12

1 = ng'(rt).

(12)

So, for Cobb-Douglas utility functions, individual labor supply decisions are independent.of
the proportional labor income tax. Denote by ft this input.
The income of a representative unemployed agent is given by:
(13)

where bf is the nominal unemployment benefit paid to an unemployed agent. These transfers

are financed from the tax revenues collected from the employed agents and the printing of
new currency as described further below.
'2The derivation of this exprsion is part of the proof of Proposition 2.

9

3.2 Market Equilibrium Given Government Policies
In each period, a goods market and a money market open in each of the two countries. The

market clearing conditions for the good markets, home and abroad respectively, in period
t + 1 are:

=
=

qgc1+(i—q)4+q+(1—qflc'

(14)
(15)

The left side of these expressions is the output by employed agents in period t + 1, using
the fact that all employed agents produce ñ units of output. The right side corresponds to
spending on home (foreign) goods by the four types of agents: employed and unemployed in
each of the two countries.

For the money markets, the given stock of fiat money must equal the nominal value of
output. For the home and foreign countries this implies:

M=

ptqtn

(16)

1W7 =

pqñ.

(17)

The exchange market clearing condition is simply:

qfrr4 + (1 —

= e(qmf' + (1 — qt)n4U).

(18)

Finally, the governments each face a budget constraint. The transfers to the unemployed must be financed by either the collection of tax revenues or the printing of money, denoted

at'.

Thus, for the home country,

= (1 —qt)bf..

(19)

These transfers to agents occur prior to exchange market trades. Thus, unemployed agents
are unable to consume foreign goods.
The allocation given government policies is then characterized by:

Proposition 2 In a world economy with multiple currencies, given government transfer
10

policies the (home) consumption allocations are given by:
+

=

q11—rf
l+o.t

q l+o-t

qt

(20)

=
(21)

Proof. See appendix. •
In these expressions, the rate of growth of the money supply is denoted by a[ and is
computed directly from the transfers. That is, of Mt =

M — M1_1 and a;FM; =

M; — M;,..
Clearly home consumption (and foreign as well) will depend on the shocks to employment

during the agents lifetime in both countries. Thus insurance must be provided to offset
these various disturbances. From these conditions, it is also apparent that the fiscal and
monetary policies interact in a particular way: consumptions are determined by the ratio
indicating that income taxes and inflation taxes operate in a similar fashion in our

()

economy.

3.3 Equilibrium Government Policies
Without loss of generality, the fiscal and monetary authorities within each country are integrated. However, governments act non-codperatively vis-a-vis one another. Their objective

is to maximize the expected lifetime utility of a representative young agent in their own
country. They choose tax rates and money creation rates simultaneously each period, after
observing the fraction of people currently employed and taking as given the policy choices
of the other government.'3
The equilibrium of the non-cooperative game is characterized by:

Proposition 3 In a world economy with flexible exchange rates and multiple currencies, the
13Note that the money supplies in each country are the only state variables in the system as there is no
physical capital. In addition, policy choices can be contingent on the realized values of the employment
shocks in the two countries. The equilibria that we characterize are dependent only on the country specific
employment rates and are Markov perfect given this representation of the state space. Note that these
restrictions seem natural given that the inherited stocks of fiat money in each country are, in the equilibria
we consider, irrelevant for real allocations. Of course, there may exist other equilibria in which inherited
money stocks matter.
11

equilibrium policies satisfy:

F—qt,E1____

1—rr
L

*

(

)

Proof. See appendix. •
In this expression, represents the period t policy choice of the home government. This
policy reflects the rate of labor taxation and the rate of money creation. In equilibrium
the governments are indifferent with respect to the nature of the taxation; the optimal
policy is characterized by combinations of the labor tax and the inflation tax that transfer
a given amount to the unemployed. This indeterminacy, reminiscent of the Tinbergen rule,

simply reflects the existence of two instruments at the disposal of governments when each
government only has a goal: to insure agents against the risk of unemployment.
Using the optimal tax policies, equilibrium consumption allocations are;

= c!\ = Oqt+Øi

and

c?h =

= (i — ) q;÷1?i

(23)

=

(24)

and

= cT = (1— )qt+1

and

=

Note that the optimal non-cooperative government policies perfectly insure agents from
the current risk of unemployment. Further, the flexible exchange rate system implies that
consumptions are equalized across countries as well. In this sense, the multiple currency
equilibrium with optimal government policies provides insurance both within and across
countries.

However, there are some important differences between this allocation and that obtained

by the planner. First, the labor supply of the home (foreign) agents is independent of q
(q) as the Cobb-Douglas preferences imply that this decision is independent of the tax
rate. In the planner's solution, employment varies with q (q) in order to stabilize total
output.'4 Second, contrary to the planner's solution, agents suffer from their inability to
have consumption depend on the realized taste shocks.

Using the expressions for consumption allocations, the expected utility (welfare) gener14lnterestingly, this optimal employment policy would arise if the government had access to lump-sum
taxes.

12

ated by this equilibrium is equal to:
Vp

= E (9t+iin () +(i —
Gt+i)ln(1 —))
+OEln(qt+i) + (i — 9)Eln(q÷,) +ln(n) — 4g(n).

(25)

This measure is used as the benchmark relative to which the various designs of a monetary
union will be compared and assessed.

4 Strong Central Bank
We now consider a monetary union defined by the presence of a single currency and a single

monetary authority which represents the interests of agents in member countries.'5 In this

section, we make a key assumption regarding timing: the central bank chooses its policy
before the fiscal authorities in each period. We term this a strong central bank since the

timing assumption implies that the monetary authority has commitment power vis-a-vis
fiscal authoritie& The next section of the paper explores the alternative case in which the
central bank moves after the fiscal authorities.16

4.1 Individual Optimization
In contrast to the world economy with multiple currencies, agents do not have to make
portfolio decisions prior to the realization of their taste shocks. It is precisely the relaxation
of the cash-in-advance constraints that leads to the gains associated with monetary union.
Formally, the representative young, employed agent of generation t from the home country
solves the following optimization problem:

max E{91÷, in (cm) + (1- e÷i) in (c)}

t+1 t+I

- g (nt)

(26)

35To maintain symmetry, we assume that this stock of money is initially distributed &jually across the
two countries.
16hiterestingly, this parallels the discussion of Sargent and Wallace [1981] who analyze closed economy
monetary models with two polar forms of coordination between the fiscal and monetary authorities.

'3

subject to

pt+icf + P;iC÷'1 = ptnt(1 —

r)

if.

(27)

Here the tax rate on the income of the home agent is given by r. In the budget constraint, Pt
(pfl represents the period t price of home (foreign) goods in terms of the common currency.
The first order conditions for the representative, employed home agent are given by:

=1

(28)

and

=
Pt+i

cfi = (1 — Ot+i)

and

Pt+i

(29)

(28) implies a constant labor supply equal to that obtained in the previous case, i. Thus,
with these Cobb-Douglas preferences over goods, the monetary institution has no effect on

employment decisions. Since the consumption decision is made after the realization of the
taste shock, consumption levels respond to this shock.
Optimal consumption levels for the representative unemployed agent satisfr:
Uh —
—

1t

Pt+i

Uf —
—

an±

jrU
\
4t
— vt+1) 7

Pt+i

Since these agents are unemployed, their nominal income is equal to the unemployment
benefits they receive both from their national fiscal authority, denoted by bf.
The fiscal policies are given by the levels of labor taxation and unemployment benefits,

(r', bfl for the home government and (re, b5) for the foreign government. The central
monetary authority creates money in period t which is distributed to the fiscal authorities of

the two governments. We let f and .A denote the period t money transfers to the home
and foreign governments.
So, the budget constraint of the home fiscal authority is given by:
(1 —

= ;5'ñpqt + A.

(31)

The left side of this expression is the level of unemployment benefits paid by the home
government. The right side is the sum of their nominal tax revenues and the money created
that flows to the home government.
14

4.2 Equilibrium
This institutional structure corresponds to a two-stage game, where the central bank plays

first and decides upon transfers to the national governments. The fiscal authorities of the
two national governments play second, non-cooperatively determining their own policy. From
(31), the money transfers simply supplement the resources available for the funding of

employment insurance.

-

The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium of this game. In the second stage,

the fiscal authorities, given transfers from the monetary authority, will design UI systems
that equate the incomes of employed and unemployed agents, as in the regime of multiple

currencies. Taking these decision rules by the fiscal authorities as given, the monetary
authority can use money creation to finance these UI programs and thus redistribute nominal
incomes across countries to offset adverse employment shocks. However, in equilibrium, the

response of prices to variations in the employment shocks is sufficient for .the stabilization

of nominal income: active intervention by the central monetary authority is not required.
Thus we find:

Proposition 4 There exists an equilibrium in the strong monetary union where the rate of
money creation is zero, irrespective of the values of the shocks, the taxation rates are equal
to

r=1—q r=1—q.

(32)

The consumption allocations are given by:

=

and

= Og+iqt+i

cf1 = cf4 = (1 — O+) q17i

and ? = c-Y = Oq1Yi

= cT' = (1 — Oti)qt.1-ifl

(33)
(34)

and the employment allocations satisfy n = n = ti where:

= 1.
Proof. See appendix. •
Note that the consumption levels for each type of agent depend on the ex post realization

of the individual specific taste shock 0. This dependence of consumption on 0, as in the
-

15

planner's allocation, is surely one of the gains associated With having a common currency.

A very important aspect of the resulting allocation is that agents' nominal income levels

are independent of both their individual employment status and against country specific
shocks to employment rates (qt,q) in their youth. The first form of insurance is provided
directly by the taxation policy of the fiscal authorities, as in the above proposition. Recall

from Proposition 2 that in the economy with independent fiscal and monetary policies,
the authorities were indifferent between financing UI benefits with labor income taxes or
seignorage. Essentially, the strong monetary union removes one of the two tools so that the

fiscal authorities are led to the use of labor income taxes to finance the country specific UI
systems.'7
The second form of insurance is provided by the stabilization of noth.inal incomes in

response to the supply side employment shocks. Given the unitary elasticity of demand,
created by the Cobb-Douglas preference structure, variations in prices effectively offset the
exogenous variations in employment rates leaving the nominal income earned by young employed agents independent of q1.'8 If, as we assume, the money supply is equally distributed
actoss the two countries in the initial period, then the young agents in each country will have

equal shares of the money supply in all time periods. This guarantees that their nominal
incomes are stabilized in the equilibrium with zero money growth.
There are other equilibria under strong monetary union. From Proposition 2, it is appar-

ent that consumption allocations depend jointly on the rate of income taxation and the rate
of money creation. The allocation in Proposition 4 picks one such combination of policies. In
particular, if the lower support of the country specific employment shocks is sufficiently large,

there will exist equilibria with positive money creation along with positive state contingent

income taxes. To guarantee that nominal incomes are equal across countries, the nominal
transfers to each country will be identical. Importantly, all of these equilibria support the
same real allocations of consumption and employment.
'TThus one might conjecture that an important element in this discussion of stabilization with strong
monetary union has to do with the number of instruments relative to targets. In our economy, a single
government has two instruments to hit a target. Hence, as demonstrated in Proposition 2, there is an
indeterminacy with respect to the nature of intervention. So, monetary union is not destabilizing here
because even in the absence of active monetary intervention, the fiscal powers are sufficient. We return to
this issue of instruments vs. targets in Section 5.
'5c1. Cole and Obstfeld [1991].

16

In this equilibrium the welfare of the representative agent is:

= E{9+iIn(O1+,) + (1— 9t+i)ln(1 —
+E1n(q÷) + (i —) Em (qt•-j-,) + ln(Ti) —g(E).

(35)

Here the expectation is taken with respect to the individual specific taste shock G÷, and to
the employment shocks during the agent's lifetime (qg, qt+i, q÷i).

4.3 Welfare Comparisons
This expression of welfare allows us to compare the allocation under a strong central bank
with that obtained by a world economy with multiple currencies.

Proposition 5 The difference in expected utilities achieved under a strong central bank and
a flexible exchange rate world economy with multiple currencies is always positive and equal
to:
ASF

Vs —14 =

E{Ot+iln(2f') +(i _Bt÷l)ln(hiOtjl)}

(36)

1/2*var(O)[+
Proof. See appendix.•
Clearly the gain to monetary union comes from the ability of agents' to response to the
realization of their taste shocks. Analytically, this gain is reflected in the var(O) term in ASF:
increases in the variability of the taste shocks will reduce Vp and thus increase ASF. Further,

the reduction in the number of stabilization tools in each country (due to the creation
of a central monetary authority) does not limit the extent to which agents are insured
against aggregate shocks. Essentially, the fiscal authorities can respond to country specific
unemployment shocks and thus efficiently insure the incomes of agents against employment
risk. The risk associated with unemployment variations is dissipated in the goods markets.'9

So in contrast to the predictions arising from the work of Mundell, there is no tradeoff
'9This is clearly a strong result that, as we shall see, depends on the unitary elasticity of demand. Still,
the economics of the problem implies that supply shocks are partially offset by price variations which tend
to stabilize labor incomes.

17

between stabilization policy losses and reductions in transactions costs associated with the

creation of a monetary union. Relative to the planner's solution, the allocation under a
strong central bank succeeds in producing optimal risk sharing. However, as in the case of
multiple currencies, the labor supply decision is not first best.

4.4 Alternative Preferences
Under a strong monetary union, inactivity is optimal for the central monetary authority.
However, this is a consequence of the fact that Cobb-Douglas preferences have the special
property of constant budget shares. It is precisely because of this unitary elasticity of demand

that nominal incomes are stabilized across countries without the need for transfers from the
central bank.
To consider an alternative specification, suppose that preferences are instead given by:
log(9c'1 + (1 — 9)c)

—

g(n).

(37)

With this preference structure, labor supply is still given by the condition of

ntg'(nt) = 1
but, in contrast to the Cobb-Douglas speciflèation, aggregate budget shares will depend
on realizations of (q, qfl. In particular, if agents have identical, nonstochastic, symmetric
preferences with 0 = .5, then, in equilibrium, Pt = p.2° This implies that nominal GDP in
the home country relative to the nominal GDP of the foreign country is given by qt/q since
all agents produce the constant level of output i. So, if shocks are perfectly correlated across

countries, then risk sharing remains optimal even with an inactive central bank.
If employment shocks are not perfectly positively correlated, nominal GDP in the home

country will not equal nominal GDP in the foreign country. Hence, risk sharing across
countries will be imperfect in the absence of central bank intervention. In fact, the central
bank should create money and transfer it to the fiscal authority of the government in the
country with the low level of nominal GDP. Given these funds, the fiscal authorities will
20Clearly in this example there are no gains to monetary union since var(O) = 0. The point we make about

the need for central bank intervention would easily extend to an example with taste shocks as long as the
equilibrium required Pt = p.

18

equalize the nominal incomes of employed and unemployed agents. In effect, the optimal
central bank rule is to stabilize nominal GDP and not necessarily prices.
In equilibrium, this equalization of nominal incomes will lead to efficient allocations of

risk both within and across countries. So, the first best allocation of risk can be supported
but, as this example illustrates, this outcome will generally require an active central bank.
One might interpret this as a form of fiscal federalism given the ability of the central bank
to redistribute real wealth across countries, Of course, the central bank is doing so through
money creation rather than direct taxation.

5 Weak Monetary Union
The results obtained thus far indicate that concerns over the loss of stabilization policy
through the creation of a monetary union may not be justified. However, it is important
to realize that these results reflect two strong assumptions about the conduct of monetary
policy:

• the central bank was able to choose monetary policy before the national authorities
selected fiscal variables,

• both the central bank and the fiscal authorities had a rich set of state contingent policy

instruments at their disposal.

This section of the paper focuses on stabilization policy under alternative institutional
structures which relax these strong assumptions. In the first case, we retain the assumption

that the central bank has commitment power vis-a-vis the fiscal authorities but impose
restrictions on the set of instruments available to the fiscal authorities. We term this a
"fiscally constrained monetary union".
In the second case, we weaken the central bank along two dimensions. First, we restrict

the nature of the contingencies associated with monetary transfers so that the distribution
of seignorage is the same across countries and independent of employment shocks. Second,

we relax the assumption that the central bank has commitment power relative to the fiscal
authorities.2'
21Chari-Kehoe 119971 make a similar point in a two-period, non-stochastic, reduced form model with
government debt and money. Their infinite horizon model provid a more formal argument but is sentially
a two-period structure.
19

5.1 A Fiscally Constrained Monetary Union
Given that the fiscal authorities retain stabilization tools (income taxes) and that the mon-

etary authority has the ability to create money in order to stabilize nominal GDP then
there are no stabilization losses associated with monetary union. But what if some of these
instruments are missing?22

Suppose, for example, that the fiscal authorities are unable to set tax rates contingent
on the realized value of the employment shock: i.e., assume r = = f. In the multiple
currency institution, this is not a problem since the condition for efficient risk sharing can be
satisfied by the appropriate choice of a money creation rate by the country specific monetary
authority.

However, with the creation of a monetary union, the fiscal authorities will lose this
stabilization tool. Is this fiscally constrained monetary union stiil desirable relative to
a world economy with multiple currencies? With these restrictions:

Proposition 6 In a fiscally constrained monetary union, (i) if corr(qt, qfl = 1, the allocation is identical to that obtained under strong monetary union, (ii) if shocks are sufficiently
correlated across countries and tastes are sufficiently variable, then the monetary union allocation will dominate the outcome with multiple currencies and (iii) if employment shocks are
not perfectly positively correlated and taste shocks are not sufficiently variable, then monetary
union will not be welfare improving.

Proof. See appendix.
Recall that we have assumed the central monetary authority can make country specific
transfers. hi this case, it is feasible for the common central bank to make monetary transfers
to the individual governments necessary to finance their unemployment insurance schemes.

In fact, given the fixed tax rates the monetary authority can print and transfer money to
the fiscal authorities to guarantee that the incomes of employed and unemployed agents
are equated, within a country. However, in the resulting allocation, income levels and thus
consumptions of agents across countries will not be equated unless the employment shocks
220r, equivalently what if there are more "shocks" than instruments? In fact, consideration of this qution
leads one to wonder about the determination of the number of pplicy instruments. In the absence of a theory
of policy instruments, we take the set of tools available to policymakers as exogeneous but recognize that
this is a rather strong assumption. For example, a country that had previously relith upon seignorage might
develop an income tax system upon joining a monetary union.
20

are perfectly positively correlated. Thus, in contrast to the allocations characterized in
Proposition 5, risk sharing is imperfect unless corr(qt, qfl = 1.
In fact, if shocks are perfectly correlated, the allocation in the fiscally constrained mone-

tary union will be identical to that achieved under strong monetary union. In the language

of instruments and targets, the perfect correlation of the shocks implies that one less instrument is needed so that the monetary authority can generate full insurance with its two
instruments. If corr(qt, qfl 1, then there is clearly a loss in stabilization from the creation
of a monetary union. In this case, a tradeoff emerges: there are liquidity gains from a mon-

etary union that are increasing in the variability of the taste shocks and stabilization losses

that depend on corr(qt,qfl.
Of course, as suggested by Mundell, these considerations lead to prediction about which
types of economies are natural candidates for a monetary union. Economies with positively
correlated shocks who trade with one another (so that there are indeed gains from trade and
the reduction of transactions costs) will profit from monetary union.

5.2 Constrained Central Bank
Instead of restricting the nature of interventions by the fiscal authorities, suppose that the
central bank had limited powers of intervention. In particular, consider a central bank which
was forced to equalize monetary transfers to the national governments. While our model
contains no rationale for this restriction, to the extent that central banks (such as the ECB)
are constrained in this manner, we can evaluate monetary union under these conditions.
As a starting point, consider again Proposition 4. In that setting, the first-best allocation

of risk was attained without intervention by the central bank. Thus for our baseline model,
there is no impact of constraining the central bank.
Now suppose that we consider the implications of a constrained central bank along with

the constraints on the fiscal authorities imposed above: r = = f. In this case, a version
of Proposition 6 holds. if the correlation of shocks is equal to 1, then the central bank
will not have any incentive to differentiate transfers to the countries. By continuity, if this

correlation is near 1, then the welfare losses from the additional contraints on the central
bank will be minimal and thus monetary union continues to dominate the allocation with

multiple currencies. At the other extreme, if the taste shocks are not too variable and
employment shocks are not perfectly positively correlated, then monetary union will still
21

-

not be welfare improving. Clearly, adding more restrictions to monetary union once fiscal
constraints are in place will not be welfare improving.
The welfare costs of a constrained central bank will be larger if preferences are not Cobb-

Douglas. As we have seen for the specification in which goods are perfect substitutes, an
active monetary policy with unequal transfers to countries is desirable even if the fiscal
authorities are unconstrained.

5.3 Weak Central Bank
We define a weak central bank by two institutional features: (i) the two national fiscal
authorities move first but act non-cooperatively and (ii) the central monetary authority
moves second and fully finances the total sum of national deficits of the two governments.
In other words, such a weak central bank functions under a full bail-out clause in which it is
committed to meeting the financial needs of the fiscal authorities of member governments.
There are a number of reasons for being interested in such an institution. First, by looking

at this extreme, one can better understanding the benefits of imposing a no bail-out clause,

as appears to be the case in the European Monetary Union. Second, to the extent that
a central bank cannot commit to a no-bail out clause, understanding the outcomes in this
extreme case are of interest.23 Third, there are examples of countries in which independent

authorities interacted through a common central bank leading, in some cases, to excessive

inflation?4 Finally, though our model has no interest bearing government debt, the weak
monetary union case captures the implications of a monetary authority which monetizes the
debt of fiscal authorities.25

Given that the three government actors (the two fiscal authorities and the monetary
23Th fact, Beetsma and Uhlig [1997] motivate their study of the "Stability Pad" by noting".. there is fear

that a high deficit member country or a member country in recion may successfully pressure the ECB
into loosening its monetary policy."

-

Some empirical evidence on that point is discussed in the conclusion. There are other studies of the

interaction between independent parts of a government that share a common budget constraint. See, for
example, Aizenman [1992], Aizenman and Powell [19981, Zarazaga[undated] and Chari and Kehoe [1997] for
discussions of this point in the context of macroeconomica.

As noted earlier, this coordination of policy issue arises in Sargent-Wallace [1981]. In the appendix of
that paper, they outline a overlapping generations model with government debt, private storage and money
as alternative assets. Through restricted participation in asset markets, they characterize an equilibrium
in which the real rate of return exceeds the growth of the economy. The consequence of this for the case
in which the monetary authority moves after the fiscal authority, in their words, is "Sooner or later in a
monetarist economy the result is additional inflation."

22

authority) face two constraints, the policy choices must be interrelated. Here, we suppose
that the monetary authority must respond to the choices of the independent fiscal authorities.

Its strategy is then easily defined: it is obligated to monetize deficits.

5.3.1 Equilibrium Analysis
As the interaction between the government entities is the only difference between this struc-

ture and the strong central bank case, we use conditions of individual optimality from that
case to characterize the consumption and labor supply decision rules of agents given monetary and fiscal policies. As before, each government provides unemployment insurance to
agents currently uneznployed. These flows are financed by tax revenues from employed agents

and from the printing of money. Since the central bank is required to finance the deficits
of the two governments, the evolution of the money supply is given by:

M+1 = M + [(1 —

— pntqtr] + [(1 — qflb — pnq-rfl = M + A + a*w (38)

where ir (A;W) denote the monetary deficit in the home (foreign) country, b' the transfer

to the unemployed and rr' (r') the tax rate set in a "weak" environment. Put differently,
the change in the money supply equals the sum of the nominal deficits across the two
countries.

An important element of this institution is made apparent by this expression. The
weak monetary union introduces an interaction across the fiscal authorities that did not
exist in either the multiple currency or strong monetary union cases. Specifically, under
a weak monetary union, deficit spending by one country is financed by an inflation tax
that is partially paid by the agents of the other country. Thus the "beggar thy neighbor"
type seignorage policies that promoted gains to monetary union in the multi-currency world
economy of Cooper-Kempf [1998] reappear here under a weak central bank.26

Taking the response of the weak monetary authority as given, each fiscal authority in
period t noncooperatively chooses the level of taxes and UI benefits to maximize the expected

utility of generation t agents. In doing so, each government fully perceives the effects of its
Tnteresting1y, thee effects were absent in the other institutional settings. This is a consequence of our
timing assumptions: agents were able to go to exchange markets after receiving government transfers. In
contrast, Cooper-Kempf [1998] assume that the transfers are received after the exchange markets are closed
thus providing a tax base for seignorage.
23

policies on equilibrium prices.

In general, characterizing additional features of this equilibrium is difficult since the
presence of country specific shocks implies that the distribution of the nominal money supply

across the two countries is stochastic. Hence in the remainder of this section we make an
additional assumption that the economies are symmetric: V =

. Let l3 represent the level

of nominal spending in period t + 1 on the home good by generation t (home and foreign)
agents. D is also the nominal income of generation t + 1 employment agents. Hence, from
market clearing:

=
Using V =

= (qjE + (1 — q)JTJ) + (1 — V)(qJ + (1 — qfltT).

(39)

the evolution of D is given by:
=

+ D1

+ a' + A].

(40)

With this added structure we find:

Proposition 7 With V = , there is a symmetric equilibrium in which all income taxes are
zero and ar = 2(qftijt_)fllit_1l Af = 2(qj:il)D;_1 and D =D for all t.
Proof. See appendix. •

-

According to this proposition, when the central bank is weak, there is no direct taxation

by either country to finance transfers to its unemployed people. To the contrary, all transfers

are fully monetized.27 This indeed can be very simply understood. Suppose an adverse
shock hits the home economy. The home fiscal authority has two alternative ways to raise
compensation to the unemployed: it can either tax its currently employed agents or ask the
weak central bank to finance its transfers. Using this inflation tax is a dominant strategy

for each of the governments since part of the tax burden is borne by agents outside their
country. Nevertheless there is a limit to the amount raised through monetization since the
higher prices lead to a reduction in the utility of young employed agents.

The equilibrium is symmetric: each country runs a deficit in each period which is proportional to the level of nominal spending in that country. The rates of money creation are
271n some countries, such as Argentina, Brazil and Russia, there is vivid evidence of the inflation predicted
by this proposition. We discuss this in our conclusions.

24

dependent on the level of unemployment in each of the countries. Since the deficit spending
is used to finance a transfer to unemployed agents which is partially paid for by the employed

agents, it is natural that the rate of money creation should be an increasing function of the
unemployment rate in the home country.
The equilibrium rate of money creation is given by:

w2qtq
q+q—

1

(41)

Clearly, money growth is zero if both economies exhibit full employment and is increasing
in the rates of unemployment of member countries.

5.3.2 Welfare Comparisons
A characteristic of a weak monetary union is that incomes of unemployed and employed

agents are not equalized within a c6untry Hence, as they face the same prices, their consumption aUocations will not be the same, for a given realization of the taste shock 9. So,
the allocation under a weak monetary union will not satisfy the conditions for optimal risk
sharing: this institution does not facilitate stabilization through the available policy instru-

ments. Instead, these fiscal policies are used strategically in order to induce the central
monetary authority to create money. This leads us to study the welfare properties of a weak

monetary union, compared to a strong monetary union as weil as the allocation obtained
with multiple currencies.

Weak vs. Strong Central Bank In the institution of a monetary authority with commitment, there were no insurance losses associated with monetary union: the fiscal authorities
provide insurance within a country and the monetary authorities, by maintaining a constant

money supply, enabled the price system to insure nominal incomes. In the weak monetary

union institution, the liquidity gains may be offset by the welfare loss associated with the
seignorage game between countries. In fact,

Proposition 8 The allocation under strong monetary union provides all agents with higher
expected utility than the allocation under a weak monetary union.

Proof. See appendix. •
25

For the weak central bank, Proposition 7 indicates that the extent to which countries

will inflate via the common central bank depends on their individual countries rates of
unemployment. Hence, if unemployment rates are sufficiently low on average and not too
volatile, then a monetary union will not create excessive inflation.

Comparing this result for a weak monetary union with that for the constrained fiscal
structure, Proposition 6, is instructive. For both cases, we see that in order for monetary
union to be welfare improving, taste shocks must be sufficiently variable. For both cases,
there are potentially significant costs from monetary union but, interestingly, these costs
depend on different parameters. In the presence of a weak central bank, a country is adversely

affected by the inflationary policies of other countries. In contrast, the key to the fiscal
constrained structure, as demonstrated in Proposition 6, is the correlation of shocks.

6 Conclusion
The goal of this paper has been to examine the effectiveness of stabilization policy within a

monetary union. To do so, we explored the allocations of a stochastic two-country overlapping generations model under alternative monetary/fiscal institutions.

In the extreme case of a strong central monetary authority with commitment power
and fiscal authorities with the ability to set state contingent tax rates, a monetary union
unambiguously increases welfare. In this institutional design, the delegation of monetary
policy to a single central bank does not jeopardize the conduct of stabilization policy. The

tradeoff envisioned by Mundeil and others does not exist. Further, the gain to monetary
union does not rest on labor mobility since in our model, by construction, labor is immobile.

However, there are designs of a monetary union which do not increase welfare precisely

because stabilization policy is impaired. In particular, if the set of policy instruments open

to fiscal authorities is sufficiently restricted, then monetary union may not increase we!fare. Despite having commitment power, the central bank lacks the tools to stabilize in the
presence of country specific shocks that are not iierfectly correlated.
Further, if the monetary authority is weak and thus influenced by the deficit spending of
member countries, then the gains to monetary union may be more than offset by the adverse

consequences of inflation. A weak central bank opens the door to strategic interaction by
the fiscal authorities and thus to excessive inflation.
27

-

These results are normative in that they point to potential gains from monetary union.
Will these gains be realized? Cooper-Kempf [1998] argue that though there are gains to a
monetary union, the incentives for each country imply that these welfare gains will not be
realized without collective action. In particular, Cooper-Kempf [1998] find that a game in
which countries, in effect, decide to join a monetary union or not has a prisoners' dilemma

structure: the cooperative outcome of monetary union is not a Nash equilibrium of this
game. Those results can be extended to the environment studied here.
Some general lessons can be drawn from this analysis. On the issue of commitment vis-

a-vis the fiscal authorities, two elements seen important. First, central bank independence
and fiscal paèts (as enforced for example in the EMU) seem important insofar as they reduce

pressures on the monetary authority. While not formally part of our model, clearly restrictions on deficits would limit the "beggar thy neighbor" type inflation that could undermine
monetary union. Second, the monetary authority must adopt rules that insulate its decisions
from the fiscal pressures exerted by member governments? In this regard, rules that specify

growth rates for monetary aggregates seem more desirable relative to rules that respond to
fiscal policy through, for example, the stabilization of interest rates. But on the other hand,

it is important to leave enough room to allow policy stabilization. On that account, the
fiscal pact and the no-bail clause used in the EMU may prove to be too constraining in the
future?°
On the issue of determining which groups of countries might benefit from a monetary

union, two factors should be kept in mind. First, one of the gains we have identified pertains to the reduction in consumption misallocations from the adoption of a single currency.
Clearly these gains are larger the more the countries trade with one another. Second, unless
the central bank is sufficiently strong and fiscal authorities are sufficiently active in the con-

duct of stabilization policy, the delegation of monetary policy will entail some stabilization

losses, If so, our results point to the fact that countries with a high correlation of shocks
will suffer less from the centralization of monetary policy.

Even though these findings are rather abstract, we do think that they provide useful
insights on actual or possible monetary unions. For the U.S., Rolnick, Smith and Weber
Por the case of Argentina, Saiegh and Thmmasi [1999] discuss the Convertibility Law of 1991 as a means

of limiting inflationary prsures.
Cle&ly this discussion suggts an interting extension of our analysis would be to evaluate a variety
of monetary rul in a version of the model with government debt.

28

[1993] develop an argument linking the clause in the U.S. Constitution which created a
central monetary authority with a desire to avoid seignorage games between colonies. On
the fiscal side, Poterba [1996] discusses the nature of balanced-budget rules across states.
The centralization of monetary authority along with these fiscal constraints seems sufficient
to eliminate the seignorage games.
Aizenxnan [1998] discusses the experiences of Brazil and Argentina from this perspective.

Saiegh and Tornmasi [1999] discuss the recent experience of Argentina in terms of a weak

central bank responding to the actions of independent fiscal entities.3° A similar fate happened in the infancy of the Community of Independent States in the early 1990s, when local
authorities had the ability to finance local expenditures through the creation of rubles by the

Russian Central Bank. Inflation has been put under control when the Russian Central Bank
stopped bailing out public governments.3' Our theoretical model makes clear a major root of

these hyperinflationary episodes: the laxity of monetary authorities and the noncooperative
behavior of fragmented fiscal authorities leading to seignorage games.

In terms of further analysis, three important extensions come to mind. First, our analysis
of stabilization policy looks exclusively at supply shocks. This is relevant since these shocks

produce price movements which tend to stabilize nominal incomes. As noted earlier, this
feature of markets created an element of stability even with a non-interventionist monetary
authority. Clearly, extending the analysis to a setting with demand side shocks and thus no
countervailing price movements is of interest.

Second, the issue of stabilization policy in a monetary union could be pursued by analyz-

ing the consequences of fiscal federalism. Such an institutional arrangement adds new fiscal

instruments by facilitating interregional transfers. However the case of strong monetary
union in which the central bank has the ability to make state contingent transfers that differ
across countries nests any fiscal federalism scheme. Hence, the study of fiscal federalism
requires additional restrictions on the conduct of monetary policy.
Third, there is another monetary arrangement that is closely related to monetary union:

the adoption of the currency of another country.32 We term this regime "dollarization"
30For the case of Argentina, the fiscal deficits of the individual provinc are actually financed jointly
through national taxation and the printing of money.
31See, for example, the discussion in V. Koen and M. Marrese [1995] and T. 3. Balinos, 1). Hoelscher and
J. Horder [1997].
32See, for example, the recent analysis of Bencivenga et al. [1999] on dollarization in a setting where

29

in recognition of the use of the U.S. dollar in a number of Latin America countries, such

as Panama, Ecuador and possibly Argentina. This structure is similar to monetary union

except that the choice of stabilization through monetary policy remains with one of the
countries. Of interest is understanding how this relationship compares to the environment
of multiple currencies and to monetary union.

capital market integration is central.

30

7 References
Aizenman, J., "Competitive Externality and Optimal Seigniorage," Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, vol. 24, 1992, 61-71.

Aizenman, J., "Fiscal Discipline in a Union," in The Political Economy of Reform, cii,
Sturzenegger, F. and M. Tommasi, MIT Press: Cambridge, Mass., 1998,
Aizenman, 3. and A. Powell, "The Political Economy of Public Savings and the Role of
Capital Mobility," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 57, 1998, 67-95.
Balino, T. J., D. Hoelscher and 3. Horder, "Evolution of Monetary Policy Instruments

in Russia", International Monetary Fund Working Paper n°07/18O, 1997.
Beetsma, R. and H. Uhlig, "An Analysis for the 'Stability Pact", mimeo, May 1997.
Bencivenga, V., E. Huybens and B. Smith, "Dollarization and the Integration of Interna-

tional Capital Markets:A Contribution to the Theory of Optimal Currency Areas,' mimeo,
University of Texas-Austin, 1999.

Buiter, W., "The EMU and the NAMU: what is the case for North-American monetary
union?", CEPR Discussion Paper n°2181, june 1999.
Chari, V.V. and P. Kehoe, "On the Need for Fiscal Constraints in a Monetary Union,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, September 1997.

Christiano, L. and M. Eichenbaum, "Liquidity Effects and the Monetary Transmission
Mechanism", American Economic Review, vol. 82, 1992, 344-353.

Cole, H. L. and M. Obstfeld, "Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing: How
much Do Financial Markets Matter?", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 28, 3-24.

Cooper, R. and H. Kempf, "Establishing a Monetary Union", NBER Working Paper
n°6791, October 1998.

Emerson, M., D. Gros, A. Italianer, J. Pisany-Ferry and J. Reichenbach, One Market,
One Money, Oxford University Press, 1992.
Feldstein, M., "The Political Economy of the European Economic and Monetary Union:
Political Sources of an Economic Liability," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11, 1997,
23-42.

Fuerst, T., "Liquidity, Loanable Funds and Real Activity", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 29, 1992, 3-24.

31

Grubel, H., "The Case for the Amero: The Economics and Politics of a North American

Monetary Union" Critical Issues Bulletin, Fraser Institute, 1999.
Koen, V. and M. Marrese, "Stabilization and Structural Change in Russia, 1992-1994",
International Monetary Fund Working Paper nb95/13, 1995.
Lucas, R. E. Jr, "Liquidity and Interest Rates", Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 50,
1990, 237-264.

Mundell, R., "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic Review, vol.
51, 1961, 657-665.

Poterba, 1, "Budget Institutions and Fiscal Policy in the U.S. States," American Economic Review Papers and Pmceedings, vol. 86, 1996, 395-400.

Rolnick, A., B. Smith and W. Weber, "In Order to Form a More Perfect Monetary
Union," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 17 (1993).
Saiegh, S. and M. Tominasi, "Why is Argentina's Fiscal Federalism so Inefficient? Enter-

ing the Labyrinth" Journal of Applied Economics, vol. 2, 1999, 169-209.
Sargent, T. and N. Wallace, "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic," Federal Reserve
of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, vol. 5, 1981, 1-17.

Zarazaga, C., "Recurrent Hyperinflations in a Dynamic Game with Imperfect Monitoring
in the Appropriation of Seignorage,"Federai Reserve Bank of Dallas, undated.

32

APPENDIX

1 Proof of Proposition 1
The planner solves

max
c(a,6),c(s,9 ),n(s),n (a)

E3{q_iUF + (1 — q_i)U" + q1U*E' + (1 —

•—qg(n(s)) — qg(n'(s))}

(44)

subject to:

Eg,ga [q_1C(s, 9) + (1— q_i)J" (a, 8) + qic*E(s, 0') + (1— q1)c(s, 0)] = n(q, q')q (45)

E9,9 [q_ic s, 8)+(1—q_i)&'" (a, 8)+q1c(s, 0)+(1—q.1)c°"(s, 9')] = n'(q, q')q'. (46)
Denoting A and A' the multipliers associated with the two constraints, the first-order conditions imply:

e

0

c(s,0)

c"(s,0)

eEl V)

1—0,

1—0'

c'(s,9) cCT(a,8)

—

—

c"f(a,8')

—

for all 8, 8, 8. Further:

A = g'(n) and A' = g'(n')

Using the resource constraint to solve for A and A, the first-best allocation is characterized
by:

8

cE(s, 0)

—
—

8

c"(s, 8)

—
—

(1—8')

—
—

e"(s, 8')

c.uh(s, 9')

for all (0,9'), and

g'(n)nq = 1 = 4'(n')n'q
as in the proposition.

33

(1—9')

-

2 Proof of Proposition 2
A. The maximization problem of an employed agent

The maximization problem solved by an employed, generation t home agent is:
hi8 {üt+1 In (c') + (1 —

8.t.

Pt (1 — Tt)

t=

mTh +

,,Eh—J
Pi+i+i

•
•

in (c) }

—

etmV'

(47)

(48)

• Ef_ Sf
Pt+i;+i — mit

Eh

(ni)

49

The first-order conditions lead to two equalities:

9 (2t) —

pt(1—rd(1—)

____ —
—

ep;ic

1—

m÷ici
etp;+1cf1

(50

Hence:

t9 (itt) =

=

esp+ic

—

-tMt (1 — Ti)
using the individual budget constraint and where M ptqgrit is the total amount of home
money in circulation at period t. Defining

mf' 1-M(1—r)
and assuming that 4' =

',

it is deduced that:
E

which implies that it1 is constant over time and denoted by-7i.

Remark then that:

p(1—r2)n=
and we get:
,.Eh

v

•

Sf —

34

which implies that 0 = and g' (ff) = 1. It is then easy to obtain the levels of consumption
for an employed agent. From above, we can write that:

Eh Mt(1—rt) 0 M
q

pt+i

qt÷i (1—vs)
—
=(1—r)qt÷in—O'n————
q -''t-1-1
s+O

(51)

since Mt+i

B. The maximization problem of an unemployed agent
The maximization problem solved by an unemployed, generation t, home agent is:

max E9 {o+ In (c) + (1 — 9+) in (c) }

- mt ,mt

s.t.

if

=

mr + etrnf'
Uf_
Pt+ict+1
—

Uh._ Uh
pt-i-i;+i — Tnt

*

(52)

(53)

Ui

4

The -first-order conditions lead to the following inequality:
Uh

v

Pt+lCt+i
. UI

1_•_ etpt+ict÷i
Defining mftt

If and assuming that çA =

0 = ____

constraint that:

1—

which

, it follows from the individual budget

1—

implies that (bU = = 9 Then the following expressions hold:

(1—

qjemf1 = (1—)(1—rt)Mt
= (i —•J) (r+u)M2

implying:

Using a similar reasoning for the foreign economy, we get from the clearing condition on the

35

exchange market the following equality:

—qflm"] = (1 —) (1+aflM;
or equivalently:
1VL4 —

Given that the equality between money supply and the aggregate nominal product in one

country, this immediately implies that:

:

6tPt+i

(55)

q

We then easily get the levels of consumption given in the proposition.

3 Proof of Proposition 3
The maximization problem solved by the home government can be written as follows:

max E0 (qtu
T ,U
given

Denoting

') (i — qt) (u (c', 4(iD)

r', 5;F

(56)

and given the expressions for the various levels of consumption, the

first-order condition generates the following equality:

-

= qt.

(57)

4 Proof of Proposition 4
Any government takes the transfer received by his unemployed agent from the central mon-

etary authority, Af, as given. The first order conditions for the agents' programs and the
resulting consumption levels and supply levels allow us to write the optimization program
of the home government as follows:

maxE{qtln (if) + (1— q,)ln (if) —Thn(p1) — (1— )ln
36

(+)}

(58)

t—
jE(i_73) fl—pjirf1
q+ 1—q

s.t.

(59)

The first-order condition for the home government implies 11E = Jf• Using this condition,

the home and foreign tax rates are given by:

—
r5 =(1—qg)—qpqn
______

—q _______
, ,_.

Given the decisions rules of the fiscal authorities, the central monetary authority solves:

maxE{qn(If)+(1—q)ln(If)+q(I)+(1—qflln(Ir)
—ln(pt÷i) — In

(60)

(z4+)}

U_5qt +A9
qt

1E = pr(i_r5)
r.E = p*fj (1 —

s.t.

It —
j*TJ

r;5)

S

= (1—q)—q_____
—

=Ptt.5 _____
•—

r5=(1—qfl—q

ptqtn

t
______

pqi

The first-order conditions are:
1

If

—

dp+1i
d.Aj9

—

dp÷1 1 = 0
S

1

Pt dA Pt

—

dp1
____1— dp÷1 1 = 0.
dL15p

From market-clearing conditions, we find:

= E9,0 {qgei + (1 — qt) 9ItL + q; (1 — e•) j.E + (1 — qfl (1 — 9) i.u}
Hence:
—

—

dAf

qt+iIi

q1'

and similarly:

dif

—

and

37

—

B

(61)

Then, taking the v1ues for the tax ratios into consideration, the first-order conditions imply

that:
1

ptqt + Af
1

ptq + A

—

____

______ —

1—!

=

q;÷1np;
—

_____ —
______

0,

_____ —
— 0
qt÷i7ipt

(62)
63

assume Af = A5 = 0 is a solution and show it is consistent with the first-order
= 0, we verify from the first order conditions of the individual
conditions. If Af =

We

A

governments that incomes are equal irrespective of employment status. This equality of
incomes requires

rf=(1—qt)

r;5=(1—qfl.

(64)

Second-order conditions ensure that it is the only solution. The consumption and employment allocations for home agents arethen obtained by evaluating (12)-(13) given these policy

choices. Similar expressions hold for foreign agents.U

5 Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. This expression for ASF comes directly from the difference between (11) and (16).

Taking the second-order Taylor approximation of this expression, this gain associated to
strong monetary union can be viewed as:

Asp*var(O)[+ (']•
ASF > 0 if var(9) > 0 as 9c(O, 1). U

6 Proof of Proposition 6
We let C, as a superscript or a subscript, denote variables for the constrained monetary
union case. The maximization prèblem of the monetary authority is similar to the problem
explored in the proof of Proposition 4, with the restriction that: r = = rC. The first-order

38

conditions then become:
1

1

— ____ —
=0
+ 7 qt÷ipt-i-i q÷171p1
1— ——o
—
—

p71rG!i?; + EsP

q171p1

qt÷f7ipt+i

(65)
66

(i) Suppose that the- monetary transfers ensure perfect income equalization within the
monetary union, given the fixed tax rate. Given the definitions of incomes, this implies:

jru = 1E = ii (i —

r°) Pt = pU = = (i — re') *

hence:

to q

Pt = p. Using the market clearing equalities, the equalization of prices is equivalent
= , or corr (q, q) = 1. Hence this is a solution to the governments problem if

corr (q, q') = 1. As we obtain the same allocation as under a strong monetary union, we get

that V = Vc if corr (q, q) = 1.
(ii) Suppose that corr (q, q') is near 1 and the variance of taste shocks is positive. From

Proposition 5, V5 > VF when var(9) >0. Since Vs = V, when corr(q,q) = 1 by continuity,
V > Vp. when corr (q, q) is near 1.
(iii) Suppose that var (9) = 0. This implies that Vs = Vp (from Proposition 5). Yet, when

corr(q,q)

l,Vg > Vc. Hence when taste shocks are not too volatile and corr(q,q) 1,
-

VF>VC.

7

Proof of Proposition 7

Given the expressions for consumption levels and using the fact that n = 71, the maximization problem of the home government can be rewritten as:

max{qtinlf + (1— qt)lnI —Olnptti —(1 —)lnp1 + Arr}
s.t.

1E = Pt'11 (i —

=

rr)

i

[pt71rflt + ar']

(67)
(68)

where A is the multiplier associated with rt - 0. In this optimization problem the home
government recognizes the effect of its policies on the equilibrium prices. The market clearing

39

-

conditions can be written as:

'=('—)&

'=#±('—)#

where D1 (Di) is p÷q+i1i (p1qf1ii), I = qIf + (1 —

(69)

q)I and i = qI + (1 — q)I.

Using these market clearing conditions, the derivatives of prices with respect to the transfers
are:

Pt+i D

Pt+i
The effects of tax rates on prices is zero sinc spending is independent of the distribution of
Pt+i

Pt+i

income within a country.

Using these results the two first-order conditions for the home government are:
(1

—

qtptn

m

\
— qt)ptn1_q,

—
mA —

—'-

___ - 0
—

ItT

()
71

With 9 = 1/2, (69) imply that D1 = D for all t. F\irther, these conditions imply that
(72)

Using (71) and the analogous condition for the foreign country,

IUJ.LT>D
since + (1— )2 c 1. Hence, for (72) to hold,

IE<D

and

I*E<D.

This implies that the employed in each country have lower nominal income than the unem-

ployed. Thus in order for (70) to hold, as well as the analogous condition for the foreign
country, A > 0 and A* > 0. So, tax rates must be zero in both countries.

As r and r are equal to 0, given the definitions of the monetary transfers, and = 1/2,

40

the FOCs for the home and foreign governments become:

r

1—q——Iii

1

=0

1

1

[t÷im÷i

q÷1np÷1]

=0

1

Lqt+im÷i

1—q
_____

—

1

From the market clearing conditions:

= Eep {qjeif + (1— qj) gjtU+q; (1 O*)J*E+ (1— q) (1— O*)I0n1}
= Eop• {q;gj;E + (1 — q2•) OI + q (1 —9) If + (1 — qt) (1 — 0) if}

we get when = 1/2:

=

pt÷iqt+j71 =

[, +

r

+

and the FOCs can be written:

1—q1 1

1—q1 1
—

—

2 qt+ipt+i

2 qg+i"pt+i

(73)

This implies:
1

Finally we get the reaction functions:

-

a= lt.[M+a1] Lsr= '—;.[M+V]

(74)

The Nash equilibrium of the game is then given by the following:

1—qt
—1

1—q
•M a'= qt+q—1

This completes the proof as 2D_1 =

41

M2

(75)

8 Proof of Proposition 8
Note that under both designs, the employment and thus output levels are the same. Then,
given the welfare function for the representative agent and the strict concavity of the utility
function, an allocation of this ouput generating perfect risk sharing dominates an ailocation

which does not guarantee perfect risk sharing. •

9 Proof of Proposition 9
Proof. Here we denote the welfare under the weak central bank allocation as Vy. If
var(O) = 0, V,. = Vg > 14, where the second inequality follows from Proposition S as long

as (7 and 4* are below 1 so that there are some states with unemployment in one of the
two countries. If the countries never experience unemployment so that q = = 1 with
probability one, then from Proposition 7, there is no inflation. In this case, V = Vs > VP
as long as taste shocks are present. Hence by continuity, if q and q near one on average
and not too volatile, then by continuity 17w > Vp.•

42

