                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EXPECTATIONS HYPOTHESES TESTS


                                             Geert Bekaert
                                            Robert J. Hodrick


                                          Working Paper 7609
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7609

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




We are grateful to David Ng and Paul Sengmueller of Columbia University and especially Joe Chen of
Stanford University for research assistance. Geert Bekaert gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Geert Bekaert and Robert J. Hodrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Expectations Hypotheses Tests
Geert Bekaert and Robert J. Hodrick
NBER Working Paper No. 7609
March 2000
JEL No. E4, F3, C5
                                           ABSTRACT

       We investigate the Expectations Hypotheses of the term structure of interest rates and of the
foreign exchange market using vector autoregressive methods for the U.S. dollar, Deutsche mark,
and British pound interest rates and exchange rates. In addition to standard Wald tests, we formulate
Lagrange Multiplier and Distance Metric tests which require estimation under the non-linear
constraints of the null hypotheses. Estimation under the null is achieved by iterating on approximate
solutions that require only matrix inversions. We use a bias-corrected, constrained vector
autoregression as a data generating process and construct extensive Monte Carlo simulations of the
various test statistics under the null hypotheses. Wald tests suffer from severe size distortions and
use of the asymptotic critical values results in gross over-rejection of the null. The Lagrange
Multiplier tests slightly under-reject the null, and the Distance Metric tests over-reject. Use of the
small sample distributions of the different tests leads to a common interpretation of the validity of
the Expectations Hypotheses. The evidence against the Expectations Hypotheses for these interest
rates and exchange rates is much less strong than under asymptotic inference.



Geert Bekaert                                         Robert J. Hodrick
Columbia Business School                              Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway                                         3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027                                    New York, NY 10027
NBER and Stanford University                          NBER
gb241@columbia.edu                                    rh169@columbia.edu
      According to the Expectations Hypothesis, information in current interest rates provides the
conditional expectation of future asset prices. The Expectations Hypothesis of the term structure
of interest rates (EH-TS) states that the current term spread between a long-term interest rate
and a short-term interest rate is the expected value of a weighted average of the expected future
changes in the short-term interest rate. This theory, popularized in the writings of Fisher (1930),
Keynes (1930), and Hicks (1953), continues to be a way that many economists think about the
determination of long-term interest rates. The Expectations Hypothesis in the foreign exchange
market (EH-FX) states that the interest-rate diﬀerential between two currencies is the conditional
expected value of the rate of depreciation of the high interest-rate currency relative to the low
interest-rate currency. Again, Fisher (1930) and Keynes (1930) discussed this hypothesis. Because
of covered interest arbitrage, the interest diﬀerential equals the forward premium, which is the
percentage diﬀerence between the forward exchange rate and the spot rate. Hence, the EH-FX
is equivalent to the Unbiasedness Hypothesis, which is the proposition that the logarithm of the
forward exchange rate is an unbiased predictor of the logarithm of the future spot rate. Many
economists also currently view the EH-FX as the way that forward exchange rates are determined.
      These Expectations Hypotheses (EHs) continue to have adherents because most modern asset
pricing theories imply either that expected future interest rates and exchange rates are related to
current interest rates directly through the EHs or with the addition to the EHs of risk premiums.
If these risk premiums are constant, the EHs can be said to hold because the temporal variation
in expected future asset prices drives the variability in current interest rates. If the risk premiums
are variable, the EHs will not hold, but the literature has had surprisingly little success generating
risk premiums that explain the empirical evidence.
      Empirical tests of the EHs are too numerous to enumerate. For the EH-FX, the statistical
evidence surveyed by Hodrick (1987), Bekaert and Hodrick (1993), and Engel (1996) strongly
rejects the hypothesis. In particular, high interest rate currencies do not depreciate as much as is
predicted by the theory. For the EH-TS, the evidence is more mixed. The EH-TS is often strongly
rejected with U.S. dollar (USD) interest rates, but for the currencies of a number of other countries,
standard tests often fail to reject.2
  2
      Campbell and Shiller (1991) and Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) examine the USD evidence. For other
currencies see Hardouvelis (1994), Gerlach and Smets (1997), Dahlquist and Jonsson (1995), and Bekaert, Hodrick,
and Marshall (1999).




                                                       3
       There are three main potential reasons for the rejection of the EHs. First, the EHs are based on
the assumption of rational expectations and unlimited arbitrage. It may be that irrational investors
make systematic forecast errors, and the ability of rational investors to profit from this situation
is limited by their risk aversion. Second, the presence of time-varying risk premiums means that
standard tests of the EHs omit the variables capturing the risk premium. If these variables are
correlated with interest rates, the estimated coeﬃcients would be pulled away from those implied
by the EHs. Third, the tests themselves may lead to false rejections because of their poor properties
in finite samples, which can be caused by highly persistent variables, peso problems, or learning.3
Recently, Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1997, 1999) and Valkanov (1998) have analyzed the poor
finite sample behavior of EH-TS tests, and Baillie and Bollerslev (1998), Maynard and Phillips
(1998), and Roll and Yan (1998) have argued that poor small-sample behavior may explain the
results of EH-FX tests. These papers note that if standard tests are poorly behaved in small
samples, inference based on standard asymptotic distribution theory is distorted, and alternative
methods of inference are necessary.
       In this paper, we re-consider the EHs in a vector autoregressive (VAR) framework. Apart from
standard Wald tests, we also investigate Lagrange Multiplier (LM) and Distance Metric (DM) tests
that require imposition of the null hypothesis in the estimation. Because the restrictions of the
EH-TS are highly non-linear, estimating under these restrictions is generally a non-trivial exercise.
We develop an easy-to-implement procedure that extends the suggested estimator of Newey and
McFadden (1994) and that works quite well. Once we have estimated the VAR subject to the
constraints of the EHs, we can use this system as a data generating mechanism to investigate the
small-sample properties of the various tests. We find that the Wald test, the test predominantly
used in the literature, has by far the worst small-sample properties. Conducting inference with
Wald tests would therefore often be very mis-leading, since the sizes of the tests are quite poor.
The DM tests also overreject, but less strongly than the Wald tests. The LM tests, on the other
hand, are slightly conservative. Overall, the LM tests perform the best. When reconsidering the
evidence on the EHs for the USD, the Deutsche mark (DEM), and the British pound (GBP), we
find that inference with the small-sample distributions considerably weakens the case against the
EHs.
   3
       An early reference to the small-sample problem is Mankiw and Shapiro (1986). Evans (1996) surveys the peso-
problem literature, and Lewis (1989) is an early example of the role of learning.




                                                          4
   The paper is organized as follows. Section I examines the conditions under which the EHs
arise in a no-arbitrage framework. Section II details several econometric approaches to testing the
EHs, developing both standard regression tests and the more novel VAR-based tests we propose.
Section III briefly describes the data on interest rates and exchange rates. Section IV examines the
small-sample properties of the various tests using bootstrap and Monte Carlo analysis. Section V
applies the tests to the data. The conclusions summarize our findings and reflect on the usefulness
of our test procedures and the technique for imposing non-linear constraints in other settings.
   I. The Expectations Hypotheses
   By the EH-TS for a particular currency j, we mean that the continuously compounded zero-
coupon n-period interest rate, ijt,n , equals the average of the current and expected future short
interest rates plus a maturity specific constant:

                                                 1 n−1
                                                   X
                                       ijt,n =         Et (ijt+h ) + αjn ,                          (1)
                                                 n h=0

where we drop the maturity subscript for one period rates.
   By the EH-FX, we mean the proposition that the conditional expectation of the continuously
compounded rate of appreciation of currency j relative to currency k equals the diﬀerential between
the continuously compounded interest rates for the two currencies plus a constant. Let St denote the
currency-k price of currency j. Then, with lower-case letters indicating either natural logarithms
of upper-case counterparts or continuously compounded interest rates, the EH-FX is

                                                                   j
                                  Et (st+n − st ) = αk,j    k
                                                     n + n(it,n − it,n ).                           (2)

   It is straightforward to demonstrate that these expectation hypotheses are consistent with a
class of modern financial models in which assets are priced by no arbitrage restrictions. In economies
                                                                    j
that do not admit arbitrage, any return denominated in currency j, Rt+1 , satisfies

                                                 j    j
                                            Et (Mt+1 Rt+1 ) = 1,                                    (3)

       j
where Mt+1 denotes the currency-j pricing kernel. When the returns and the pricing kernels are
log-normally distributed, equation (3) implies the following:

              Et (mjt+1 ) + 0.5Vt (mjt+1 ) + Et (rt+1
                                                  j               j
                                                      ) + 0.5Vt (rt+1 ) + Ct (mjt+1 , rt+1
                                                                                       j
                                                                                           ) = 0,   (4)

where the conditional variance and covariance are denoted Vt (.) and Ct (.), respectively. Because
the rate of return associated with the continuously compounded one-period interest rate is in the

                                                        5
time t information set, equation (4) implies that
                                            h                              i
                                    ijt = − Et (mjt+1 ) + 0.5Vt (mjt+1 ) .                         (5)

To derive the implications for the term structure of interest rates, consider the continuously com-
pounded, one-period rate of return on an n-period bond, rbjt+1,n ≡ ijt,n + (n − 1)(ijt,n − ijt+1,n−1 ).
Using equations (4) and (5) we find
                                                h                                       i
                      Et (rbjt+1,n ) − ijt = − 0.5Vt (rbjt+1,n ) + Ct (mjt+1 , rbjt+1,n ) .        (6)

The right-hand side of equation (6) is a constant for any bond-pricing model, such as Vasicek’s
(1977), in which the logarithmic pricing kernel is conditionally homoskedastic. Let this constant
be denoted cjn . By using the definition of the rate of return on the bond and the relation between
logarithmic bond prices and yields to maturity, equation (6) implies
                                                    h                  i
                                  nijt,n = ijt + Et (n − 1)ijt+1,n−1 + cjn .                       (7)

Recursive application of equation (7) and use of the law of iterated expectations implies equation
                 Pn    j
(1) with αjn ≡    h=2 ch .

   Note that any currency-j return can be converted into a currency-k return by multiplying by
St+1 /St , which recognizes that one must first purchase one unit of currency j with currency k and
then resell the currency j return for currency k. Hence, if markets are complete, and by using
equation (3) for each currency, we find that the diﬀerence of the logarithms of the pricing kernels
equals the rate of appreciation of currency j relative to currency k:

                                         mjt+1 − mkt+1 = st+1 − st .                               (8)

We can derive the implications for the EH-FX by taking the conditional expectation of equation
(8) and substituting from equation (5) evaluated for each of the currencies:

                        Et (st+1 − st ) = (ikt − ijt ) + 0.5Vt (mkt+1 ) − 0.5Vt (mjt+1 ).          (9)

As with the term structure, the EH-FX is true in economies with conditionally homoskedastic
logarithmic pricing kernels. It is possible to derive general expressions for the term premiums and
foreign exchange premiums in terms of the conditional moments of the logarithm of the pricing
kernel under much weaker conditions than log-normality. The Appendix demonstrates that the


                                                        6
conditions for the EHs to hold are constancy of all second and higher order conditional moments
of the log pricing kernel.
   The logic that leads to equation (9) can also be used to verify that equation (2) holds for the
n-period maturity. Note that st+1 −st +ikt −ijt is a one-period excess rate of return that also satisfies
equation (6). After substituting into equation (6), the right-hand side is then the one-period foreign
exchange risk premium previously indicated by αk,j
                                               1 . When both the one-period EH-FX holds and

the n-period EH-TS holds in both currencies, the n-period foreign exchange premium is constant
and equals
                              h                             i
                                                     j         k,j
                    αk,j                      k                       k    j
                     n = Et (st+n − st ) − n(it,n − it,n ) = nα1 − n(αn − αn ).                     (10)

An investment of a unit of currency k in the n-period currency-j bond earns the currency-j term
premium and n times the one-period foreign exchange premium. The opportunity cost is the
currency-k term premium.
   II.Econometric Procedures
   This section develops several alternative econometric approaches to testing the EHs derived in
equations (1) and (2). We begin with traditional single-equation specifications and then consider
tests based on unconstrained and constrained VARs. Since the validity of the asymptotic distribu-
tions of the various test statistics is questionable in the sample sizes we have available, we do not
present any estimation results until we have developed all of the statistics and explained how we
will assess their finite sample properties.
   The derivation of the asymptotic properties of the test statistics relies on Hansen’s (1982)
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM), which uses orthogonality conditions defined by the theory
to develop tests. The orthogonality conditions are based on the assumption of rational expectations,
which implies that the realization of a random variable is equal to its conditional expectation plus
an error term that is orthogonal to the information set used to form the expectation. To represent
a vector of orthogonality conditions specified by the expectation theories, let yt be a vector of data
in the time t information set, and let xt−1 be a vector of instruments that are in the time t-1
information set. Let h(yt , xt−1 , θ) be a vector-valued function of the data and the parameters to be
estimated, θ, with the property that

                                         Et [h(yt , xt−1 , θ)] = 0                                  (11)

when the null hypothesis is true and the function is evaluated at the parameter θ0 . Let the vector

                                                    7
ηt be an error process defined by the rational expectations assumption applied to equation (11),
and define the vector zt ≡ (yt0 , x0t−1 )0 and the vector-valued function of the data and the parameters,
g(zt , θ) ≡ ηt ⊗ xt−1 . Then, the unconditional orthogonality conditions used in a GMM estimation
are
                                            E[g(zt , θ)] = 0.                                       (12)

Estimation uses the corresponding sample moment conditions for a sample of size T:
                                                        T
                                                     1X
                                        gT (θ) ≡           g(zt , θ).                               (13)
                                                     T t=1

The parameters are estimated by minimizing the GMM criterion function which is a quadratic form
in the sample orthogonality conditions using a weighting matrix, W :

                                        JT (θ) ≡ gT (θ)0 W gT (θ).                                  (14)

Hansen (1982) demonstrates that the optimal weighting matrix is a consistent estimate of the
inverse of
                                        k=∞
                                         X       £                      ¤
                                   Ω≡          E g(zt , θ)g(zt−k , θ)0 .                            (15)
                                        k=−∞

Let the gradient of the sample orthogonality conditions be GT (θ) ≡ ∇θ gT (θ), and let ΩT represent
a consistent estimate of Ω. When the weighting matrix is chosen optimally as Ω−1
                                                                              T , the GMM

asymptotic distribution theory implies that
                                 √
                                  T (bθ − θ0 ) → N[0, (G0T Ω−1    −1
                                                            T GT ) ]                                (16)

where θb denotes the parameter estimate and the symbol → denotes convergence in distribution.
The standard errors implicit in equation (16) are autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent.
      Regression Tests
      It is straightforward to derive ordinary least squares (OLS) regression tests of the various
expectation hypotheses. Under rational expectations, equation (2) evaluated for n = 1 becomes

                                st+1 − st = αk,j   k,j k    j
                                             1 + β 1 (it − it ) + ²t+1                              (17)

where ²t+1 is the rational expectations error term and the null hypothesis is that the slope coeﬃcient
equals one. A GMM estimation based on the orthogonality of the error term to a constant and the
interest diﬀerential reduces to OLS estimation of equation (17), and setting k = 0 in equation (15)
produces heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.

                                                       8
   Campbell and Shiller (1991) propose two distinct regression tests of the EH-TS based on equa-
tion (1). The first specification test can be derived directly from equation (1) under the assumption
of rational expectations:
                             1 n−1
                               X j
                                  (i ) − ijt = αjn + β jn (ijt,n − ijt ) + ν t+n−1 .             (18)
                             n h=0 t+h
The null hypothesis is again that the slope coeﬃcient equals one, and the estimation uses the fact
that the error term, ν t+n−1 , is orthogonal to a constant and the term spread at time t. While
OLS provides the parameter estimates, appropriate GMM standard errors must allow for the serial
correlation of the errors induced by overlapping observations by setting k = n − 1 in equation (15).
   The second specification test of Campbell and Shiller (1991) is derived by rearranging equation
(7) and using rational expectations:
                                                                 1
                            ijt+1,n−1 − ijt,n = δ jn + γ jn           (ijt,n − ijt ) + ξ t+1 .   (19)
                                                              (n − 1)
The OLS specification uses the orthogonality of the error term, ξ t+1 , to a constant and the adjusted
term spread, and the null hypothesis is again that the slope coeﬃcient equals one. Standard
errors can be constructed by setting k = 0 in equation (15). When only constant maturities are
available, this specification test is often performed with ijt+1,n on the left-hand side instead of
ijt+1,n−1 . Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) note that this change of variables leads to an
upward bias in the prediction of the slope coeﬃcient such that values greater than one are expected
under the null hypothesis, even asymptotically.
   Tests from Unconstrained Vector Autoregressions
   It is also possible to develop GMM-based tests of the expectation hypotheses using the orthog-
onality conditions of a VAR. With a VAR, one can test the theory directly as well as calculate
implied slope coeﬃcients that are analogous to the directly estimated OLS slope coeﬃcients dis-
cussed above. Below, we examine VARs that involve a two-country framework using data from
three developed economies to investigate the various EHs. For convenience of presentation, we
number the currencies and use standard currency abbreviations in the following way: one for the
USD, two for the DEM, and three for the GBP. Thus, i1t is the USD short interest rate, and sp2t
is the spread between the DEM long interest rate and the DEM short interest rate. Since all rates
of change of exchange rates are expressed versus the USD, ∆sjt is the rate of appreciation of the
USD relative to currency j, for j = 2, 3. The variables in the VAR are the rate of appreciation
of the USD relative to a currency j, the USD interest rate, the currency-j interest rate, the USD

                                                          9
spread, and the currency-j spread. To develop the econometric model, stack the five variables into
the vector yt ≡ (∆sjt , i1t , ijt , sp1t , spjt )0 . Then, let a K-th order VAR represent the demeaned data
generating process for yt :

                                               K
                                               X
                                      yt+1 =         Bk yt−k+1 + ηt+1                                 (20)
                                               k=1
where the parameters Bk represent five-dimensional square matrixes of coeﬃcients, and ηt+1 is the
vector of innovations that is orthogonal to the time t information set. The first-order companion
form of the VAR can be represented using the vector xt ≡ (yt0 , yt−1
                                                                 0 , ...y 0     0
                                                                         t−K+1 ) :


                                           xt+1 = Θxt + ξ t+1 .                                       (21)

The parameter matrix, Θ, is a 5K-dimensional square matrix with the Bk matrixes stacked hori-
zontally in the first five rows, a 5(K-1) identity matrix beneath these parameters on the left, and
zeroes elsewhere. The innovation vector, ξ t+1 ≡ (η0t+1 , 0...0), has variance matrix Σ. With this
specification there are (25K) parameters in θ 0 .
   We use the VAR parameters and the asymptotic distribution in equation (16) to generate test
statistics that are based on implied counterparts of the OLS slope coeﬃcients. We can also develop
tests of the full restrictions of the EHs in the VAR framework. To derive these tests we need to
consider the implications of the EHs for the coeﬃcients of the VAR.
   Although the EHs are based on the full information set of economic agents, as long as that
information set includes the information on the right-hand sides of the VAR equations, the law of
iterated expectations implies that we can use the VAR to test the theories. From the companion
form of the VAR in equation (21), we know that forecasts of xt+h , based on the information in the
VAR at time t, may be generated as

                                           Etx (xt+h ) = Θh xt ,                                      (22)

where the expectation is with respect to the information set of the VAR. The EHs consequently
imply highly non-linear sets of restrictions on the parameters. To derive the constraints on the
parameters, define the indicator vectors, ej , which have dimension 5K, a one in the j-th position,
and zeroes elsewhere. The vector of restrictions from the EH-FX for one-period interest rates may
be written as
                                            e01 Θ = (e03 − e02 ).                                     (23)

                                                      10
Next, consider the derivation of the restrictions of the EH-TS for each currency. For the USD
interest rates, equation (1) implies the following restrictions on the underlying parameters of the
VAR:
                                       h                                 i
                              e04 = e02 (1/n)(I − Θn )(I − Θ)−1 − I .                           (24)

The analogous restrictions associated with the EH-TS of the foreign currency interest rates are
                                       h                                 i
                              e05 = e03 (1/n)(I − Θn )(I − Θ)−1 − I .                           (25)

   The representations of the EHs in equations (23)-(25) allow estimation of implied slope coeﬃ-
cients that are analogous to the directly estimated OLS coeﬃcients. For example, the implied slope
coeﬃcient from the VAR that is analogous to the slope coeﬃcient in equation (17) is
                                                  e01 ΘΨ(e3 − e2 )
                                     β k,j =                                                    (26)
                                               (e3 − e2 )0 Ψ(e3 − e2 )
where Ψ is the unconditional variance of xt , which is computed from vec(Ψ) = (I −Θ⊗Θ0 )−1 vec(Σ).
The numerator of equation (26) is the covariance between the expected future rate of apprecia-
tion and the interest diﬀerential, while the denominator is the variance of the interest diﬀerential.
Similarly, the implied slope coeﬃcient for the USD EH-TS analogous to equation (18) is the covari-
ance between the average of the expected future interest rates and the current interest rate spread
divided by the variance of the current spread:
                                     e02 [(1/n)(I − Θn )(I − Θ)−1 − I]Ψe4
                           βU
                            n
                              SD
                                 =                                        .                     (27)
                                                     e4 0 Ψe4
The implied OLS coeﬃcient corresponding to equation (19) for the USD which uses the substitution
of the n-period rate for the n-1 period rate is
                                           (e4 + e2 )0 (Θ − I)Ψe4 (n − 1)
                               γU
                                n
                                  SD
                                     =                                    .                     (28)
                                                        e4 0 Ψe4
   To develop Wald tests of the three expectation hypotheses, let the null hypotheses in equations
(23)-(25) be summarized by
                                             H0 : a(θ0 ) = 0,                                   (29)

where a(θ0 ) is a 15K-dimensional vector that is non-linear in the underlying parameters. Let the
sample counterpart of this vector be aT (θ), let the gradient of the constraints with respect to the
parameters be AT ≡ ∇θ aT (θ), and let BT ≡ G0T Ω−1
                                                T GT . Then, it follows from a Taylor’s Series

approximation that
                                   √
                                    T aT (b
                                          θ) → N(0, AT BT−1 A0T ).                              (30)

                                                     11
A Wald test of the null hypothesis asks how close are the constraints to being satisfied at the
unconstrained parameter values. The test statistic follows from the asymptotic distribution in
equation (30):
                              T aT (bθ)0 (AT BT−1 A0T )−1 aT (b
                                                              θ) → χ2 (15K).                      (31)

   Estimation under the null hypothesis
   Both Distance Metric statistics, which are based on intuition from maximum likelihood, and
Lagrange Multiplier statistics require estimation of the parameters subject to the highly non-linear
constraints of equation (29), which is quite diﬃcult. One approach to constrained estimation
follows Melino (1983), who corrected an error in Sargent’s (1979) maximum likelihood estimation
of the EH-TS. Melino (1983) recognizes that the EH-TS imposes significant restrictions on the
eigenvectors of Θ.
   To understand these restrictions, consider a first-order VAR in which the five eigenvalues of Θ
are distinct. In this case, we can do an eigenvalue decomposition:

                                             Θ = P ΛP −1 ,                                        (32)

where Λ is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues and P is the matrix with the corresponding eigen-
vectors in its columns. Now, to derive the restrictions of the EHs, substitute from equation (32)
into equation (23) and multiply from the right-hand side by P implies

                                          e01 P Λ = (e03 − e02 )P.                                (33)

Let the diagonal elements of Λ be λj , and let the rows of P be Pi , with distinct elements Pij . Since
P1 can be normalized to a row vector of ones, this constraint implies

                                            P3j = P2j + λj .                                      (34)

By substituting equation (32) into equations (24) and (25) and simplifying, we find

                              e04 P = e02 P [(1/n)(I − Λn )(I − Λ)−1 − I]                         (35)

and
                              e05 P = e03 P [(1/n)(I − Λn )(I − Λ)−1 − I].                        (36)

The restrictions in equations (34)-(36) imply that the ten free parameters of the constrained es-
timation of a first-order VAR are the five eigenvalues and the five parameters of the second row

                                                    12
of the eigenvectors. All other parameters are functions of these fundamental parameters. Since
the eigenvalues can be complex conjugates, direct estimation of the constrained system is quite
complicated because the search must be conducted over potentially complex numbers.
   To estimate the parameters, θ, subject to the constraints in equation (29), we instead follow an
indirect route that extends the estimator proposed by Newey and McFadden (1994). Define the
Lagrangian for the constrained GMM maximization problem to be.

                                     L(θ, γ) = −(1/2)gT0 (θ)Ω−1               0
                                                             T gT (θ) − aT (θ) γ                               (37)

where γ is a vector of Lagrange multipliers. Let an overbar denote estimates subject to the con-
straints. Then, the first-order conditions for this problem can be written as
                                                              √              √   
                                      0            −G0T Ω−1
                                                            T
                                                                              0
                                                                  T gT (θ) − AT T γ 
                                        =                      √                 .                         (38)
                                         0                       − T aT (θ)

While equation (38) is non-linear in the parameters, we can derive an approximate asymptotic
solution using the law of large numbers and a Taylor’s Series expansion. Recognize that
                                                     √
                                                      T gT (θ0 ) → N(0, Ω),                                    (39)
                                         √          √               √
                                          T gT (θ) ≈ T gT (θ0 ) + GT T (θ − θ0 ),                              (40)

and
                                         √          √                √
                                          T aT (θ) ≈ T aT (θ 0 ) + AT T (θ − θ0 ).                             (41)

Under the null hypothesis, aT (θ0 ) = 0. Hence, when we substitute from equations (40) and (41)
into the first-order conditions, we find
                                              √                                 √            
                    0             −G0T Ω−1
                                           T      T gT (θ0 )     BT        A0T      T (θ − θ0 ) 
                      =                                     −                     √          .         (42)
                       0                         0                        AT 0                Tγ

The formula for a partitioned inverse implies that
                                −1                                                                     
                                                       −1/2  −1/2
                BT        A0T                      BT MT BT                BT−1 A0T (AT BT−1 A0T )−1   
                                       =                                                                   (43)
                       AT 0                          (AT BT−1 A0T )−1 AT BT−1      − (AT BT−1 A0T )−1

                       −1/2                                   −1/2
where MT ≡ I − BT              A0T (AT BT−1 A0T )−1 AT BT             is an idempotent matrix. Thus, the asymptotic
distribution for the constrained estimator and the Lagrange multiplier is
                                          √                    −1/2  −1/2
                                           T (θ − θ0 ) → N(0, BT MT BT )                                       (44)

                                                                 13
                                    √
                                     T γ → N[0, (AT BT−1 A0T )−1 ].                           (45)

Although direct maximization of the Lagrangian in equation (38) is feasible, it is often compu-
tationally diﬃcult. We instead extend the approach suggested in Newey and McFadden (1994)
who demonstrate how to derive a constrained consistent estimator starting from an initial uncon-
strained consistent estimator and using only matrix algebra. Let e
                                                                 θ represent an initial consistent
unconstrained estimate. Then, we have

                                     gT (θ) ≈ gT (e
                                                  θ) + GT (θ − e
                                                               θ)                             (46)

                                     aT (θ) ≈ aT (e
                                                  θ) + AT (e
                                                           θ − θ).                            (47)

After substituting into the first-order conditions and solving, we find

                          −1/2       −1/2
                θ≈e
                  θ − BT         MT BT      G0T Ω−1    e     −1 0      −1 0 −1    e
                                                 T gT (θ) − BT AT (AT BT AT ) aT (θ)          (48)

                 γ ≈ −(AT BT−1 A0T )−1 AT BT−1 G0T Ω−1    e         −1 0 −1    e
                                                    T gT (θ) + (AT BT AT ) aT (θ).            (49)

While Newey and McFadden (1994) note that the estimators in equations (48) and (49) are con-
sistent, they do not satisfy the constrained optimization problem exactly. In constructing our
constrained estimates, we iterated on equations (48) and (49), substituting the first constrained
estimate for the initial consistent unconstrained estimate to derive a second constrained estimate,
and so forth. We stopped the iterative process when the resulting constrained estimate satisfied
the constraints, i.e. when aT (θ) = 0.
   The values of the Lagrange multipliers are not zero at the constrained parameter estimates
when imposition of the constraints significantly aﬀects the value of the objective function. An LM
test asks whether we can reject the hypothesis that the multipliers are jointly zero. From equation
(45), the LM test for a K-th-order system is

                                    T γ 0 (AT BT−1 A0T )γ → χ2 (15K).                         (50)

   A GMM-based distance metric (DM) test, analogous to a likelihood ratio test, can also be
developed. Typically, this test is constructed as the sample size times the diﬀerence between the
GMM objective function evaluated at a constrained estimate and the GMM objective function
evaluated at the unconstrained estimate using the same weighting matrix in each estimation. Since
our unconstrained problem is just identified, the value of the GMM objective function is zero in


                                                   14
this case. Hence, the DM test for a K-th-order system is

                                         T gT (θ)0 Ω−1          2
                                                    T gT (θ) → χ (15K).                           (51)

      III. The Data
      Table 1 presents some summary statistics for the variables. All variables are measured in
percentage points per annum. Monthly rates of appreciation are annualized by multiplying by 1200.
While this transformation does not aﬀect the interpretation of the mean returns, the annualized
standard deviation is not the standard deviation associated with an annual holding period. The
sample period is January 1975 to July 1997. The exchange rates and Eurocurrency interest rates
are from Datastream. The dollar-based exchange rates are calculated from the quoted sterling
exchange rates which are closing middle rates provided by Reuters.
      Notice that the rates of appreciation are quite volatile and have very small autocorrelations.
The one-month interest rates are all highly autocorrelated, and the spreads between twelve-month
rates and one-month rates are persistent but not as highly autocorrelated as the short rates. Use
of interest rates and spreads as predictors of the rates of appreciation is consistent with the idea
that predictable changes in asset prices are small relative to their unpredictable changes.
      IV. Econometric Analysis of Test Statistics
      The goal of this section is two-fold. We first integrate our analysis with the recent evidence on
the small-sample characteristics of standard regression tests of the EH-TS and the EH-FX. Various
authors, including Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1997, 1999), Schotman (1996), and Valkanov
(1998) have demonstrated that the standard regression tests of the EH-TS are ill-behaved in small
samples under a variety of data generating processes (DGPs). In particular, small-sample biases
arise for essentially the same reason that was first discussed by Kendall (1954) in the context of
estimation of the parameters of autoregressive processes. The regressors are serially correlated
lagged dependent variables. Although the parameter estimates are consistent, the absence of strict
exogeneity of the regressors implies bias in small samples.4 In EH-TS tests, the regression coeﬃ-
cients are upwardly biased and their small-sample distributions are very dispersed. Tauchen (1985)
and Baillie and Bollerslev (1998) have also shown that EH-FX regressions suﬀer from a similar
problem. Unfortunately, research about the small-sample problems of doing inference about the
validity of the EHs does not arrive at a common conclusion.
  4
      Stambaugh (1999) provides a recent Bayesian treatment of these issues.



                                                         15
       Our VAR model imposes the three EHs while matching the time-series properties of the data.
Hence, we derive the small-sample distributions of the regression coeﬃcients under the null hypoth-
esis within a model that accommodates realistic persistence in both the foreign and local interest
rates and Granger-causality of interest rates both by spreads and exchange-rate changes. Moreover,
we compare the distributions of the standard regression coeﬃcients with the distributions of the
slope coeﬃcients implied by the VAR. If the VAR adequately captures the dynamics of the data,
we obtain slightly more eﬃcient estimates in some instances. For example, the long-run (12 month)
unbiasedness test and the test of Equation (18) lead to the loss of data, which is not the case in
the VAR.
       A second goal of this section is to examine whether alternatives to the simple Wald test have
superior small-sample properties. By imposing the non-linear constraints on the VAR dynamics,
we are also able to examine the relative size and power properties of the Wald, LM and DM tests
described in Section III.5 Given the well-known problems with Wald tests in general (as discussed in
Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996) for example), it may well be that these other tests have superior
small-sample properties.
       Alternative Data Generating Processes
       We use two DGPs in the Monte Carlo analysis. Both start from an unconstrained five variable
VAR. In principle, we could then apply the iterative scheme described in Section III to find the
VAR parameters that impose the null. However, as Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) note, the
estimated VAR parameters are biased in small samples. Hence, these parameters do not constitute
a relevant starting point.
       The bias-correction we implement proceeds as follows. We use the estimated unconstrained VAR
parameters to generate 100,000 artificial data sets of 269 observations using an i.i.d. bootstrap of
the residuals. We re-estimate the VAR parameters from these replications of the initial data. The
bias in the estimated parameters is estimated by the diﬀerence between the known parameters of the
DGP and the means of the Monte Carlo distributions based on the 100,000 replications. We then
bias-correct the original estimates by adding these biases to the original unconstrained estimates.
This yields a bias-corrected set of unconstrained parameters, µu and Au , which are also used in
   5
       Ligeralde (1997) examines the small-sample performance of various methods of constructing Wald tests. The
diﬀerential performance across alternatives is mostly due to how one deals with the serial correlation induced by the
overlapping error structure in the data. In our VAR setting however, this overlapping data problem does not arise.




                                                         16
simulations to represent an alternative hypothesis in which there are violations of the EHs. To
determine bias-corrected parameters that satisfy the null hypothesis, we use µu and Au to simulate
a very long series (70,000 observations plus 1,000 starting values that are discarded), which is then
subjected to the iterative estimation scheme described in Section III. These parameters are our
bias-corrected constrained parameters, µc and Ac
       In all cases we use a first-order VAR as that is the order chosen by the Schwarz Criterion. Table
A1 in the Appendix reports these test statistics in Panel A along with Cumby-Huizinga (1992) l-
tests for residual serial correlation in Panel B. Only for the residuals of the USD and DEM spreads
in that VAR do we find any evidence inconsistent with the first-order model. The three panels of
Table A2 report the unconstrained parameter estimates with their bias-corrected counterparts for
the three VARs. Table A3 reports the estimates of the VAR coeﬃcients that are constrained to
satisfy the EHs.
       In all of our experiments, we use the constrained coeﬃcients that are estimated from simul-
taneously imposing the EHs. For the first DGP, we bootstrap the original residuals from the
unconstrained VAR, and reconstruct constrained and unconstrained data, using µc and Ac , and µu
and Au , respectively. Whereas the sample size for each experiment is 269, each experiment gener-
ates an initial 1,000 observations that are discarded. We also check the validity of the computer
code by letting the sample size become very large and verifying convergence to the asymptotic
distributions. We conduct this bootstrap procedure for both the DEM-USD and the GBP-USD
VARs.
       Although the bootstrap procedure captures skewness and leptokurtosis in the data, it is po-
tentially unrealistic because it destroys higher-order dependence in the residuals (for example,
volatility clustering).6 To accommodate temporal heteroskedasticity and its potential eﬀects on
small-sample distributions, we also use a Monte Carlo experiment based on a parameterized model
of the residuals. We use the same conditional mean coeﬃcient matrices as in the bootstrap DGP,
but we draw the error terms according to a multivariate GARCH model.
       The GARCH model is similar to the factor GARCH models of Engle, Ng and Rothschild (1990),
Bekaert and Harvey (1997), and Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997). We model the innovation
   6
       We experimented with stationary bootstrap methods, as in Politis and Romano (1994) and Politis, Romano, and
Wolf (1997), which allow for dependence, but they do not seem well-suited for problems where the data are highly
persistent but residuals ought to be uncorrelated.




                                                         17
vector, ηt , as a factor structure with the innovations of the short rates in the two countries as the
factors. Thus,
                                                   η t = F et                                     (52)

with                                                                      
                                            
                                              1 f12 f13 0 0 
                                                           
                                             0 1    0 0 0 
                                                           
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                      F =  0 f32           1     0 0  .                         (53)
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                             0 f           f43   1 0 
                                                42                   
                                                                     
                                                0 f52 f53 0 1
Note that the innovation in the USD interest rate aﬀects the innovation in the foreign interest rate,
but the foreign interest rate shock does not aﬀect the USD interest rate innovation. In eﬀect, f32
determines the correlation between the two fundamental shocks to the system. In equation (52), the
vector et represents the idiosyncratic innovations. Hence, Et−1 [et e0t ] = Ht , where Ht is a diagonal
matrix. As a result, the conditional covariance matrix of the innovations, ηt ,which is denoted Σt ,
can be written as Σt = F Ht F 0 . We assume that elements in Ht corresponding to the two factors
and the conditional exchange rate variance follow a GARCH(1,1) process (see Bollerslev (1986)).
For the conditional variances of the interest rates, we augment the model to allow the conditional
variance to depend on the past interest rate as in the univariate model of Gray (1996). Thus, the
model for the conditional variances can be written as follows:

                          hjt = β j hjt−1 + αj (ejt−1 )2 + ω j (ijt−1 ),       j = 2, 3.          (54)

The modification to the usual GARCH model accommodates the dramatic shift in short-rate volatil-
ity during the monetary targeting period of 1979-1982. In this model, the conditional variances of
the twelve-month term spreads and the rate of change of the exchange rate have three components:
a component linear in the conditional variance of the USD short rate, a component linear in the
conditional variance of the foreign short rate and an idiosyncratic component. Compared to other
multivariate GARCH models, the model is very parsimonious with only 18 parameters. This parsi-
mony is achieved by restricting the covariance matrix to depend only on the conditional variances
of the two short rates.
   To estimate the model in equations (52) to (54), we exploit the block-diagonal nature of the
information matrix and estimate the multivariate GARCH model from the VAR residuals, us-
ing quasi-maximum likelihood. Hence, we assume normal innovations to construct the likelihood

                                                       18
function although the true distribution of the innovations may not be normal. White (1982) and
Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992) show that the resulting estimator is consistent and asymptotically
normal.
       Tables A4 and A5 contain the estimation results for the GARCH models for the DEM and
USD rates and the GBP and USD rates, respectively. We first discuss the DEM-USD system.
The conditional variances of the USD and DEM short rates are moderately persistent with large
ARCH coeﬃcients. There is some remaining time-variation in the idiosyncratic component of the
conditional variance of the exchange rate, but it shows little persistence. The exchange rate shows
small, but statistically significantly positive factor loadings with respect to both the USD and the
DEM interest rates.7 The USD term spread residual is negatively correlated with the USD short-
rate shock, as is expected, and it only weakly depends on the DEM rate. The DEM spread residual
is also strongly negatively correlated with the DEM short rate, but it is correlated positively with
the USD short rate. This does not necessarily imply that unexpected increases in the USD short
rate steepen the German yield curve, since the USD short rate is positively related to the DEM
short rate, and increases in the DEM short rate increases flatten the yield curve.
       Table A5 reports the GBP-USD system. The estimates are in many ways qualitatively similar
to the DEM-USD system although the conditional variances of both the USD and GBP short
rates show more persistence. We again find positive exchange-rate factor loadings with respect
to both the USD and GBP interest rate shocks, but the GBP interest rate eﬀect is statistically
insignificant. The factor loadings for the spreads also have the same signs as in the DEM-USD
system. The covariance between the USD and GBP interest rate shocks is much lower than the
comparable one between the USD and DEM interest rates. The USD-GBP system does somewhat
under-predict the unconditional variances of both the USD and the GBP interest rates.
       As mentioned above, the innovations in the Monte Carlo experiments are drawn either from
the bootstrap procedure or the GARCH models, and the DGP satisfies the null of the EHs using
the bias-corrected, constrained VAR parameters. The bias-corrected, unconstrained VARs serve as
natural alternative models.
       Properties of Test Statistics in Finite Samples
   7
       In traditional theories of exchange rate determination, the correlation of exchange rate innovations with interest
rate innovations depends on whether the shock causing interest rates to move reflects a change in expected inflation
or in the expected real rate. The latter case predicts a positive correlation for the USD and a negative correlation
for the DEM. That is, if the USD (DEM) short rate unexpectedly rises, the dollar (mark) ought to appreciate.


                                                            19
   From the DGPs described above, we simulate 25,000 artificial samples of 269 observations. We
focus on two sets of results. First, we investigate the small-sample distributions of the various
regression coeﬃcients in the standard regressions used to test the EHs. Second, we examine the
performance of the three test statistics (Wald, LM and DM) in terms of size and power against the
alternative hypothesis.
   Tables 2 and 3 present some relevant characteristics of the small-sample distributions of the
slope coeﬃcients in the various regression tests under the two diﬀerent data generating processes,
the bootstrap in Table 2 and the GARCH model in Table 3. We report only the left-hand tail area
quantiles because the sample parameter estimates are all less than the null value. We consider both
OLS regression coeﬃcients and regression coeﬃcients implied by the VAR parameters.
   A comparison of the means and the medians for the distributions of the OLS coeﬃcients indicates
that they show little asymmetry. The biases, defined as the deviations of the mean values of the
empirical distributions from the values under the null hypothesis, are rather small for the EH-FX
tests and the EH-TS tests based on equation (18). The biases are considerably larger for the
tests based on equation (19), but most of this bias is due to the maturity mis-match between the
twelve-month interest rate used in the test and the eleven-month interest rate that should be used.
Hence, the bias largely remains present even in samples of 50,000. The biases in the EH-TS tests
are consistent with the results in Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (1997) where biases only become
quite substantial for longer maturities.
   Now consider the dispersion of the slope coeﬃcients. The standard deviations of the empirical
distributions in Panels A and B of Table 2 are larger than their corresponding values in Table 3
except for those associated with the DEM term structure. This reflects the inability of the GARCH
models to match the fat tails in the data. The standard deviations of the FX slopes for the DEM in
Panel A are much larger than the standard deviations of the term structure slopes, but they are not
noticeably larger than the asymptotic standard errors except for the regression at the twelve-month
horizon. This is true in Panel B for the GBP as well except the standard deviations of the FX slopes
are now smaller than the asymptotic values. Notice also that the left tails of the distributions of
the FX tests in Table 2 include substantially negative values. The slope coeﬃcients from equation
(19) also show much more dispersion than those from equation (18). Note that these results are
similar across the two currencies.
   The small-sample distributions for the implied regression coeﬃcients from the VARs are quite


                                                20
similar to the distributions of the OLS regression coeﬃcients. Overall, the biases are slightly
smaller, but with a few exceptions for the GBP, the quantiles are remarkably alike across the
two sets of coeﬃcients. This indicates that the VAR generally provides a good description of the
relevant dynamics of the data. Note though that the dispersion of the small-sample distributions
is sometimes larger for the EH-TS tests because there are a few extreme observations.8
       Tables 4, 5, and 6 focus on the small-sample properties of the various test statistics.9 Table 4
considers properties of the small-sample distribution from the bootstrap DGP. We consider first the
EH-FX tests individually for one-month and twelve-month horizons and jointly for both horizons.
We then consider the EH-TS tests for the USD and for the DEM in Panel A and for the USD
and the GBP in Panel B. Finally, we consider joint tests of all three EHs. As noted above, with
a first-order VAR, each individual test imposes five restrictions on the VAR parameters. Hence,
the appropriate asymptotic distributions for comparison purposes are the χ2 (5) for the individual
tests, χ2 (10) for the joint FX test, and χ2 (15) for the simultaneous test of all EHs.
       Panel A of Table 4 reveals that the means of the small-sample distributions are slightly higher
than the corresponding chi-square means, in all but one case (the joint LM test). The upward bias
is most severe for the Wald tests and very small for the LM tests. A similar relation holds for
the dispersions of the test statistics. The DM tests and especially the Wald tests show much more
dispersion than their corresponding asymptotic distributions. The distributions of the Wald tests
are significantly shifted to the right, as are the distributions of the DM tests, but less dramatically so.
The LM tests actually show slightly less dispersion than the corresponding chi-square distributions.
Given these findings, it is not surprising that the empirical critical values do not correspond with
the asymptotic ones. The LM tests slightly under-reject at the asymptotic critical value in some
cases, but in general their small-sample distributions are far closer to the asymptotic distributions
than those of the other test statistics. The distortions of the Wald test appear worst for the EH-TS
tests. The distortions of the Wald test also worsen considerably when the number of restrictions
increases. For example, whereas the 99% quantile for a χ2 (15) is 30.58, the 99% value in the
   8
       Occasionally, the implied coeﬃcients show rather extreme standard deviations which can be traced to outliers
caused by VAR nonstationarity. The removal of one outlier typically suﬃces to bring the standard deviation back in
line with the other results.
    9
      These test statistics are asymptotically pivotal because their limiting distributions do not depend on any un-
known parameters in contrast to the distributions of the regression coeﬃcients. Statisticians argue that examining
asymptotically pivotal statistics improves finite-sample inference. See Berkowitz and Kilian (1996), for example.



                                                         21
small-sample distribution of the Wald test for all restrictions in the DEM-USD system is 63.66.
   Panel B of Table 4 reports the same characteristics for the GBP system. All the observations
made above remain valid, but we now record a few more instances in which the empirical mean of
the LM tests is slightly below the asymptotic mean. In general, the closeness of the results between
the two panels is extremely encouraging. For example, the means of the small-sample distributions
for the EH-FX tests are at most 0.10 apart across the two tables. For the individual EH-TS tests we
have four sets of results (the USD twice, the DEM and the GBP). Across these four sets of results,
the 95% quantiles vary between 17.32 and 19.66 for the Wald test, between 10.79 and 11.24 for the
LM test (the corresponding chi-square value is 11.07), and between 14.60 and 15.21 for the DM
test. This is a clear illustration of the remarkable robustness across currencies of our distributions,
and it nicely illustrates the relative qualities of the test statistics.
   Table 5 repeats all of these results for the GARCH DGP. All of the results remain robust. To
illustrate, let us focus on the joint tests, since they feature the largest distortions. The means of
the Wald tests are 27.47 in the DEM-USD system and 28.22 in the GBP-USD system, and the
95% quantiles are 54.27 and 56.33, respectively. The distortions here are somewhat larger than
for the bootstrap results where the 95% quantiles are 47.46 and 52.50, respectively. Compared
to the 95% critical value of a χ2 (15) of 25, the size distortions are considerable. There is also
a significant rightward shift for the DM test. Its mean is 18.25 in the DEM-USD system and
17.76 in the GBP-USD system. The 95% quantiles are 28.50 and 27.17, respectively. Apart from
showing a much smaller distortion relative to the Wald test, the small-sample distribution of the
DM test is also more alike across currencies and DGPs. The 95% quantiles in the bootstrap case
are 27.98 for the DEM-USD system and 31.16 for the GBP-USD case. The LM test is again the
best-behaved. The mean of its distribution is 15.42 for the DEM-USD system and 14.78 for the
GBP-USD system, which is very close to the mean of the χ2 (15). Since the empirical distributions
of the LM tests have smaller variances than the asymptotic distributions, it is not surprising that
the 95% quantiles are lower than the corresponding value of 25 for a χ2 (15). The 95% quantiles are
23.27 in the DEM-USD system and 21.95 in the GBP-USD system. The under-coverage of the LM
test is worst for the joint test. Since the 95% critical values in the bootstrap case were 22.15 for the
DEM-USD system and 21.57 for the GBP-USD case, this test also shows remarkable robustness
across currencies and DGPs.
   In Table 6 we focus on the empirical size and the empirical power of the various tests at the


                                                    22
nominal 5% significance level. The empirical size of a test is the percent of the Monte Carlo
experiments conducted under the null hypothesis in which the test statistic exceeds the asymptotic
critical value associated with a 5% type one error. These values are reported in Panel A. The
empirical power of a test is the percent of Monte Carlo experiments conducted under the alternative
hypothesis in which the test statistic exceeds the empirical critical value. These critical values are
reported in Tables 4 and 5. Panel B of Table 6 reports the values for the empirical powers of the
tests where the alternative hypothesis is the unconstrained VAR.
   Whereas all tests show size distortions, the Wald test has by far the worst size properties. Its
empirical size for a 5% nominal test is at least 10.50 %. The empirical size is considerably worse for
the EH-TS tests reaching 26.2% for the USD test in the DEM-USD GARCH DGP. For the joint
test of the EHs, the empirical sizes of the Wald tests vary between 44.6% and 50.6%. Since this
test has been the one used most in empirical work, these findings may potentially change inference
regarding the validity of the EHs. The DM tests also have size distortions for the EH-FX tests
with a largest empirical size of 15.4%, but the sizes of the DM tests are smaller than those of the
corresponding Wald tests, except in one case. The empirical sizes of the LM tests for a 5% nominal
size vary between 0.7% and 7.9%. In the majority of the cases, the sizes of the LM tests are smaller
than 5%, and in virtually half of the cases the empirical size is within 1% of the nominal size.
   To assess the power of the tests, we use the unconstrained VAR as the alternative hypothesis.
We find that the power of the tests depends critically on which of the null hypotheses is tested and
to some extent on the DGP. For the DEM-USD system, the EH-TS tests are more powerful than
the EH-FX tests. Note that the information set considered for the EH-FX test is larger than what
is typically considered in regression tests, where changes in foreign exchange rates are regressed
on an interest diﬀerential. Here the coeﬃcients on the interest rates are allowed to be diﬀerent in
absolute magnitude and the spreads are allowed to predict changes in exchange rates. The power of
the FX tests hovers around 55%. For the test of the EH-TS in the DEM, the power is very high for
the bootstrap DGP (in excess of 95%) and between 74.3% and 85.4% for the GARCH system. For
the USD term structure, the roles are reversed, with the GARCH system yielding more powerful
tests, generally in excess of 95%. Nevertheless, even for the bootstrap system, power is still in
excess of 80%. For the joint EH-FX test, power is slightly in excess of 50% for the LM and DM
tests, but drops to 45.1% for the Wald test in the bootstrap DGP and to 12.5% for the Wald test
in the GARCH DGP.


                                                 23
    For the GBP system, power is always higher for the EH-FX tests than in the DEM-USD system.
We find that empirical power in these test varies between 56.5% and 99.4%. EH-TS tests for the
USD and the GBP are less powerful with the exception of the GBP tests for the GARCH system
in which they exceed 94% in every case.
    For the joint tests of the EHs, there is uniformly high power. For the GARCH system, the LM
and DM tests have power over 99%, while the power is generally smaller for the bootstrap DGP, it
never falls below 91.8%.
    We also checked to see that all tests are consistent in that power goes to one when the sample
is increased. Simulations of samples with 50,000 observations reveal powers very close to 1.00 for
all tests. For our small samples of 269 observations, it is important to assess which tests are most
powerful. Of course, we already know that the LM test has superior size properties and should be
the preferred test, if it has comparable power to the other tests. Across the two DGPs, the two
currencies, and the various tests, we can make a total of 20 power comparisons. In 17 cases, the
DM test is most powerful and comes in second in the three other cases. The LM test is never the
most powerful test, but comes in second in 13 cases. Moreover, whereas the Wald test is sometimes
more powerful than the LM test, when it is not, its power is substantially below that of the other
tests.
    Taken together, our results strongly suggest avoiding use of the Wald test. The DM test has
reasonable size properties, but its use would lead to over-rejection of the null hypothesis. It is also
quite powerful when applied correctly. The LM test is by far the best test. It has very good size
properties, and it has good power. In some cases, it may turn out to be a slightly conservative
test, which fails to reject the null when it is false. Ironically, the LM test is arguably the least used
of all in applied work. Having established the small-sample properties of the various test statistics
allows us to revisit the evidence on the EHs in the data.
    V. Statistical Analysis of the Data
    This section evaluates the validity of the EHs using the small-sample distributions developed
above. Two types of evidence are interpreted. First, we consider the regression evidence corre-
sponding to equations (17), (18), and (19) for slope coeﬃcients from ordinary least squares (OLS)
regressions and the corresponding implied coeﬃcients (IOLS) from the VAR. Then, we consider
the test statistics from the VARs.
    The Regression Evidence


                                                   24
   Consider first the results in Table 2. For the DEM/USD rate, the slope coeﬃcients corresponding
to equation (17) of -0.527 (OLS) and -0.498 (IOLS) fall between the 2.5% and 5% quantiles of the
empirical distributions. After allowing for a two-sided test, this evidence is consistent with the
large-sample inference one would do based on asymptotic standard errors of 0.923 (OLS) and 0.979
(IOLS) which produces p-values of .1 for the null that the slope coeﬃcient is one. Similarly, for
the GBP/USD rate, the coeﬃcient estimates of -1.654 (OLS) and -1.662 (IOLS) are well below
the 0.5% quantile of the empirical distributions. Hence, the small-sample inference supports the
asymptotic inference that rejects the null at smaller than a 1% marginal level of significance. The
evidence for both of these rates at the twelve-month horizon is not quite as strong.
   The situation for the term structure is in many ways the reverse of the above. We now reject
the EH-TS for the USD at the 1% level for equation (18) and at the 5% level for equation (19).
We reject very strongly in the DEM term structure, but we do not reject at all in the GBP term
structure.
   Similar inference can be drawn from the distributions in Table 3 because the GARCH model
generally produces less dispersion in the slope coeﬃcients. The p-values of the FX tests would
actually be smaller than the asymptotic p-values.
   The VAR tests
   Analysis of Tables 4 and 5 indicates that use of empirical critical values generally weakens
the evidence against the EHs for the Wald and DM tests. Consider a researcher who conducts
inference using Wald tests and their asymptotic critical values, which is undoubtedly the most
common approach in the literature. Such a researcher would conclude that there is strong evidence
against the EH-FX for the GBP/USD but not in the DEM/USD, that the EH-TS is rejected for
the USD and the DEM but not for the GBP. Notice, though, that a joint test of all the EHs would
reveal very strong evidence against the hypotheses in both currency markets and all three term
structures.
   When empirical critical values are used, the evidence against the EHs weakens considerably. In
fact, all tests fail to reject at the 1% marginal level of significance, and most of the joint evidence
yields (marginal) 5% rejections. Given the LM test’s superior size properties, a researcher using
such a test, even with the asymptotic critical values, would typically reach the right conclusion.
   Note that using the appropriate empirical critical values for the diﬀerent tests generally leads
to a more common interpretation of the data across the tests than is aﬀorded from the asymptotic


                                                  25
distributions. For example, in the joint test of all the EHs’s in the DEM-USD system, which is
reported in Table 4, the Wald, DM, and LM test statistics are 47.76, 27.94, and 21.34, respectively.
Since the 5% critical value of a χ2 (15) is 25, asymptotic inference is quite diﬀerent depending on
the statistic chosen. The results in Table 4 indicate that each of the statistics is quite close to the
95% quantiles of the empirical distributions, which are 47.46, 27.98, and 22.15, respectively.
   VI. Conclusions
   The goal of this paper is to evaluate the Expectations Hypotheses of the term structure of
interest rates and of the foreign exchange market using alternative statistical techniques and ex-
tensive Monte Carlo methods. We find no evidence against the EH-FX for the DEM/USD foreign
exchange market, but we marginally reject it for the GBP/USD market at either the 5% or 10%
marginal level of significance depending on the test statistic. The lack of strong evidence against
the EH-FX for these major currencies is consistent with the findings of Huisman, Koedijk, Kool,
and Nissen (1998) and Bansal and Dahlquist (1999) who use panel data techniques with fifteen and
twenty-eight countries, respectively.
   For the EH-TS, the evidence is more mixed. There is no evidence at all against the EH-TS for
the GBP, weak evidence against the EH-TS for the USD (at most 5% rejections) and somewhat
stronger evidence against the EH-TS for the DEM, where the DM test rejects at the 1% level for
both DGPs. However, the other tests reject at the 5% or 10% level depending on the DGP. The
joint tests of the EHs never reject at the 1% level and the strongest evidence against the joint
hypotheses occurs in the GBP-USD bootstrap system, where the Wald and DM tests reject at the
5% level and the LM test at the 10% level.
   These rejections are much less dramatic than the asymptotic distributions imply. In general,
we find severe size distortions in the Wald tests and to a lesser extent in Distance Metric tests.
The test with the best performance for our sample size is the Lagrange Multiplier test. While
estimation of VARs subject to highly non-linear restrictions is often technically demanding, we
find that iterating on the approximate solution of Newey and McFadden (1994) easily converged
to estimators that satisfied the constraints.
   This technique is not only useful in formulating alternative test statistics to the usual Wald tests,
it also delivers the dynamics of the data under the null hypothesis. This allows the straightforward
development of Monte Carlo experiments to analyze the small-sample distributions of test statistics.
There are also many environments in which contrasting constrained with unconstrained dynamics


                                                  26
can yield useful insights. As one example, consider the eﬀect of monetary policy on the aggregate
economy. Policy analysis, such as Bernanke, Gertler and Watson (1997), often uses VARs to trace
out these eﬀects. If some of the eﬀects occur through changes in long rates, it may be instructive
to compare the predictions of models estimated under the EH with unconstrained VAR dynamics,
especially since the EH is a working hypothesis of many policy makers.
   While the distortions in the test statistics provide a partial rehabilitation to the EHs, it remains
inconsistent with the data. Moreover, our results cannot be generalized to other currencies. There
are several possible ways to go in explaining the findings. First, it is unlikely that the EHs are
literally true because of the requirement that risk premiums are constant. Indeed, Bekaert, Hodrick,
and Marshall (1999) find that allowing for a small amount of variation in term premiums in the
bond market improves the ability of the EH-TS test statistics to match the data. Second, although
we allow for a rich data generating process, it may be that the real world is more complicated than
this and that peso problems may consequently plague the statistical analysis. Once again, Baillie
and Bollerslev (1998), Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1999), and others have experimented with
alternative DGPs that may provide richer and more realistic environments than our constrained
VARs.




                                                 27
                                          References

   Baillie, R. T. and T. Bollerslev, 1998, ”The Forward Premium Anomaly Is Not as Bad as You
Think,” manuscript, University of Virginia.
   Bansal, R. and M. Dahlquist, 1999, ”The Forward Premium Puzzle: Diﬀerent Tales from De-
veloped and Emerging Economies,” manuscript, Duke University.
   Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey, 1997, ”Emerging Equity Market Volatility,” Journal of Financial
Economics 43, 29-77.
   Bekaert, G. and R. J. Hodrick, 1993, ”On Biases in the Measurement of Foreign Exchange Risk
Premiums,” Journal of International Money and Finance 12, 115-138.
   Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and D. Marshall, 1997, ”On Biases in Tests of the Expectations
Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics 44, 309-348.
   Bekaert, G., R. J. Hodrick, and D. Marshall, 1999, ”Peso Problem’ Explanations for Term
Structure Anomalies,” revision of NBER Working Paper No. 6147.
   Berkowitz, J. and L. Kilian, 1996, ”Recent Developments in Bootstrapping Time Series,”
manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.
   Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and M. Watson, 1997, ”Systematic Monetary Policy and the Eﬀects
of Oil Price Shocks,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 91-142.
   Bollerslev, T., 1986, ”Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity,” Journal of
Econometrics 31, 307-328.
   Bollerslev, T. and J. M. Wooldridge, 1992, ”Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Infer-
ence in Dynamic Models with Time Varying Covariances,” Econometric Reviews 11, 143-172.
   Burnside, C. and M. Eichenbaum, 1996, ”Small-Sample Properties of GMM-Based Wald Tests,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 294-308.
   Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller, 1991, ”Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird’s
Eye View,” Review of Economic Studies 58, 495-514.
   Cumby, R. E. and J. Huizinga, 1992, ”Testing the Autocorrelation Structure of Disturbances
in Ordinary Least Squares and Instrumental Variables Regressions,” Econometrica 60, 185-196.
   Dahlquist, M. and G. Jonsson, 1995, ”The Information in Swedish Short-maturity Forward
Rates,” European Economic Review 39, 1115-1131.
   Engel, C., 1996, ”The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of Recent
Evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.

                                               28
   Engle, R. F., V. M. Ng, and M. Rothschild, 1990, ”Asset Pricing with Factor-ARCH Structure:
Empirical Estimation for Treasury Bills,” Journal of Econometrics 45, 213-237.
   Evans, M. D. D., 1996, ”Peso Problems: Their Theoretical and Empirical Implications,” in G.S.
Maddala and C.R. Rao, eds., Handbook of Statistics, Vol. 14, Elsevier Science, 613-646.
   Fisher, I., 1930, The Theory of Interest, New York: Macmillan.
   Gerlach, S. and F. Smets, 1997, ”The Term Structure of Euro-Rates: Some Evidence In Support
of the Expectations Hypothesis,” Journal of International Money and Finance 16, 305-321.
   Gray, S. F., 1996, ”Modeling The Conditional Distribution Of Interest Rates As A Regime-
switching Process,” Journal of Financial Economics 42, 27-62.
   Hansen, L. P., 1982, ”Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators,”
Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.
   Hardouvelis, G. A., 1994, ”The Term Structure Spread and Future Changes in Long and Short
Rates in the G7 Countries: Is There a Puzzle?” Journal of Monetary Economics 33, 255-284.
   Hicks, 1953, Value and Capital, London: Oxford University Press.
   Hodrick, R. J., 1987, The Empirical Evidence on the Eﬃciency of Forward and Futures Foreign
Exchange Markets. Harwood Academic Publishers, Chur, Switzerland.
   Huisman, R., K. Koedijk, C. Kool, and F. Nissen, 1998, ”Extreme Support for Uncovered
Interest Parity,” Journal of International Money and Finance17, 211-228.
   Kendall, M. G., 1954, ”Note on the Bias in the Estimation of Autocorrelation,” Biometrika 41,
403-404.
   Keynes, J. M., 1930, A Treatise on Money. London: Macmillan.
   Lewis, K. K., 1989, ”Changing Beliefs and Systematic Rational Forecast Errors with Evidence
from Foreign Exchange” American Economic Review 79, 621-636.
   Ligeralde, A. V., 1997, ”Covariance Matrix Estimators And Tests Of Market Eﬃciency,” Journal
of International Money and Finance 16, 323-343.
   Mankiw, N. G. and M. Shapiro, 1986, ”Do We Reject Too Often: Small Sample Properties of
Rational Expectations Models,” Economics Letters 20, 139-145.
   Maynard, A. and P. C. B. Phillips, 1998, ”Rethinking an Old Empirical Puzzle: Econometric
Evidence on the Forward Discoun Anomaly,” manuscript, Yale University.
   Melino, A., 1983, ”Essays on Estimation and Inference in Linear Rational Expectations Models,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.


                                               29
   Newey, W. K. and D. L. McFadden, 1994, ”Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis Testing,”
in R. F. Engle and D. L. McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics: Volume 4. Elsevier Science:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2111-2245.
   Politis, D. N. and J. P. Romano, 1994, ”The Stationary Bootstrap,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 89, 1303-1313.
   Politis, D. N., J. P. Romano, and M. Wolf, 1997, ”Subsampling for Heteroskedastic Time Series,”
Journal of Econometrics 81, 281-317.
   Roll, R. and S. Yan, 1998, ”An Explanation of the Forward Premium Puzzle’,” UCLA CIBER
Working Paper No. 98-13.
   Sargent, T. J., 1979, ”A Note on Maximum Likelihood Estimation of the Rational Expectations
Model of the Term Structure,” Journal of Monetary Economics 5, 133-144.
   Schotman , P., 1996, ”Small Sample Properties of the Regression Test of the Expectations
Hypothesis of the Term Structure,” Economics Letters 57, 129-134.
   Stambaugh, R., 1999, ”Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375-421.
   Tauchen, G., 1985, ”The Small-Sample Bias of Tests for a Risk Premium in Forward Exchange
Rates,” manuscript, Duke University.
   Valkanov, R., 1998, ”The Term Structure with Highly Persistent Interest Rates,” manuscript,
Princeton University.
   Vasicek, O., 1977, ”An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure,” Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics 5, 177-188.
   White, H., 1982, ”Maximum Likelihood Estimation Of Misspecified Models,” Econometrica 50,
1-26.




                                               30
                                                       Appendix


   This Appendix examines the implications of economies that do not admit arbitrage for the
expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates. From equation (3) of the paper, the
n-period interest rate can be written as follows:

                                                1
                                        it,n = − log [Et [exp(mt+n,n )]]                                                 (55)
                                                n
                                                                         Pn
where the log of the n-period pricing kernel is mt+n,n ≡                      i=1 mt+i .    A Taylor’s Series expansion of
exp(mt+n,n ) around the mean yields the following expression:
                                                                                                 
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X [mt+n,n − Et (mt+n,n )]p 
                exp (mt+n,n ) = exp[Et (mt+n,n )] 1 +                                                           .       (56)
                                                                    p=1
                                                                                            p!

Therefore,                                                                                           
                                                                                      ∞
                                                                                      X ν t,n (p)
                        Et [exp (mt+n,n )] = exp[Et (mt+n,n )] 1 +                                                     (57)
                                                                                      p=2
                                                                                                 p!

where ν t,n (p) is the p-th conditional central moment of mt+n,n .
   By applying equation (57) repeatedly for n = 1, and replacing interest rates by conditional
expectations of pricing kernels as in equation (55), we derive the following general term premium:
                                                                                                       
                           Xn        X∞                              X∞
                     1                   ν t+i−1,1 (p)                 ν t,n (p) 
             αt,n   = Et  log 1 +                      − log 1 +                  .                                  (58)
                     n     i=1       p=2
                                              p!                     p=2
                                                                             p!

   To compute the foreign exchange risk premium, use the complete markets assumption to express
exchange rate changes in terms of conditional pricing kernels and then use the results in equations
(55) through (57) to obtain:
                                    ³              ´     ³         ´
             Et (∆st+1 ) = Et mjt+1 − Et mkt+1 =                                                                         (59)
                                                                                                                  
                                ³              ´                 ∞                                    ∞ ν j (p)
                                                                 X ν kt,1 (p)                         X   t,1
                            =    ikt   − ijt       + log 1 +                      − log 1 +                       
                                                                 p=2
                                                                         p!                           p=2
                                                                                                            p!

   Under log-normality, the last two terms reduce to half the diﬀerence of the conditional variances
of the two log pricing kernels, as in equation (9) in the paper.




                                                             31
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics

The sample contains 270 monthly observations from January 1975 to July 1997. The currencies are
numbered 1 for the USD, 2 for the DEM, 3 for the GBP. The continously compounded rates of appreciation
of the USD versus currency j are denoted ∆ stj . The short-term interest rate for currency j is it j . The spread
                                                                                  j
between the twelve-month rate and the one-month rate for currency j is spt .


  Variable        Mean        Stand.      Minimum        Maximum                      Autocorrelations
                               Dev.                                           1               2            3

     ∆st2         -1.084      40.617       -120.068       132.234        -0.019           0.105          0.03

     ∆st3         1.661       39.987       -163.297       157.455         0.083           0.036          -0.013

      it1         7.943        3.52         3.059          20.081         0.968           0.932          0.899

      it2         6.011        2.445        2.248          14.907         0.975           0.96           0.945

      it3        10.652        3.373        4.647          20.204         0.957           0.92            0.88

      spt1        0.164        0.925        -4.882          1.823         0.817           0.673          0.554

     spt2         0.071        0.683         -3.24          2.666         0.805           0.722          0.666

      spt3        -0.429       1.106        -4.273          1.898         0.817           0.707          0.638
                     Table 2: Empirical Distributions of the Regression Coefficients

                              under the EH Null with Bootstrap Innovations

The Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a constrained VAR with
a bootstrap of the residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, Median, Standard Deviation (Std. Dev.)
and the 0.5%, 2.5%, and 5% quantiles. The statistics are the slope coefficients in regression tests. An R
indicates the direct regression, and an I indicates an implied regression from a VAR. FX1 and FX12 are the
one-month and twelve-month EH-FX tests as in equation (17). CUR1 and CUR2 refer to EH-TS tests as in
equations (18) and (19), where CUR signifies either USD, DEM, or GBP interest rates. The point estimate
is Sample Stat., and the asymptotic standard error is Asymp. S.E.

                                        Panel A: DEM-USD VAR
    Slope        Mean      Median       Std.        0.5%       2.5%         5%         Sample    Asymp.
                                        Dev.                                            Stat.     s.e.
   FX1-R         1.009      0.991       0.926      -1.503      -0.793     -0.470       -0.527     0.923
    FX1-I        1.011      0.997       0.955      -1.543      -0.808     -0.490       -0.498     0.979
   FX12-R        0.924      0.922       1.022      -1.979      -1.103     -0.737       -0.273     0.467
   FX12-I        0.941      0.938       0.939      -1.447      -0.806     -0.500       -0.729     0.982
  USD1-R         1.073      1.070       0.194       0.591      0.699       0.756       0.466      0.142
   USD1-I        1.025      1.031       0.440       0.590      0.729       0.783       0.664      0.280
  USD2-R         1.505      1.493       0.516       0.183      0.510       0.682       0.237      0.929
   USD2-I        1.488      1.479       0.782       0.155      0.505       0.677       0.271      0.777
  DEM1-R         1.028      1.028       0.143       0.658      0.748       0.793       0.558      0.151
  DEM1-I         0.990      0.993       0.193       0.673      0.762       0.803       0.669      0.148
  DEM2-R         1.507      1.513       0.361       0.488      0.774       0.903       0.146      0.368
  DEM2-I         1.495      1.504       0.415       0.480      0.750       0.886       0.193      0.339
                          Panel B: GBP-USD VAR
 Slope   Mean    Median   Std.     0.5%    2.5%      5%      Sample   Asymp.
                          Dev.                                Stat.    s.e.
FX1-R    1.052   1.045    0.673   -0.778   -0.261   -0.035   -1.654   0.911
FX1-I    1.050   1.045    0.680   -0.801   -0.277   -0.048   -1.662   0.936
FX12-R   0.985   0.990    0.741   -1.107   -0.507   -0.231   -0.867   0.651
FX12-I   0.986   0.992    0.644   -0.784   -0.293   -0.081   -1.341   0.942
USD1-R   1.059   1.057    0.197   0.556    0.679    0.737    0.466    0.142
USD1-I   1.018   1.010    1.567   0.557    0.710    0.766    0.624    0.348
USD2-R   1.512   1.502    0.509   0.163    0.530    0.698    0.237    0.929
USD2-I   1.500   1.489    0.954   0.124    0.503    0.672    0.255    0.707
GBP1-R   1.054   1.052    0.174   0.608    0.720    0.774    0.839    0.176
GBP1-I   1.007   1.009    0.289   0.622    0.739    0.786    0.817    0.241
GBP2-R   1.546   1.536    0.425   0.462    0.730    0.859    0.938    0.483
GBP2-I   1.535   1.525    0.580   0.415    0.705    0.840    0.928    0.467
                     Table 3: Empirical Distributions of the Regression Coefficients

                               under the EH Null with GARCH Innovations

The Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a constrained VAR with
a GARCH model of the residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, Median, Standard Deviation (Std.
Dev.) and the 0.5%, 2.5%, and 5% quantiles. The statistics are the slope coefficients in regression tests. An
R indicates the direct regression, and an I indicates an implied regression from a VAR. FX1 and FX12 are
the one-month and twelve-month EH-FX tests in the foreign exchange market as in equation (17). CUR1
and CUR2 refer to EH-TS tests as in equations (18) and (19), where CUR signifies either USD, DEM, or
GBP interest rates. The point estimate is Sample Stat., and the asymptotic standard error is Asymp. S.E.

                                        Panel A: DEM-USD VAR
    Slope        Mean       Median       Std.        0.5%       2.5%         5%        Sample      Asymp.
                                         Dev.                                           Stat.       s.e.
   FX1-R         0.998       0.998       0.226       0.359      0.545       0.631      -0.527       0.923
    FX1-I        0.998       0.997       0.229       0.343      0.539       0.626      -0.498       0.979
   FX12-R        0.962       0.971       0.259       0.173      0.416       0.522      -0.273       0.467
   FX12-I        0.965       0.972       0.246       0.224      0.445       0.544      -0.729       0.982
  USD1-R         1.053       1.058       0.131       0.703      0.790       0.833       0.466       0.142
   USD1-I        1.047       1.068       1.991       0.679      0.807       0.855       0.664       0.280
  USD2-R         1.421       1.398       0.343       0.633      0.807       0.898       0.237       0.929
   USD2-I        1.405       1.397       2.440       0.585      0.796       0.888       0.271       0.777
  DEM1-R         1.116       1.114       0.242       0.504      0.647       0.719       0.558       0.151
   DEM1-I        1.066       1.085       1.531       0.416      0.680       0.757       0.669       0.148
  DEM2-R         1.626       1.603       0.658       0.029      0.391       0.585       0.146       0.368
   DEM2-I        1.589       1.589       2.548      -0.058      0.361       0.558       0.193       0.339
                          Panel B: GBP-USD VAR
 Slope   Mean    Median   Std.     0.5%    2.5%      5%      Sample   Asymp.
                          Dev.                                Stat.    s.e.
FX1-R    1.002   1.003    0.288   0.227    0.430    0.530    -1.654   0.911
FX1-I    1.002   1.003    0.290   0.228    0.429    0.527    -1.662   0.936
FX12-R   0.898   0.910    0.546   -0.645   -0.216   -0.018   -0.867   0.651
FX12-I   0.914   0.920    0.458   -0.320   0.005    0.151    -1.341   0.942
USD1-R   1.071   1.072    0.180   0.597    0.715    0.772    0.466    0.142
USD1-I   1.024   1.030    0.236   0.621    0.736    0.790    0.624    0.348
USD2-R   1.579   1.554    0.454   0.521    0.761    0.877    0.237    0.929
USD2-I   1.573   1.549    0.553   0.507    0.753    0.872    0.255    0.707
GBP1-R   1.021   1.024    0.083   0.798    0.851    0.879    0.839    0.176
GBP1-I   1.010   1.015    0.135   0.828    0.876    0.902    0.817    0.241
GBP2-R   1.344   1.336    0.164   0.966    1.046    1.089    0.938    0.483
GBP2-I   1.342   1.334    0.232   0.959    1.044    1.087    0.928    0.467
        Table 4: Empirical Distributions of Wald, Lagrange Multiplier and Distance Metric Tests

                              under the EH Null with Bootstrap Innovations

The Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a constrained VAR with
a bootstrap of the residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, Median, Standard Deviation (Std. Dev.)
and the 90%, 95%, and 99% quantiles. The statistics are the Wald (W), Lagrange Multiplier (LM), and
Distance Metric (DM) tests. FX1 and FX12 are the one-month and twelve-month EH-FX tests. The
asymptotic distribution is a P2(5). FX1-12 examines the one-month and twelve-month joint EH-FX test. The
asymptotic distribution is a P2(10). The EH-TS tests are labelled by currency. The asymptotic distribution
is a P2(5). Joint-EH is a simultaneous test of the restrictions of the EH-FX and the EH-TS in each currency.
The asymptotic distribution is a P2(15). The currencies are the USD, the DEM, and the GBP. The sample
statistic is Sample Stat., and its asymptotic p-value is Asymp. p-value.

                                         Panel A: DEM-USD VAR

                    Mean       Median      Std.        90%        95%        99%       Sample     Asymp
                                           Dev.                                         Stat.     p-value

      P2(5)          5.00       4.35       3.16        9.24      11.07       15.09

     FX1 W           6.23       5.30       4.23       11.67      14.35       20.18      6.953      0.224

    FX1 LM           5.08       4.59       2.91        8.98      10.61       13.73      5.666      0.340

    FX1 DM           6.19       5.32       4.06       11.67      14.16       19.40      8.770      0.119

    FX12 W           6.20       5.23       4.35       11.66      14.37       21.57      6.740      0.241

    FX12 LM          5.07       4.57       2.91        8.97      10.60       13.81      6.093      0.297

    FX12 DM          6.13       5.28       4.01       11.51      13.95       18.92      9.993      0.079

     P2(10)         10.00       9.34       4.47       15.99      18.31       23.21

   FX1-12 W         11.09       9.09       9.99       18.57      23.93       41.60      8.063      0.623

   FX1-12 LM        10.38      10.02       3.82       15.51      17.16       20.55      9.133      0.520

   FX1-12 DM        12.82      12.11       5.51       20.14      22.53       27.69     12.110      0.278

      P2(5)          5.00       4.35       3.16        9.24      11.07       15.09

     USD W           7.98       6.55       5.91       15.17      18.91       29.20     14.898      0.011

    USD LM           5.65       5.20       2.98        9.72      11.24       14.00     12.627      0.027

    USD DM           6.80       5.99       4.10       12.31      14.60       19.52     18.134      0.003

    DEM W            7.28       6.01       5.29       13.83      17.32       26.24     19.890      0.001

    DEM LM           5.37       4.93       2.92        9.33      10.79       13.80     10.971      0.052

    DEM DM           6.76       5.88       4.51       12.48      14.89       20.20     24.498      0.000

     P2(15)         15.00      14.34       5.48       22.31      25.00       30.58

   Joint-EH W       25.63      23.54       11.76      40.56      47.46       63.66     47.758      0.000
Joint-EH LM   14.96   14.76     4.16     20.41    22.15     25.35   21.336   0.126

Joint-EH DM   18.19   17.77     5.91     25.62    27.98     32.97   27.937   0.022


                               Panel B: GBP-USD VAR

              Mean    Median    Std.     90%          95%   99%     Sample   Asymp
                                Dev.                                 Stat.   p-value

   P2(5)      5.00     4.35     3.16     9.24     11.07     15.09

  FX1 W       6.30     5.38     4.21     11.79    14.35     20.58   17.664   0.003

 FX1 LM       4.98     4.55     2.76     8.70     10.15     13.00   9.340    0.096

 FX1 DM       6.18     5.37     3.94     11.45    13.76     18.71   15.678   0.005

 FX12 W       6.24     5.26     4.29     11.75    14.39     20.80   16.622   0.005

 FX12 LM      4.98     4.56     2.77     8.74     10.09     13.09   9.753    0.083

 FX12 DM      6.15     5.35     3.92     11.39    13.62     18.58   15.050   0.010

  P2(10)      10.00    9.34     4.47     15.99    18.31     23.21

 FX1-12 W     13.08   10.48    13.64     21.74    28.16     55.84   23.728   0.008

FX1-12 LM     10.34   10.04     3.70     15.30    16.93     19.89   14.962   0.133

FX1-12 DM     12.89   12.33     5.24     19.99    22.43     27.07   26.197   0.003

   P2(5)      5.00     4.35     3.16     9.24     11.07     15.09

  USD W       8.00     6.61     5.85     15.07    18.87     28.51   13.247   0.021

 USD LM       5.61     5.20     2.89     9.53     10.97     13.58   7.813    0.167

 USD DM       6.95     6.14     4.15     12.57    14.87     19.86   13.154   0.022

  GBP W       7.96     6.38     6.21     15.40    19.66     30.91   4.666    0.458

 GBP LM       5.54     5.08     3.03     9.67     11.23     14.38   4.086    0.537

 GBP DM       6.86     5.99     4.32     12.71    15.21     20.53   6.032    0.303

  P2(15)      15.00   14.34     5.48     22.31    25.00     30.58

Joint-EH W    27.65   25.15    13.22     44.32    52.50     71.86   55.511   0.000

Joint-EH LM   14.81   14.64     3.93     20.01    21.57     24.43   20.109   0.168

Joint-EH DM   18.04   17.72     5.30     25.18    27.34     31.16   27.937   0.022
        Table 5: Empirical Distributions of Wald, Lagrange Multiplier and Distance Metric Tests

                              under the EH Null with GARCH Innovations

The Table provides summary statistics for the empirical distributions generated from a constrained VAR with
a GARCH model of the residuals. The summary statistics are the Mean, Median, Standard Deviation (Std.
Dev.) and the 90%, 95%, and 99% quantiles. The statistics are the Wald (W), Lagrange Multiplier (LM),
and Distance Metric (DM) tests. FX1 and FX12 are the one-month and twelve-month EH-FX tests. The
asymptotic distribution is a P2(5). FX1-12 examines the one-month and twelve-month joint EH-FX test. The
asymptotic distribution is a P2(10). The EH-TS tests are labelled by currency. The asymptotic distribution
is a P2(5). Joint-EH is a simultaneous test of the restrictions of the EH-FX and the EH-TS in each currency.
The asymptotic distribution is a P2(15). The currencies are the USD, the DEM, and the GBP. The point
estimate is Sample Stat., and its asymptotic p-value is Asymp. p-value.

                                         Panel A: DEM-USD VAR

                    Mean       Median      Std.        90%        95%        99%       Sample     Asymp.
                                           Dev.                                         Stat.     p-value

      P2(5)          5.00       4.35       3.16        9.24      11.07       15.09

     FX1 W           6.05       5.16       4.04       11.47      13.87       19.32      6.953      0.224

    FX1 LM           5.02       4.52       2.88        8.98      10.54       13.68      5.666      0.340

    FX1 DM           5.94      5.12        3.83       11.11      13.39       18.25      8.770      0.119

    FX12 W           6.14       5.10       4.34       11.75      14.47       21.09      6.740      0.241

    FX12 LM          5.06       4.55       2.92        9.08      10.59       13.84      6.093      0.297

    FX12 DM          6.00       5.17       3.89       11.32      13.60       18.40      9.993      0.079

     P2(10)         10.00       9.34       4.47       15.99      18.31       23.21

   FX1-12 W         15.87      12.36       15.81      27.75      37.03       68.33      8.063      0.623

   FX1-12 LM        10.34       9.96       3.96       15.66      17.45       21.12      9.133      0.520

   FX1-12 DM        12.33      11.67       5.25       19.44      21.96       27.15     12.110      0.278

      P2(5)          5.00       4.35       3.16        9.24      11.07       15.09

     USD W           9.05       6.79       8.26       17.93      23.98       40.39     14.898      0.011

    USD LM           5.91       5.36       3.30       10.39      12.13       15.73     12.627      0.027

    USD DM           7.10       6.17       4.50       13.13      15.73       21.50     18.134      0.003

    DEM W            8.71       6.71       7.40       17.29      22.22       36.63     19.890      0.001

    DEM LM           5.93       5.37       3.30       10.47      12.16       15.64     10.971      0.052

    DEM DM           7.16       6.20       4.50       13.27      15.90       21.52     24.498      0.000

     P2(15)         15.00      14.34       5.48       22.31      25.00       30.58

   Joint-EH W       27.47      24.29       14.68      45.29      54.27       79.32     47.758      0.000
Joint-EH LM   15.42   15.17     4.45     21.36    23.24     26.62   21.336   0.126

Joint-EH DM   18.25   17.82     5.77     25.99    28.50     33.02   27.937   0.022


                               Panel B: GBP-USD VAR

              Mean    Median    Std.     90%          95%   99%     Sample   Asymp
                                Dev.                                 Stat.   p-value

   P2(5)      5.00     4.35     3.16     9.24     11.07     15.09

  FX1 W       6.25     5.30     4.22     11.78    14.32     20.31   17.664   0.003

 FX1 LM       4.97     4.51     2.79     8.72     10.26     13.21   9.340    0.096

 FX1 DM       6.05     5.24     3.86     11.27    13.54     18.42   15.678   0.005

 FX12 W       6.42     5.30     4.60     12.31    15.29     22.57   16.622   0.005

 FX12 LM      5.06     4.61     2.84     8.92     10.43     13.59   9.753    0.083

 FX12 DM      6.20     5.37     3.97     11.55    13.86     18.95   15.050   0.010

  P2(10)      10.00    9.34     4.47     15.99    18.31     23.21

 FX1-12 W     16.52   13.20    14.77     28.52    37.33     70.07   23.728   0.008

FX1-12 LM     10.25    9.91     3.78     15.28    17.03     20.19   14.962   0.133

FX1-12 DM     12.57   11.96     5.17     19.61    22.04     26.68   26.197   0.003

   P2(5)      5.00     4.35     3.16     9.24     11.07     15.09

  USD W       8.23     6.27     7.17     16.34    21.23     36.32   13.247   0.021

 USD LM       5.52     5.01     3.10     9.73     11.41     14.66   7.813    0.167

 USD DM       6.73     5.86     4.28     12.50    15.05     20.40   13.154   0.022

  GBP W       7.89     5.97     6.87     15.89    20.67     33.70   4.666    0.458

 GBP LM       5.41     4.85     3.13     9.69     11.39     14.82   4.086    0.537

 GBP DM       6.65     5.68     4.35     12.55    15.18     20.56   6.032    0.303

  P2(15)      15.00   14.34     5.48     22.31    25.00     30.58

Joint-EH W    28.22   24.95    15.04     46.73    56.33     80.91   55.511   0.000

Joint-EH LM   14.78   14.59     4.13     20.26    21.95     25.08   20.109   0.168

Joint-EH DM   17.76   17.45     5.41     25.01    27.17     31.21   27.937   0.022
                                   Table 6: Empirical Size and Power of

                           Wald, Lagrange Multiplier and Distance Metric Tests

The Table provides empirical sizes and powers from the empirical distributions of various test statistics. The
empirical size is the percent of the Monte Carlo experiments generated when the null hypothesis is true in
which the test statistic exceeds the 5% asymptotic critical value. The power of the test is the percent of the
empirical distribution generated when the alternative hypothesis is true that exceeds the 5% critical value
of the empirical distribution generated when the null hypothesis is true. The statistics are the Wald (W),
Lagrange Multiplier (LM), and Distance Metric (DM) tests. The symbol B signifies the bootstrap DGP
distributions, and the symbol G signifies the GARCH model DGP distributions. FX-1 and FX-12 are the
one-month and twelve-month EH-FX tests. Joint FX is the simultaneous test of both horizons. The EH-TS
tests are labeled by currency. Joint is a simultaneous test of the restrictions of the EH-FX and the two EH-
TS.

                             DEM-USD                                           GBP-USD
            FX-    FX-     Joint   EH-      EH-      Joint   FX-     FX-    Joint    EH-      EH-      Joint
             1      12      FX     USD      DEM               1       12     FX      USD      GBP
                                          Panel A: Empirical Size
  W-B       11.8   11.5    10.5    21.9     17.8     44.6    12.1    12.0    15.6    21.8     22.0     50.6
  LM-B      4.1     4.0    3.0      5.4      4.4      1.2     3.2    3.1     2.5      4.8      5.3     0.7
 DM-B       11.6   11.3    15.2    14.3     14.7     11.9    11.2    11.1    15.4    15.1     15.4     10.6
  W-G       11.1   11.9    25.9    26.2     24.9     47.7    12.2    13.4    28.5    22.6     21.2     49.9
  LM-G      3.9     4.0    3.5      7.7      7.9      2.3     3.3    3.6     2.9      5.8      5.7     1.1
 DM-G       10.2   10.8    13.2    16.8     17.4     12.8    10.6    11.7    13.7    14.5     14.7     10.0
                                          Panel B: Empirical Power

  W-B       55.8   49.7    45.1    80.1     95.3     95.8    77.8    72.7    60.2    69.1     45.6     91.8
  LM-B      54.1   51.1    52.0    84.4     95.5     96.1    64.0    70.9    79.5    72.5     47.6     91.8
 DM-B       55.2   52.8    54.1    88.2     97.7     98.9    72.0    78.1    85.5    76.1     49.5     95.3
  W-G       57.8   54.8    12.5    95.6     74.3     98.6    67.8    61.9    31.2    95.3     94.1     99.8
  LM-G      56.2   57.6    53.0    97.9     83.7     99.0    56.5    59.8    99.1    96.9     95.4     99.9
 DM-G       58.0   58.7    54.2    98.4     85.4     99.5    61.8    66.8    99.4    97.4     95.7     99.9
                      Table A1: VAR Order Tests

                       Panel A: Schwarz Criteria
   VAR        Lag 1              Lag 2               Lag 3     Lag 4
 DEM-USD      1.677              1.805               2.062     2.414
  GBP-USD     3.87               4.176               4.571     4.823
                Panel B: Cumby-Huizinga l-tests p-values
              Lag 1            Lags 1-3             Lags 1-6
VAR DEM-USD
    ∆ st2     0.798              0.459               0.625

    it1       0.321              0.536               0.187

    it2       0.703              0.868                0.31

    spt1      0.049              0.228               0.188

    spt2      0.024              0.082               0.107

VAR GBP-USD
    ∆st3      0.443              0.637               0.377

    it1       0.306              0.598               0.217

    it3       0.805              0.987               0.148

    spt1      0.687              0.766               0.799

    spt3      0.358              0.726               0.811
          Table A2: Unconstrained VAR Dynamics with OLS and Bias-Corrected Coefficients

Panel A:      Coef. ∆ st2−1      Coef. it1−1      Coef. it2−1      Coef. spt1       Coef. spt2
 DEM-        Bias-Corrected    Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected
 USD              (s.e.)            (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)          ( s.e.)

  ∆ st2          -0.026            1.706            -0.518            3.812           -6.431
                 -0.011            1.667            -0.020           3.837            -5.936
                (0.075)           (1.277)          (1.692)          (5.629)          (4.459)

   it1           0.000             1.030            -0.035           0.287            -0.175
                 0.000             1.039            -0.020           0.273            -0.165
                (0.001)           (0.036)          (0.024)          (0.164)          (0.123)

   it2           0.002             -0.021           1.001            -0.209           0.312
                 0.002             -0.023           1.012            -0.207           0.303
                (0.001)           (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.071)          (0.073)

  spt1           0.000             -0.036           -0.015           0.699            0.019
                 0.000             -0.033           -0.018           0.725            0.023
                (0.001)           (0.018)          (0.015)          (0.066)          (0.056)

  spt2           -0.001            0.032            -0.038           0.152            0.655
                 -0.001            0.029            -0.033           0.147            0.684
                (0.001)           (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.047)          (0.063)
Panel B:        Coef. ∆st3−1     Coef. it1−1       Coef. it3−1     Coef. spt1       Coef. spt3
 GBP-         Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected
 USD               (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)

  ∆st3            0.060             1.524            -0.390          1.405            4.709
                  0.077             1.555            -0.273          1.486            4.625
                 (0.080)           (1.441)          (1.151)         (4.288)          (3.498)

   it1            -0.002            1.023            -0.019          0.272            -0.072
                  -0.002            1.042            -0.019          0.266            -0.075
                 (0.001)           (0.038)          (0.023)         (0.150)          (0.103)

   it3            0.001             0.025            1.022           -0.078           0.370
                  0.001             0.017            1.035           -0.086           0.361
                 (0.001)           (0.034)          (0.041)         (0.085)          (0.106)

   spt1           0.001             -0.042           0.010           0.693            0.060
                  0.001             -0.042           0.013           0.718            0.064
                 (0.001)           (0.020)          (0.013)         (0.059)          (0.047)

   spt3           -0.001            0.027            -0.081          0.184            0.602
                  -0.001            0.028            -0.075          0.183            0.630
                 (0.001)           (0.018)          (0.022)         (0.065)          (0.061)
          Table A3: Constrained VAR Dynamics with OLS and Bias-Corrected Coefficients

                                        Panel A: DEM-USD

             Coef. ∆ st2−1      Coef. it1−1      Coef. it2−1     Coef. spt1        Coef. spt2
            Bias-Corrected    Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected
                 (s.e.)            (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)

  ∆ st2          0.000            -1.000           1.000            0.000             0.000
                 0.000            -1.000           1.000            0.000             0.000
                (0.076)          (1.357)          (1.789)          (5.986)           (4.618)

  it1           -0.001            1.034            0.007            0.475            -0.021
                 0.000            1.022            0.020            0.401             0.018
                (0.001)          (0.038)          (0.028)          (0.179)           (0.130)

  it2            0.000           -0.031            1.014           -0.152             0.393
                 0.001           -0.021            1.109           -0.139             0.414
                (0.001)          (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.075)           (0.072)

  spt1           0.001           -0.042           -0.009            0.626             0.022
                 0.000           -0.029           -0.025            0.707            -0.025
                (0.001)          (0.019)          (0.017)          (0.068)           (0.059)

 spt2            0.000            0.037           -0.019            0.175             0.720
                -0.001            0.025           -0.027            0.160             0.692
                (0.001)          (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.051)           (0.063)

GBP-USD        Coef. ∆st3−1     Coef. it1−1       Coef. it3−1     Coef. spt1       Coef. spt3
             Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected   Bias-Corrected
                  (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)           (s.e.)

  ∆st3           0.000             -1.000           1.000           0.000            0.000
                 0.000             -1.000           1.000           0.000            0.000
                (0.077)           (1.664)          (1.370)         (5.327)          (4.026)

   it1           -0.001            1.026            -0.008          0.413            -0.065
                 -0.001            1.026            -0.006          0.397            -0.039
                (0.001)           (0.039)          (0.025)         (0.158)          (0.108)

   it3           0.001             -0.024           1.066           -0.176           0.486
                 0.000             -0.032           1.064           -0.202           0.478
                (0.001)           (0.034)          (0.041)         (0.091)          (0.111)

  spt1           0.001             -0.033           0.009           0.698            0.072
                 0.001             -0.034           0.007           0.714            0.044
                (0.001)           (0.019)          (0.013)         (0.059)          (0.047)

  spt3           -0.001            0.027            -0.084          0.199            0.609
                  0.000            0.037            -0.081          0.230            0.617
                (0.001)           (0.018)          (0.022)         (0.066)          (0.061)
                    Table A4: DEM-USD GARCH Model


          ∆st2             it1          it2          spt1     spt2

∆st2    1.0000           0.0019       0.0014        0.0000   0.0000
                        (0.0006)     (0.0004)

 it1    0.0000           1.0000       0.0000        0.0000   0.0000


it2     0.0000           0.4689       1.0000        0.0000   0.0000
                        (0.0672)

spt1    0.0000           -0.6217      -0.0377       1.0000   0.0000
                        (0.0919)     (0.0494)

spt2    0.0000           0.1882       -0.6053       0.0000   1.0000
                        (0.0847)     (0.0675)
          Tj               $j           "j
         (s.e.)           (s.e.)       (s.e.)
h1,t     0.1461          0.00002      0.0980
        (0.0155)        (0.00173)    (0.0691)
h2,t    0.00006          0.5355       0.2222
       (0.00002)        (0.1182)     (0.0761)
h3,t    0.00004          0.4642       0.2777
       (0.00001)        (0.0881)     (0.0890)
h4,t     0.00003           0.0          0.0
       (0.000002)
h5,t    0.000014           0.0          0.0
       (0.000001)
                    Table A5: GBP-USD GARCH Model


          ∆st3             it1          it3          spt1     spt3

∆st3    1.0000           0.0013       0.00007       0.0000   0.0000
                        (0.0006)     (0.00087)

it1     0.0000           1.0000       0.0000        0.0000   0.0000


 it3    0.0000           0.1289       1.0000        0.0000   0.0000
                        (0.0376)

spt1    0.0000           -0.5175      -0.0475       1.0000   0.0000
                        (0.0867)     (0.0864)

spt3    0.0000           0.1302       -0.8097       0.0000   1.0000
                        (0.0514)     (0.0795)
          Tj               $j           "j
         (s.e.)          (s.e.)        (s.e.)
h1,t     0.1243        0.000000       0.2004
        (0.0143)       (0.00023)     (0.0914)
h2,t    0.000019         0.6877       0.2215
       (0.000021)       (0.1185)     (0.0727)
h3,t    0.000033         0.7657       0.0991
       (0.000014)       (0.0662)     (0.0355)
h4,t    0.000027          0.0           0.0
       (0.000002)
h5,t    0.000035          0.0           0.0
       (0.000003)
