                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FOUNDATIONS OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS:
                       COMPUTATIONAL ALGORITHMS, STATISTICAL
                      INFERENCE, AND EMPIRICAL IMPLEMENTATION


                                             Andrew W. Lo
                                            Harry Mamaysky
                                              Jiang Wang


                                          Working Paper 7613
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7613

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000



This research was partially supported by the MIT laboratory for Financial Engineering, Merrill Lynch, and
the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SBR-9709976). We thank Ralph Acampora, Franklin Allen,
Susan Berger, Mike Epstein, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, Ed Kao, Doug Sanzone, Jeff Simonoff, Tom Stoker, and
seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, NYU, and conference participants at the
Columbia-JAFEE conference, the 1999 Joint Statistical Meetings, RISK 99, the 1999 Annual Meeting of the
Society forComputational Economics, and the 2000 Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association for
valuable comments and discussion. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are notnecessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Andrew W. Lo, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
  notice, is given to the source.
Foundations of Technical Analysis: Computational Algorithms, Statistical Inference,
and Empirical Implementation
Andrew W. Lo, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 7613
March 2000

                                            ABSTRACT

       Technical analysis, also known as "charting," has been part of financial practice for many
decades, but this discipline has not received the same level of academic scrutiny and acceptance as
more traditional approaches such as fundamental analysis. One of the main obstacles is the highly
subjective nature of technical analysis—the presence of geometric shapes in historical !price charts is
often in the eyes of the beholder. In this paper, we propose a systematic and automatic approach to
technical pattern recognition using nonparametric kernel regression, and apply this method to a large
number of U.S. stocks from 1962 to 1996 to evaluate the effectiveness to technical analysis. By
comparing the unconditional empirical distribution of daily stock returns to the conditional
distribution—conditioned on specific technical indicators such as head-and-shoulders or double-
bottoms—we find that over the 31-year sample period, several technical indicators do provide
incremental information and may have some practical value.


       Andrew W. Lo                                            Harry Mamaysky
       Sloan School of Management                              Sloan School of Management
       MIT                                                    Mn'
       50 Memorial Drive, E52-432                              50 Memorial Drive, E52-458
       Cambridge, MA 02142                                     Cambridge, MA 02142
       and NBER                                                harrym@mit.edu
       alo@mit.edu

       Jiang Wang
       Sloan School of Management
       MIT
       50 Memorial Drive, E52-435
       Cambridge, MA 02142
       and NBER
       wangj @mit.edu
   One of the greatest gulfs between academic finance and industry practice is the separation
that exists between technical analysts and their academic critics. In contrast to fundamental
analysis, which was quick to be adopted by the scholars of modern quantitative finance, tech-
nical analysis has been an orphan from the very start. It has been argued that the difference
between fundamental analysis and technical analysis is not unlike the difference between
astronomy and astrology. Among some circles, technical analysis is known as "voodoo fi-
nance." And in his influential book A Random Walk Down Wall Street, Burton Maildel
(1996) concludes that "[ujnder scientific scrutiny, chart-reading must share a pedestal with
alchemy."
   However, several academic studies suggest that despite its jargon and methods, technical
analysis may well be an effective means for extracting useful information from market prices.
For example, in rejecting the Random Walk Hypothesis for weekly US stock indexes, Lo and
MacKinlay (1988, 1999) have shown that past prices may be used to forecast future returns to
some degree, a fact that all technical analysts take for granted. Studies by Tabell and Tabell
(1964), Treynor and Ferguson (1985), Brown and Jennings (1989), Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993), Blume, Easley, and O'Hara (1994), Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), Lo and
MacKinlay (1997), Grundy and Martin (1998), and Rouwenhorst (1998) have also provided
indirect support for technical analysis, and more direct support has been given by Pruitt
and White (1988), Neftci (1991), Broth, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992), Neely, Weber,
and Dittmar (1997), Neely and Weller (1998), Chang and Osler (1994), Osler and Chang
(1995), and Allen and Karjalainen (1999).
   One explanation for this state of controversy and confusion is the unique and sometimes
impenetrable jargon used by technical analysts, some of which has developed into a standard
lexicon that can be translated. But there are many "homegrown" variations, each with its
own patois, which can often frustrate the uninitiated. Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997,
pp. 43—44) provide a striking example of the linguistic barriers between technical analysts
and academic finance by contrasting this statement:

     The presence of clearly identified support and resistance levels, coupled with
     a one-third retracement parameter when prices lie between them, suggests the


                                             1
     presence of strong buying and selling opportunities in the near-term.

with this one:

     The magnitudes and decay pattern of the first twelve autocorrelations and the
     statistical significance of the Box-Pierce Q-statistic suggest the presence of a
     high-frequency predictable component in stock returns.

Despite the fact that both statements have the same meaning—that past prices contain
information for predicting future returns-—-most readers find one statement plausible and
the other puzzling, or worse, offensive.
   These linguistic barriers underscore an important difference between technical analysis
and quantitative finance: technical analysis is primarily visual, while quantitative finance is
primarily algebraic and numerical. Therefore, technical analysis employs the tools of geom-
etry and pattern recognition, while quantitative finance employs the tools of mathematical
analysis and probability and statistics. In the wake of recent breakthroughs in financial en-
gineering, computer technology, and numerical algorithms, it is no wonder that quantitative
finance has overtaken technical analysis in popularity—the principles of portfolio optimiza-
tion are far easier to program into a computer than the basic tenets of technical analysis.
Nevertheless, technical analysis has survived through the years, perhaps because its visual
mode of analysis is more conducive to human cognition, and because pattern recognition is
one of the few repetitive activities for which computers do not have an absolute advantage
(yet).
    Indeed, it is difficult to dispute the potential value of price/volume charts when confronted
with the visual evidence. For example, compare the two hypothetical price charts given in
Figure 1. Despite the fact that the two price series are identical over the first half of the
sample, the volume patterns differ, and this seems to be informative. In particular, the lower
chart, which shows high volume accompanying a positive price trend, suggests that there
may be more information content in the trend, e.g., broader participation among investors.
The fact that the joint distribution of prices and volume contains important information is
hardly controversial among academics. Why, then, is the value of a visual depiction of that
joint distribution so hotly contested?

                                                2
   In this paper, we hope to bridge this gulf between technical analysis and quantitative
finance by developing a systematic aiid scientific approach to the practice of technical anal-
ysis, and by employing the now-standard methods of empirical analysis to gauge the efficacy
of technical indicators over time and across securities. In doing so, our goal is not only to
develop a lingua franca with which disciples of both disciplines can engage in productive
dialogue, but also to extend the reach of technical analysis by augmenting its tool kit with
some modem techniques in pattern recognition.
   The general goal of technical analysis is to identify regularities in the time series of prices
by extracting nonlinear patterns from noisy data. Implicit in this goal is the recognition
that some price movements are significant—they contribute to the formation of a specific
pattern—and others are merely random fluctuations to be ignored. In many cases, the
human eye can perform this "signal extraction" quickly and accurately, and until recently,
computer algorithms could not. However, a class of statistical estimators, called smoothing
estimators, is ideally suited to this task because they extract nonlinear relations the) by
"averaging out" the noise. Therefore, we propose using these estimators to mimic, and in
some cases, sharpen the skills of a trained tec]mical analyst in identifying certain patterns
in historical price series.
   In Section I, we provide a brief review of smoothing estimators and describe in detail the
specific smoothing estimator we use in our analysis: kernel regression. Our algorithm for
automating technical analysis is described in Section II. We apply this algorithm to the daily
returns of several hundred U.S. stocks from 1962 to 1996 and report the results in Section
III. To check the accuracy of our statistical inferences, we perform several Monte Carlo
simulation experiments and the results are given in Section IV. We conclude in Section V.


I. Smoothing Estimators and Kernel Regression
The starting point for any study of technical analysis is the recognition that prices evolve
in a nonlinear fashion over time and that the nonlinearities contain certain regularities or
patterns. To capture such regularities quantitatively, we begin by asserting that prices {P}



                                               3
satisfy the following expression:


                            Pt =    m(Xt)   + c , t=1,...,T                               (1)


where m(X) is an arbitrary fixed but unknown nonlinear function of a state variable X,
and {e} is white noise.
   For the purposes of pattern recognition in which our goal is to construct a smooth function

nze) to approximate the time series of prices {pt}, we set the state variable equal to time,
X = t. However, to keep our notation consistent with that of the kernel regression literature,
we will continue to use X, in our exposition.
   When prices are expressed as (1), it is apparent that geometric patterns can emerge from
a visual inspection of historical prices series—prices are the sum of the nonlinear pattern
im(Xt) and white noise—and that such patterns may provide useful information about the
unknown function me) to be estimated. But just how useful is this information?
   To answer this question empirically and systematically, we must first develop a method
for automating the identification of technical indicators, i.e., we require a pattern recogni
tion algorithm. Once such an algorithm is developed, it can be applied to a large number of
securities over many time periods to determine the efficacy of various technical indicators.
Moreover, quantitative comparisons of the performance of several indicators can be con-
ducted, and the statistical significance of such performance can be assessed through Monte
Carlo simulation and bootstrap techniques.'
   In Section A, we provide a brief review of a general class of pattern-recognition tech-
niques known as smoothing, and in Section B we describe in some detail a particular method
called nonparametric kernel regression on which our algorithm is based. Kernel regression
estimators are calibrated by a bandwidth parameter and we discuss how the bandwidth is
selected in C.

A. Smoothing Estimators
One of the most common methods for estimating nonlinear relations such as (1) is smoothing,
in which observational errors are reduced by averaging the data in sophisticated ways. Ker-

                                                4
nel regression, orthogonal series expansion, projection pursuit, nearest-neighbor estimators,
average derivative estimators, splines, and neural networks are all examples of smoothing
estimators. In addition to possessing certain statistical optirnality properties, smoothing
estimators are motivated by their close correspondence to the way human cognition extracts
regularities from noisy data.2 Therefore, they are ideal for our purposes.
   To provide some intuition for how averaging can recover nonlinear relations such as
the function me) in (1), suppose we wish to estimate mC) at a particWar date to when
X0=x0. Now suppose that for this one observation, X0, we can obtain repeated independent
observations of the price P,0, say       = Pi,-• . ,          = p, (note that these are ii independent
realizations of the price at the same date to, clearly an impossibility in practice, but let us
continue with this thought experiment for a few more steps). Then a natural estimator of
the function mC) at the point zo is


                         ñt(xo) =       1pi
                                        ni=1
                                                  = 1[m(xo)+efl                                    (2)


                                 =     m(xo)    + —Ed,                                             (3)


and by the Law of Large Numbers, the second term in (3) becomes negligible for large ii.
   Of course, if {P} is a time series, we do not have the luxury of repeated observations
for a given X,. However, if we assume that the function mC) is sufficiently smooth, then
for time-series observations X near the value x0, the corresponding values of P should be
close to m(xo). In other words, if mC) is sufficiently smooth, then in a small neighborhood
around x0, m(xo) will be nearly constant and may be estimated by taking an average of the
Pr's that correspond to those Xe's near x0. The closer the Xi's are to the value x0, the closer
an average of corresponding Pt's will be to m(xo). This argues for a weighted average of the
Pt's, where the weights decline as the X,'s get farther away from x0. This weighted-average
or "local averaging" procedure of estimating m(x) is the essence of smoothing.
   More formally, for any arbitrary x, a smoothing estimator of m(x) may be expressed as

                                                  lT
                                     rui(x)
                                                  w(z)Pt
                                                       t= 1
                                                                                                   (4)


                                                  5
where the weights {wt(x)} are large for those Ps's paired with Xe's near x, and small for those
Pr's with Xe's far from x. To implement such a procedure, we must define what we mean by
"near" and "far." If we choose too large a neighborhood around x to compute the average,
the weighted average will be too smooth and will not exhibit the genuine nonlinearities of
mC). If we choose too small a neighborhood around x, the weighted average will be too
variable, reflecting noise as well as the variations in mC). Therefore, the weights {wt(x)}
must be chosen carefully to balance these two considerations.

B. Kernel Regression
For the kernel regression estimator, the weight function Wt(x) is constructed from a proba-
bility density function K(x), also called a kernel:3


                                  K(x) 0    ,
                                                fK(n)d'u=
                                                             1.                             (5)


By rescaling the kernel with respect to a parameter h>0, we can change its spread, i.e., let:


                          Kh(u)      K(u/h) ,                     =   1                     (6)
                                                       fKh(u)du

and define the weight function to be used in the weighted average (4) as


                               wt,h(x)              — Xt)/gh(x)                             (7)

                                  gh(x)     fLKh(x—Xt).                                     (8)


If h is very small, the averaging will be done with respect to a rather small neighborhood
around each of the Xe's. If h is very large, the averaging will be over larger neighborhoods of
the Xe's. Therefore, controlling the degree of averaging amounts to adjusting the smoothing
parameter Ii, also known as the bandwidth. Choosing the appropriate bandwidth is an
important aspect of any local-averaging technique and is discussed more fully in Section C.




                                                6
    Substituting (8) into (4) yields the Nadaraya- Watson kernel estimator 'thh(x) of m(x):

                                1 '"                Kh(x — X)Y
                       mnh(x) = —EWt,h(X)Yt = >i::1
                                                  T                                        (9)
                                T              E=1 Khfr — X)

Under certain regularity conditions on the shape of the kernel K and the magnitudes and
behavior of the weights as the sample size grows, it may be shown, that ñth(x) converges to
ni(x) asymptotically in several ways (see Hãrdlle (1990) for further details). This convergence
property holds for a wide class of kernels, but for the remainder of this paper we shall use
the most popular choice of kernel, the Gaussian kernel:


                                   Kh(x) =                                                (10)


C. Selecting the Bandwidth
Selecting the appropriate bandwidth h in (9) is clearly central to the success of ñzhC) in
approximating mO—too little averaging yields a function that is too choppy, and too much
averaging yields a function that is too smooth. To illustrate these two extremes, Figure II
displays the Nadaraya-Watson kernel estimator applied to 500 datapoints generated from
the relation:

                               = Sin(Xt) + 0.5 c , c 'S-' N(0, 1)                         (11)


where X is evenly spaced in the interval [0, 2ir]. Panel 11(a) plots the raw data and the
function to be approximated.
   Kernel estimators for three different bandwidths are plotted as solid lines in Panels 11(b)—
(c). The bandwidth in 11(b) is clearly too small; the function is too variable, fitting the
"noise" 0.5 t as well as the "signal" Sin(S). Increasing the bandwidth slightly yields a much
more accurate approximation to Sine) as Panel 11(c) illustrates. However, Panel 11(d) shows
that if the bandwidth is increased beyond some point, there is too much averaging and
information is lost.
   There are several methods for automating the choice of bandwidth h in (9), but the most


                                              7
popular is the cross-validation method in which h is chosen to minimize the cross-validation
function:


                               CV(h) =             (P   - rnh,t)2                         (12)


where


                                   Tflh,t   = >W,hYr                                      (13)


The estimator iuih,t is the kernel regression estimator applied to the price history {P,-} with
the t-th observation omitted, and the summands in (12) are the squared errors of the ihh,t's,
each evaluated at the omitted observation. For a given bandwidth parameter It, the cross-
validation function is a measure of the ability of the kernel regression estimator to fit each
observation P when that observation is not used to construct the kernel estimator. By
selecting the bandwidth that minimizes this function, we obtain a kernel estimator that
satisfies certain optimality properties, e.g., minimum asymptotic mean-squared error.4
   Interestingly, the bandwidths obtained from minimizing the cross-validation function are
generally too large for our application to technical analysis—when we presented several
professional technical analysts with plots of cross-validation-fitted functions ni4e), they all
concluded that the fitted functions were too smooth. In other words, the cross-validation-
determined bandwidth places too much weight on prices far away from any given time t,
inducing too much averaging and discarding valuable information in local price movements.
Through trial and error, and by polling professional technical analysts, we have found that
an acceptable solutioft to this problem is to use a bandwidth of 0.3 x h*, where h minimizes
CV(h).5 Admittedly, this is an ad hoc approach, and it remains an important challenge for
future research to develop a more rigorous procedure.
    Another promising direction for future research is to consider alternatives to kernel re-
gression. Although useful for its simplicity and intuitive appeal, kernel estimators suffer
from a number of well-known deficiencies, e.g., boundary bias, lack of local variability in
the degree of smoothing, etc. A popular alternative that overcomes these particular defi-


                                               8
ciencies is local polynomial regression in which local averaging of polynomials is performed
to obtain an estimator of tm(x) 6 Such alternatives may yield important improvements the
pattern-recognition algorithm described in Section II.


TI. Automating Technical Analysis
Armed with a mathematical representation the) of {P} with which geometric properties can
be characterized in an objective manner, we can now construct an algorithm for automating
the detection of technical patterns. Specifically, our algorithm contains three steps:

   1. Define each technical pattern in terms of its geometric properties, e.g., local extrema
      (maxima and minima).

   2. Construct a kernel estimator thC) of a given time series of prices so that its extrema
     can be determined numerically.

   3. Analyze the) for occurrences of each technical pattern.

The last two steps are rather straightforward applications of kernel regression. The. first step
is likely to be the most controversial because it is here that the skills and judgment of a
professional technical analyst come into play. Although we will argue in Section A that most
technical indicators can be characterized by specific sequences of local extrema, technical
analysts may argue that these are poor approximations to the kinds of patterns that trained
human analysts can identify.
   While pattern-recognition techniques have been successful in automating a number of
tasks previously considered to be uniquely human endeavors—fingerprint identification,
handwriting analysis, face recognition, and so on—nevertheless it is possible that no algo-
rithm can completely capture the skills of an experienced technical analyst. We acknowledge
that any automated procedure for pattern recognition may miss some of the more subtle nu-
ances that human cognition is capable of discerning, but whether an algorithm is a poor
approximation to human judgment can only be determined by investigating the approxima-
tion errors empirically. As long as an algorithm can provide a reasonable approximation to


                                               9
some of the cognitive abilities of a human analyst, we can use such an algorithm to investi-
gate the empirical performance of those aspects of technical analysis for which the algorithm
is a good approximation. Moreover, if technical analysis is an art form that can be taught,
then surely its basic precepts can be quantified and automated to some degree. And as
increasingly sophisticated pattern-recognition techniques are developed, a larger fraction of
the art will become a science.
   More importantly, from a practical perspective, there may be significant benefits to devel-
oping an algorithmic approach to technical analysis because of the leverage that technology
can provide. As with many other successful technologies, the automation of technical pat-
tern recognition may not replace the skills of a technical analyst, but can amplify them
considerably.
   In Section A, we propose definitions of ten technical patterns based on their extrema. In
Section B, we describe a specific algorithm to identify technical patterns based on the local
extrema of kernel regression estimators, and provide specific examples of the algorithm at
work in Section C.

A. Definitions of Technical Patterns
We focus on five pairs of technical patterns that are among the most popular patterns of
traditional technical analysis (see, for example, Edwards and Magee (1966, Chapters VII—
X)): head-and-shoulders (HS) and inverse head-and-shoulders (IRS), broadening tops (BT)
and bottoms (BB), triangle tops (TT) and bottoms (TB), rectangle tops (RT) and bottoms
(RB), and double tops (DT) and bottoms (DB). There are many other technical indicators
that may be easier to detect algorithmically—moving averages, support and resistance levels,
and oscillators, for example—but because we wish to illustrate the power of smoothing
techniques in automating technical analysis, we focus on precisely those patterns that are
most difficult to quantify analytically.
   Consider the systematic component me) of a price history {P} and suppose we have iden-
tified ii local extrema, i.e., the local maxima and minima, of tm{';). Denote by E1, E2,. . . ,
the ii extrema   and t, t,. . . , t the dates on which these extrema occur. Then we have the
following definitions:

                                               10
Definition 1 (Head-and-Shoulders)         Head-and-shoulders (HS) and inverted head-and-
shoulders (IHS) patterns are characterized by a sequence of five consecutive local extrema
E1,. . , P25 such that:
                                a maximum
                 IfS =—
                            E1 and P25 within 1.5percent of their average
                            P22 and P24 within 1.5percent of their average

                            P21 a minimum
                IHS =
                    —
                            F1 and F5 within 1.5percent of their average
                            F2 and F4 within l.5percent of their average

Observe that only five consecutive extrema are required to identify a head-and-shoulders
pattern. This follows from the formalization of the geometry of a head-and-shoulders pattern:
three peaks, with the midifie peak higher than the other two. Because consecutive extrema
must alternate between maxima and minima for smooth functions,7 the three-peaks pattern
corresponds to a sequence of five local extrema: maximum, minimum, highest maximum,
minimum, and maximum. The inverse head-and-shoulders is simply the mirror image of the
head-and-shoulders, with the initial local extrema a minimum.
   Because broadening, rectangle, and triangle patterns can begin on either a local maximum
or minimum, we aUow for both of these possibilities in our definitions by distinguishing
between broadening tops and bottoms:
Definition 2 (Broadening) Broadening tops (BTOP) and bottoms (EBOT) are charac-
terized by a sequence of five consecutive local extrema F1,.. . , F5 such that:

                          a maximum                             I F1 a minimum
       BTOP P21<E3<E5                        ,        BBOT
                                                                1E2<P24

Definitions for triangle and rectangle patterns follow naturally:
Definition 3 (Triangle) Triangle tops (TTOF) and bottoms (TBOT) are characterized by
a sequence of five consecutive local extrema Er,.. . ,E5 such that:

                    I E1 a maximum                              (F1 a minimum
       TTOP=—                                ,        TBOT=
                    L.E2<P24                                    IE2>E4

                                                 11
    Definitign 4 (Rectangle) Rectangle tops (RTOP) and bottoms (RBOT) are characterized
    by a sequence of five consecutive local extrema E1,. . . , E5 such that:

                                          a maximum
                   RTOP —
                        =             tops within 0. 75 percent of their average
                                      bottoms within 0.75 percent of their average
                                      lowest top> highest bottom

                                          a minimum
                   RBOT —
                        =             tops within 0.75 percent of their average
                                      bottoms within 0.75 percent of their average
                                      lowest top > highest bottom

    The definition for double tops and bottoms is slightly more involved. Consider first the
    double top. Starting at a local maximum E1, we locate the highest local maximum Ea
    occurring after E1 in the set of all local extrema in the sample. We require that the two
    tops, E1 and E,   be   within 1.5 percent of their average. Finally, following Edwards and
    Magee (1966), we require that the two tops occur at least a month, or 22 trading days,
    apart. Therefore, we have:
    Definition 5 (Double Top and Bottom) Double tops (DTOP) and bottoms (DBO T) are
    characterized by an initial local extremum E1 and a subsequent local extrema E and Eb such
    that:

                                           sup{Pç : t>t, k=2,...,n}
                                           inf{Pt : t>t ,        k=2,;..,n}
    and

                                     P21 a maximum
    •
                  DTOP               Ej and E within 1.5 percent of their average
                                 1t—t>22
                                     E a minimum
                  DBOT           .   P11   and Eb within 1.5 percent of their average
•
                                 1t—t>22
    B. The Identification Algorithm
    Our algorithm begins with a sample of prices {P1,.      ..   Pr} for which we fit kernel regressions,
    one for each subsample or    window      from t to t+l+d—1, where t varies from 1 to T—l—d+1,

                                                       12
and I and d are fixed parameters whose purpose is explained below. In the empirical analysis
of Section III, we set I = 35 and d = 3, hence each window consists of 38 trading days.
   The motivation for fitting kernel regressions to rolling windows of data is to narrow our
focus to patterns that are completed within the span of the window—i + d trading days in
our case. If we fit a single kernel regression to the entire dataset, many patterns of various
durations may emerge, and without imposing some additional structure on the nature of the
patterns, it is virtually impossible to distinguish signal from noise in this case. Therefore,
our algorithm fixes the length of the window at I+d, but kernel regressions are estimated on
a rolling basis and we search for patterns in each window.
   Of course, for any fixed window, we can only find patterns that are completed within l+d
trading days. Without further structure on the systematic component of prices me), this is
a restriction that any empirical analysis must contend with.8 We choose a shorter window
length of 1 = 35 trading days to focus on short-horizon patterns that may be more relevant
for active equity traders, and leave the analysis of longer-horizon patterns to future research.
   The parameter d controls for the fact that in practice we do not observe a realization of
a given pattern as soon as it has completed. Instead, we assume that there may be a lag
between the pattern completion and the time of pattern detection. To account for this lag,
we require that the final extremum that completes a pattern occurs on day t+l—1; hence d is
the number of days following the completion of a pattern that must pass before the pattern
is detected. This will become more important in Section III when we compute conditional
returns, conditioned on the realization of each pattern. In particular, we compute post-
pattern returns starting from the end of trading day t+l+d, i.e., one day after the pattern
has completed. For example, if we determine that a head-and-shoulder pattern has completed
on day t + 1— 1 (having used prices from time t through time t + 1 + d —1), we compute the
conditional one-day gross return as        Yt+l+d+1/Yt÷l+d. Hence we do not use any forward
information in computing returns conditional on pattern completion. In other words, the
lag d ensures that we are computing our conditional returns completely out-of-sample and
without any "look-ahead" bias.
   Within each window, we estimate a kernel regression using the prices in that window,


                                               13
hence:

                     \—
                     I        Et+l+d—1
                                 s=t
                                        it I      \ fl
                                         flhkr—S).I—,     .         ——
                 mhkr) —       'c-'t+t+d—liy I        '
                               L.5=t       IhkT — 8)

where Kh(z) is given in (10) and h is the bandwidth parameter (see Section C). It is clear
that ñih(r) is a differentiable function of r.
   Once the function ñ'ih(r) has been computed, its local extrema can be readily identified
by finding times r such that Sgn(ñz(r)) = —Sgn(n4(r+1)), where ñz denotes the derivative
of flih with respect to r and Sgn(.) is the signum function. If the signs of ñ%(r) ñt(r+1) are
+1 and —1, respectively, then we have found a local maximum, and if they are —1 and +1,
respectively, then we have found a local minimum. Once such a time r has been identified,
we proceed to identify a maximum or minimum in the original price series {P} in the range
[t—i, t+iJ, and the extrema in the original price series are used to determine whether or not
a pattern has occurred according to the definitions of Section A.
   If th(r) =    0   for a given i-, which occurs if closing prices stay the same for several
consecutive days, we need to check whether the price we have found is a local minimum or
maximum. We look for the date s such that s = inf { s >        r : ñz(s) $ 0 }.      We then
apply the same method as discussed above, except here we compare Sgn(i%(r — 1)) and
Sgn(u14(s)).
   One useful consequence of this algorithm is that the series of extrema which it identifies
contains alternating minima and maxima. That is, if the kth extremum is a maximum, then
it is always the case that the (k+l)th extremum is a minimum, and vice versa.
   An important advantage of using this kernel regression approach to identify patterns is
the fact that it ignores extrema that are "too local." For example, a simpler alternative is
to identify local extrema from the raw price data directly, i.e., identify a price P as a local
maximum if P,1 C Pt and P, > P+1, and vice versa for a local minimum. The problem
with this approach is that it identifies too many extrema, and also yields patterns that are
not visually consistent with the kind of patterns that technical analysts find compelling.
   Once we have identified all of the local extrema in the window [t, t + I + d — 1], we can
proceed to check for the presence of the various technical patterns using the definitions of

                                                 14
Section A. This procedure is then repeated for the next window [t+i, t+l+d] , and continues
until the end of the sample is reached at the window [T —i —d+ 1, T].

C. Empirical Examples
To see how our algorithm performs in practice, we apply it to the daily returns of a single
security, CTX, during the five-year period from 1992 to 1996. Figures 111—Vu plot occur-
rences of the five pairs of patterns defined in Section A that were identified by our algorithm.
Note that there were no rectangle bottoms detected for CTX during this period, so for com-
pleteness we substituted a rectangle bottom for CDO stock which occurred during the same
period.
   In each of these graphs, the solid lines are the raw prices, the dashed lines are the kernel
estimators mh(•), the circles indicate the local extrema, and the vertical line marks date
t+l —1, the day that the final extremum occurs to complete the pattern.
   Casual inspection by several professional technical analysts seems to confirm the ability of
our automated procedure to match human judgment in identifying the five pairs of patterns
in Section A. Of course, this is merely anecdotal evidence and not meant to be conclusive—
we provide these• figures simply to illustrate the output of a technical pattern recognition
algorithm based on kernel regression.


III. Is Technical Analysis Informative?
Although there have been many tests of technical analysis over the years, most of these tests
have focused on the profitability of technical trading rules.9 While some of these studies do
find that technical indicators can generate statistically significant trading profits, they beg
the question of whether or not such profits are merely the equilibrium rents that accrue to
investors willing to bear the risks associated with such strategies. Without specifying a fully
articulated dynamic general equilibrium asset-pricing model, it is impossible to determine
the economic source of trading profits.
   Instead, we propose a more fundamental test in this section, one that attempts to gauge
the information content in the technical patterns of Section A by comparing the unconditional


                                              15
empirical distribution of returns with the coriesponding conditional empirical distribution,
conditioned on the occurrence of a technical pattern. If technical patterns are informative,
conditioning on them should alter the empirical distribution of returns; if the information
contained in such patterns has already been incorporated into returns, the conditional and
unconditional distribution of returns should be close. Although this is a weaker test of the
effectiveness of technical analysis—informativeness does not guarantee a profitable trading
strategy—it is, nevertheless, a natural first step in a quantitative assessment of technical
analysis.
   To measure the distance between the two distributions, we propose two goodness-of-fit
measures in Section A. We apply these diagnostics to the daily returns of individual stocks
from 1962 to 1996 using a procedure described in Sections B to D, and the results are
reported in Sections E and F.

A. Goodness-of-Fit Tests
A simple diagnostic to test the informativeness of the ten technical patterns is to compare the
quantiles of the conditional returns with their unconditional counterparts. If conditioning on
these technical patterns provides no incremental information, the quantiles of the conditional
returns should be similar to those of unconditional returns. In particular, we compute the
deciles of unconditional returns and tabulate the relative frequency 5 of conditional returns
falling into decile j of the unconditional returns,=j 1,. . ., 10:

                              number of conditional returns in decile
                                                                                           15
                                total number of conditional returns

Under the null hypothesis that the returns are independently and identically distributed and
the conditional and unconditional distributions are identical, the asymptotic distributions of
S and the corresponding goodness-of-fit test statistic Q are given by:

                                       —0.10) Qi Af(0, 0.10(1—0.10))                      (16)

                    Q        (nj_0J0n)2                                                   (17)



                                              16
where nj is the number of observations that fall in decile j and n is the total number of
observations (see, for example, DeGroot (1986)).
   Another comparison of the conditional and unconditional distributions of returns is pro-
vided by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Denote by {Z1}1 and {Z2}1 two samples that
are each independently and identically distributed with cumulative distribution functions
Fi(z) and F2(z), respectively. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic is designed to test the null
hypothesis that F1 = F2, and is based on the empirical cumulative distribution functions N
of both samples:


                                                                        i=1,2               (18)
                                                    k=i

where   1(.) is the indicator function. The statistic is given by the expression:



                                  =        n1n2
                                                               sup           —fr2(z)I       (19)
                         7m1,n2
                                      (   Ti1   + n2 )1/2
                                                                     Ei(z)              .




Under the null hypothesis F1 = F2, the statistic 'y,,22 should be small. Moreover, Smirnov
(1939a, 1939b) derives the limiting distribution of the statistic to be:

                 lim
            mm(ni ,fl2)—*oC
                                                E (_1)k exp(—2k2x2) , x> 0
                              Prob( 'y1,2 x) =k=—oo                                         (20)


An approximate a-level test of the null hypothesis can be performed by computing the
statistic and rejecting the null if it exceeds the upper lOOa-th percentile for the null distri-
bution given by (20) (see Hollander and Wolfe (1973, Table A.23), Csáki (1984), and Press
et al. (1986, Chapter 13.5)).
   Note that the sampling distributions of both the goodness-of-fit and Kolmogorov-Smirnov
statistics are derived under the assumption that returns are independently and identically
distributed, which is not plausible for financial data. We attempt to address this prob-
lem by normalizing the returns of each security, i.e., by subtracting its mean and dividing
by its standard deviation (see Section C), but this does not eliminate the dependence or
heterogeneity. We hope to extend our analysis to the more general non-lID case in future


                                                          17
research.

B. The Data and Sampling Procedure
We apply the goodness-of-fit and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests to the daily returns of indi-
vidual NYSE/AMEX and Nasdaq stocks from 1962 to 1996 using data from the Center for
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP). To ameliorate the effects of nonstationarities induced
by changing market structure and institutions, we split the data into NYSE/AMEX stocks
and Nasdaq stocks and into seven five-year periods: 1962 to 1966, 1967 to 1971, and so on.
To obtain a broad cross-section of securities, in each five-year subperiod, we randomly select
ten stocks from each of five market-capitalization quintiles (using mean market-capitalization
over the subperiod), with the further restriction that at least 75 percent of the price obser-
vations must be non-missing during the subperiod.'° This procedure yields a sample of 50
stocks for each subperiod across seven subperiods (note that we sample wjth replacement,
hence there may be names in common across subp eriods).
   As a check on the robustness of our inferences, we perform this sampling procedure twice
to construct two samples, and apply our empirical analysis to both. Although we report
results only from the first sample to conserve space, the results of the second sample are
qualitatively consistent with the first and are available upon request.

C. Computing Conditional Returns
For each stock in each subperiod, we apply the procedure outlined in Section II to identify
all occurrences of the ten patterns deBited in Section A. For each pattern detected, we com-
pute the one-day continuously compounded return d days after the pattern has completed.
Specifically, consider a window of prices {P} from t to t+l +d— 1, and suppose that the
identified pattern p is completed at t + I — 1. Then we take the conditional return R' as
log(1 + R+1÷i). Therefore, for each stock, we have ten sets of such conditional returns,
each conditioned on one of the ten patterns of Section A.
   For each stock, we construct a sample of unconditional continuously compounded returns
using non-overlapping intervals of length r, and we compare the empirical distribution func-
tion of these returns with those of the conditional returns. To facilitate such comparisons,

                                             18
we standardize all returns—both conditional and unconditional—by subtracting means and
dividing by standard deviations, hence:

                                          —     — Mean[Rt]
                                     it   —                                               ' 21
                                                 SD[Rj]

where the means and standard deviations are computed for each individual stock within each

subperiod. Therefore, by construction, each normalized return series has zero mean and unit
variance.
   Finally, to increase the power of our goodness-of-fit tests, we combine the normalized re-
turns of all 50 stocks within each subperiod; hence for each subperiod we have two samples—
unconditional and conditional returns—and from these we compute two empirical distribu-
tion functions that we compare using our diagnostic test statistics.

D. Conditioning on Volume
Given the prominent role that volume plays in technical analysis, we also construct returns
conditioned on increasing or decreasing volume. Specifically, for each stock in each subperiod,
we compute its average share-turnover during the first and second halves of each subperiod,
r1 and r2, respectively." If i-, > 1.2 x r2, we categorize this as a "decreasing volume" event;
if r2 >   1.2   x r1, we categorize this as an "increasing volume" event. If neither of these
conditions holds, then neither event is considered to have occurred.
   Using these events, we can construct conditional returns conditioned on two pieces of
information: the occurrence of a technical pattern and the occurrence of increasing or de-
creasing volume. Therefore, we shall compare the empirical distribution of unconditional
returns with three conditional-return distributions: the distribution of returns conditioned
on technical patterns, the distribution conditioned on technical patterns and increasing vol-
ume, and the distribution conditioned on technical patterns and decreasing volume.
   Of course, other conditioning variables can easily be incorporated into this procedure,
though the "curse of dimensionality" imposes certain practical limits on the ability to esti-
mate multivariate conditional distributions nonparametrically.



                                               19
E. Summary Statistics
In Tables I and II, we report frequency counts for the number of patterns detected over the
entire 1962 to 1996 sample, and within each subperiod and each market-capitalization quin-
tile, for the ten patterns defined in Section A. Table I contains results for the NYSE/AMEX
stocks, and Table II contains corresponding results for Nasdaq stocks.
   Table I shows that the most common patterns across all stocks and over the entire sam-
ple period are double tops and bottoms (see the row labelled "Entire"), with over 2,000
occurrences of each. The second most common patterns are the head-and-shoulders and
inverted head-and-shoulders, with over 1,600 occurrences of each. These total counts corre-
spond roughly to four to six occurrences of each of these patterns for each stock during each
five-year subperiod (divide the total number of occurrences by 7 x 50), not an unreasonable
frequency from the point of view of professional technical analysts. Table I shows that most
of the ten patterns are more frequent for larger stocks than for smaller ones, and that they
are relatively evenly distributed over the five-year subperiods. When volume trend is con-
sidered jointly with the occurrences of the ten patterns, Table I shows that the frequency
of patterns is not evenly distributed between increasing (the row labelled "r(,)") and de-
creasing (the row labelled "r(N)") volume-trend cases. For example, for the entire sample
of stocks over the 1962 to 1996 sample period, there are 143 occurrences of a broadening
top with decreasing volume trend, but 409 occurrences of a broadening top with increasing
volume trend.
   For purposes of comparison, Table I also reports frequency counts for the number of pat-
terns detected in a sample of simulated geometric Brownian motion, calibrated to match the
mean and standard deviation of each stock in each five-year subperiod.12 The entries in the
row labelled "Sim. GBM" show that the random walk model yields very different implications
for the frequency counts of several technical patterns. For example, the simulated sample
has only 577 head-and-shoulders and 578 inverted-head-and-shoulders patterns, whereas the
actual data have considerably more, 1,611 and 1,654, respectively. On the other hand, for
broadening tops and bottoms, the simulated sample contains many more occurrences than
the actual data, 1,227 and 1,028 as compared to 725 and 748, respectively. The number of


                                             20
triangles is roughly comparable across the two samples, but for rectangles and double tops
and bottoms, the differences are dramatic. Of course, the simulated sample is only one real-
ization of geometric Brownian motion, so it is difficult to draw general conclusions about the
relative frequencies. Nevertheless, these simulations point to important differences between
the data and independently and identically distributed lognormal returns.
   To develop further intuition for these patterns, Figures VIII and IX display the cross-
sectional and time-series distribution of each of the ten patterns for the NYSE/AMEX and
Nasdaq samples, respectively. Each symbol represents a pattern detected by our algorithm,
the vertical axis is divided into five quintiles, the horizontal axis is calendar time, and
alternating symbols (diamonds and asterisks) represent distinct subperiods. These graphs
show that the distribution of patterns is not clustered in time or among a subset of securities.
   Table II provides the same frequency counts for Nasdaq stocks, and despite the fact that
we have the same number of stocks in this sample (50 per subperiod over seven subperiods),
there are considerably fewer patterns detected than in the NYSE/AMEX case. For example,
the Nasdaq sample yields only 919 head-and-shoulders patterns, whereas the NYSE/AMEX
sample contains 1,611. Not surprisingly, the frequency counts for the sample of simulated
geometric Brownian motion are similar to those in Table I.
   Tables III and IV report suumiary statistics—means, standard deviations, skewness, and
excess kurtosis—of unconditional and conditional normalized returns of NYSE/AMEX and
Nasdaq stocks, respectively. These statistics show considerable variation in the different re-
turn populations. For example, the first four moments of normalized raw returns are 0.000,
1.000,   0.345, and 8.122, respectively. The same four moments of post-BTOP returns are
—0.005, 1.035, —1.151, and 16.701, respectively, and those of post-DTOP returns are 0.017,
0.910, 0.206, and 3.386, respectively. The differences in these statistics among the ten con-
ditional return populations, and the differences between the conditional and unconditional
return populations, suggest that conditioning on the ten technical indicators does have some
effect on the distribution of returns.




                                              21
F. Empirical Results
Tables V and Vi reports the results of the goodness-of-fit test (16)—(l7) for our sample of
NYSE and AMEX (Table V) and Nasdaq (Table VI) stocks, respectively, from 1962 to 1996
for each of the ten technical patterns. Table V shows that in the NYSE/AMEX sample,
the relative frequencies of the conditional returns are significantly different from those of the
unconditional returns for seven of the ten patterns considered. The three exceptions are the
conditional returns from the BBOT, TTOP, and DBOT patterns, for which the p-values of
the test statistics Qare 5.1 percent, 21.2 percent, and 16.6 percent respectively. These results
yield mixed support for the overall efficacy of technical indicators. However, the results of
Table VI tell a different story: there is overwhelming significance for all ten indicators in the
Nasdaq sample, with p-values that are zero to three significant digits, and test statistics Q
that range from 34.12 to 92.09. In contrast, the test statistics inTable V range from 12.03
to 50.97.
   One possible explanation for the difference between the NYSE/AMEX and Nasdaq
samples is a difference in the power of the test because of different sample sizes. If the
NYSE/AMEX sample contained fewer conditional returns, i.e., fewer patterns, the corre-
sponding test statistics might be subject to greater sampling variation and lower power.
However, this explanation can be ruled out from the frequency counts of Tables I and II—
the number of patterns in the NYSE/AMEX sample is considerably larger than those of the
Nasdaq sample for all ten patterns. Tables V and VI seem to suggest important differences
in the informativeness of technical indicators for NYSE/AMEX and Nasdaq stocks.
   Table VII and VIII report the results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (19) of the equality
of the conditional and unconditional return distributions for NYSE/AMEX (Table VII) and
Nasdaq (Table VIII) stocks, respectively, from 1962 to 1996, in five-year subperiods, and
in market-capitalization quintiles. Recall that conditional returns are defined as the one-
day return starting three days following the conclusion of an occurrence of a pattern. The
p-values are with respect to the asymptotic distribution of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
statistic given in (20).
   Table VII shows that for NYSE/AMEX stocks, five of the ten patterns—HS, BBOT,


                                               22
RTOP, RBOT, and DTOP—yield statistically significant test statistics, with p-values rang-
ing from 0.000 for RBOT to 0.021 for DTOP patterns. However, for the other five patterns,
the p-values range from 0.104 for IRS to 0.393 for DBOT, which implies an inability to
distinguish between the conditional and unconditional distributions of normalized returns.
    When we condition on declining volume trend as well, the statistical significance declines
for most patterns, but increases the statistical significance of TBOT patterns. In contrast,
conditioning on increasing volume trend yields an increase in the statistical significance of
BTOP patterns. This difference may suggest an important role for volume trend in TBOT
and BTOP patterns. The difference between the increasing and decreasing volume-trend
conditional distributions is statistically insignificant for almost all the patterns (the sole
exception is the TBOT pattern). This drop in statistical significance may be due to a lack
of power of the K-S test given the relatively small sample sizes of these conditional returns
(see Table I for frequency counts).
    Table VIII reports corresponding results for the Nasdaq sample and as in Table VI, in
contrast to the NYSE/AMEX results, here all the patterns are statistically significant at
the 5 percent level. This is especially significant because the the Nasdaq. sample exhibits far
fewer patterns than the NYSE/AMEX sample (see Tables I and II), hence the K-S test is
likely to have lower power in this case.
    As with the NYSE/AMEX sample, volume trend seems to provide little incremental
information for the Nasdaq sample except in one case: increasing volume and BTOP. And
except for the TTOP pattern, the K-S test still cannot distinguish between the decreasing
and increasing volume-trend conditional distributions, as the last pair of rows of Table Viii's
first panel indicates.


IV. Monte Carlo Analysis
Tables IX and X contain bootstrap percentiles for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equal-
ity of conditional and unconditional one-day return distributions for NYSE/AMEX and Nas-
daq stocks, respectively, from 1962 to 1996, and for market-capitalization quintiles, under
the null hypothesis of equality, For each of the two sets of market data, two sample sizes,


                                             23
in1 and in2, have been chosen to span the range of frequency counts of patterns reported
in Tables I and II. For each sample size m, we resample one-day normalized returns (with
replacement) to obtain a bootstrap sample of in1 observations, compute the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test statistic (against the entire sample of one-day normalized returns), and repeat
this procedure 1,000 times. The percentiles of the asymptotic distribution are also reported
for comparison under the column "-y".
    Tables IX and X show that for a broad range of sample sizes and across size quintiles,
subperiod, and exchanges, the bootstrap distribution of the Kohnogorov-Smirnov statistic
is well approximated by its asymptotic distribution (20).


V. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a new approach to evaluating the efficacy of technical anal-
ysis. Based on smoothing techniques such as nonparametric kernel regression, our approach
incorporates the essehce of technical analysis: to identify regularities in the time series of
prices by extracting nonlinear patterns from noisy data. While human judgment is still
superior to most computational algorithms in the area of visual pattern recognition, recent
advances in statistical learning theory have had successful applications in fingerprint identi-
fication, handwriting analysis, and face recognition. Technical analysis may well be the next
frontier for such methods.
   When applied to many stocks over many time periods, we find that certain technical
patterns do provide incremental information, especially for Nasdaq stocks. While this does
not necessarily imply that technical analysis can be used to generate "excess" trading profits,
it does raise the possibility that technical analysis can add value to the investment process.
   Moreover, our methods suggest that technical analysis can be improved by using auto-
mated algorithms such as ours, and that traditional patterns such as head-and-shoulders and
rectangles, while sometimes effective, need not be optimal. In particular, it may be possible
to determine "optimal patterns" for detecting certain types of phenomena in financial time
series, e.g., an optimal shape for detecting stochastic volatility or changes in regime. More-
over, patterns that are optimal for detecting statistical anomalies need not be optimal for


                                              24
trading profits, and vice versa. Such considerations may lead to an entirely new branch of
technical analysis, one based on selecting pattern recognition algorithms to optimize specific
objective functions. We hope to explore these issues more fully in future research.




                                              25
                                       Footnotes
   1A similar approach has been proposed by Chang and Osler (1994) and Osler and Chang
(1995) for the case of foreign-currency trading rules based on a head-and-shouiders pat-
tern. They develop an algorithm for automatically detecting geometric patterns in price or
exchange data by looking at properly defined local extrema.
   2See, for example, Beymer and Poggio (1996), Poggio and Beymer (1996), and Riesenhu-
ber and Poggio (1997).
   3flespite the fact that K(x) is a probability density function, it plays no probabilistic
role in the subsequent analysis—it is merely a convenient method for computing a weighted
average, and does not imply, for example, that X is distributed according to K(x) (which
would be a parametric assumption).
   4However, there are other bandwidth-selection methods that yield the same asymptotic
optimality properties but which have different implications for the finite-sample properties
of kernel estimators. See Hãrdle (1990) for further discussion.
   5Specifically, we produced fitted curves for various bandwidths and compared their ex-
trema to the original price series visually to see if we were fitting more "noise" than "signal,"
and asked several professional technical analysts to do the same. Through this informal pro-
cess, we settled on the bandwidth of 0.3 x h and used it for the remainder of our analysis.
This procedure was followed before we performed the statistical analysis of Section III, and
we made no revision to the choice of bandwidth afterwards.
   6See Simonoff (1996) for a discussion of the problems with kernel estimators and alter-
natives such as local polynomial regression.
   TAfter all, for two consecutive maxima to be local maxima, there must be a local minimum
in between, and vice versa for two consecutive minima.
   81f we are willing to place additional restrictions on me),. e.g., linearity, we can obtain
considerably more accurate inferences even for partially completed patterns in any fixed
window.
    9For example, Chang and Osler (1994) and Osler and Chang (1995) propose an algorithm
for automatically detecting head-and-shoulders patterns in foreign exchange data by looking
at properly defined local extrema. To assess the efficacy of a head-and-shoulders trading rule,
they take a stand on a class of trading strategies and compute the profitability of these across
a sample of exchange rates against the U.S. dollar. The null return distribution is computed
by a bootstrap that samples returns randomly from the original data so as to induce temporal
independence in the bootstrapped time series. By comparing the actual returns from trading
strategies to the bootstrapped distribution, the authors find that for two of the six currencies
in their sample (the yen and the Deutsche mark), trading strategies based on a head and
shoulders pattern can lead to statistically significant profits. See, also, Neftci and Policano
(1984), Pruitt and White (1988), and Brock, Lakonishok, and LeBaron (1992).
  '°If the first price observation of a stock is missing, we set it equal to the first non-missing
price in the series. If the t-th price observation is missing, we set it equal to the first
non-missing price prior to t.
   11For the Nasdaq stocks, r1 is the average turnover over the first third of the sample, and
r2. is the average turnover over the final third of the sample.

                                               26
  12[u particular, let the price process satisfy
                            dP(t) =      jzP(t) dt   + cP(t) dW(t)                     (22)
where W(t) is a standard Brownian motion. To generate simulated prices for a single security
in a given period, we estimate the security's drift and diffusion coefficients by maximum
likelihood and then simulate prices using the estimated parameter values. An independent
price series is simulated for each of the 350 securities in both the NYSE/AMEX and the
Nasdaq samples. Finally, we use our pattern recognition algorithm to detect the occurrence
of each of the ten patterns in the simulated price series.




                                              27
                                    References

Allen, Franklin and Risto Karjalainen, 1999, Using genetic algorithms to find technical
    trading rules, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 245—271.
Beymer, David and Tomaso Poggio, 1996, Image representation for visual learning, Science
    272, 1905—1909.
Blume, Lawrence, Easley, David and Maureen O'Hara, 1994, Market statistics and technical
   analysis: The role of volume, Journal of Finance 49, 153—181.
Brock, William, Lakonishok, Joseph and Blake LeBaron, 1992, Simple technical trading
    rules and the stochastic properties of stock returns, Journal of Finance 47, 1731—1764.
Brown, David and Robert Jennings, 1989, On technical analysis, Review of Financial Stud-
    ies 2, 527—551.
Campbell, John, Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of
   Financial Markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chan, Louis, Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Joseph Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies,
   Journal of Finance 51, 1681—1713.
Chang, Kevin and Carol Osler, 1994, Evaluating chart-based technical analysis: The head-
   and-shoulders pattern in foreign exchange markets, working paper, Federal Reserve
   Bank of New York.
Csáki, E., 1984, Empirical distribution function, in P. Krislmaiah and P. Sen, eds., Handbook
    of Statistics, Volume.4 (Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
DeGroot, Morris, 1986, Probability and Statistics (Addison Wesley Publishing Company,
   Reading, MA).
Edwards, Robert and John Magee, 1966, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 5th Edition
    (John Magee Inc., Boston, MA).
Grundy, Bruce and S. Martin, 1998, Understanding the nature of the risks and the source
   of the rewards to momentum investing, unpublished working paper, Wharton School,
    University of Pennsylvania.
Hãrdle, Wolfgang, 1990, Applied Nonparametric Regression (Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge, UK).
Hollander, Myles and Douglas Wolfe, 1973, Nonparametric Statistical Methods (John Wiley
    & Sons, New York, NY).
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
    losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65—91.
Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1988, Stock market prices do not follow random
    walks: Evidence from a simple specification test, Review of Financial Studies 1, 41—66.
Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, Maximizing predictability in the stock and
    bond markets, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1(1997), 102—134.


                                            28
Lo, Andrew W. and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1999, A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street
    (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Malkiel, Burton, 1996, A Random Walk Down Wall Street: Including a Life-Cycle Guide
   to Personal Investing (W.W. Norton, New York, NY).
Neely, Christopher, Weller, Peter and Robert Dittmar, 1997, Is technical analysis in the
    foreign exchange market profitable? A genetic programming approach, Journal of
    Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 405—426.
Neely, Christopher and Peter Weller, 1998, Technical trading rules in the european mone-
    tary system, working paper, Federal Bank of St. Louis.
Neftci, Salih, 1991, Naive trading rules in financial markets and wiener-kolmogorov predic-
    tion theory: K study of technical analysis, Journal of Business 64, 549—571.
Neftci, Salih and Andrew Policano, 1984, Can chartists outperform the market? Market
    efficiency tests for 'technical analyst' , Journal of Future Markets 4, 465—478.
Osler, Carol and Kevin Chang, 1995, Head and shoulders: Not just a flaky pattern, Staff
    ReportNo. 4, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Poggio, Tomaso and David Beymer, 1996, Regularization networks for visual learning, in
   Shree Nayar and Tomaso Poggio, eds., Early Visual Learning (Oxford University Press,
   Oxford, UK).
Press, William, Flannery, Brian, Teukolsky, Saul and William Vetterling, 1986, Numerical
    Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
    UK).
Pruitt, Stephen and Robert White, 1988, The CRISMA trading system: Who says technical
    analysis can't beat the market?. Journal of Portfolio Management 14, 55—58.
Riesenhuber, Maximilian and Tomaso Poggio, 1997, Common computational strategies in
    machine and biological vision, in Proceedings of International Symposium on System
    Life. Tokyo, Japan, 67—75.
Rouwenhorst, Geert, 1998, International momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 53,
    26 7—284.

Simonoff, Jeffrey, 1996, Smoothing Methods in Statistics (Springer-Verlag, New York, NY):
Smirnov, N., 1939a, Sur les écarts de la courbe de distribution empirique, Eec. Math.
    (Mat. Sborn.) 6, 3—26.
Smirnov, N., 1939b, On the estimation of the discrepancy between empirical curves of
    distribution for two independent samples, Bulletin. Math. Univ. Moscow 2, 3—14.
Tabell, Anthony and Edward Tabell, 1964, The case for technical analysis, Financial Ana-
    lyst Journal 20, 67—76.
Treynor, Jack and Robert Ferguson, 1985, In defense of technical analysis, Journal of
    Finance 40, 757—773.




                                           29
     Price



                                                      ''
                   liii II' 11111 I
                              I       iiii
              liii                           HI''''        liiiliiiiIiiil         liii'
                                                                            1111111




Volume


         11M.J .IIId,ItI.IIIiIJS IJ,li.iiiiLIi idL1iii1l                                  I    Date


     Price




                     ' 'II'I'III
               I


                                                                                      ''Ill'

Volume


                                         '.IIIIiIiII.I,IHiI,II iIII,11ii111 iiI I Date



   Figure I. Two hypothetical price/volume charts.




                                              30
             Simulated DaIs V — Sin(K) + .5Z                                    Kernel [eLimut. Car 1—01,7110* .5Z. 4—. In




                                                                                           —
                                                                             -' tcuc3.—.f.          -
                                                                                       :-x.-•                  &




                                                                                                          -
n.no        1.57           3,14
                                          -
                                                                                                                              ITE   - 4,24
                                                                                    .37            7.14                4.71




                         (,)                                                                     (b)



         Kernel E.limntn lnrY—SntK3+,5Z. I, —                            -      Kanral F.ti.nutn nrVSir(3)+ ,SZ. h2.nn              -




                                                                                                          -                     -




                                                H-
             .57           7.53          4.71                     0.00               .57           3.14                4.71             1,20
                            S                                                                                      -
                                                                                                    0




                         (c)                                                                     (a)

   Figure II. Illustration of bandwidth selection for kernel regression.




                                                          Sr.-:

                                                          551 .                        —                      .I


       () HeaSand-Shonuldern                                                          (b) Inverse Head-and-Shouldern

       Figure III. Head-and-shoulders and inverse head-and-shoulders.


                                                     31
                                                                                                                 I;



                                                                           .1
                                                                               j\j
                                                                                /   !.—                      II
                                                                                                             I




                                                                           •

                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                 \,    r\J



                                                                               TTt#4 ..?C.
                     La) Broadening Top                                                   tIi) Hro&den,ng Bottom

                                      Figure IV. Broadening tops and bottoms.




      _____________                                     :..._..

flM     j.       f   ¼




             V




 3)                                              ,,•,
                                        I        p




                                            .•               •
 0
         *                       on
                                                        i.        a
                         La' TTiangl. Ti p                                                 (II) triangle Rotton'

                                             Figure V. Triangle tops and bottoms.




                                                                      32
                             (a) Rectangle Top                                           (I,) Rectangle Bottom

                                                      Figure VI. Rectaig1e tops and bottoms.




                   Ir       O..si, crc fQ%Glfl -344




      klr
               -
                        I
                                                                            I-
                                                                            I



           I                              -
                                                  I-                    I

0-
     no
      *9                     I                                      I
                                                       I
     an-                         I                          /
                                                                I




      20                                                   I;
                                              -   -                 .
                   44                14
                                          49

                                 I a I Dot. hic Toj                                       I Lj Don I I. 13. Ittfln


                                                       Figure VII. Double tops and bottoms.




                                                                                 33
                    (a)                    (b)



  oo


       :°

                                 00




            v;            —%04
                  000*     0

            000              0


                     0
                    (c)                    (a)




                    (0)


Figure VIII. Distribution of patterns in NYSE/AMEX sample.




                                      34
(g)                               (h)




 0
(i)                               (j)

      Figure VIII. (continued).




                 35
4




                              C,)                               (b)


                         _gr —
         00

     0%             oco             4o   o
                                                      00

    • o.°4t                    .0        •°_ — 0%
                                             0
                     0
         00000 •t         0                      00


    08

     0oc:




                              (c)                               (dY




                              (0)                               (I)

    Figure IX. Distribution of patterns in NASDAQ sample.




                                                           36
m' —




Cs)                              (h)




(i)                              ci)

       Figure IX. (continued).




                 37
                                                           Table I
Frequency counts for 10 technical indicators detected among NYSE/AMEX stocks from 1962 to
1996, in 5-year subperiods, in size quintiles, and in a sample of simulated geometric Brownian
motion. In each 5-year subperiod, 10 stocks per quintile are selected at random among stocks with
at least 80% non-missing prices, and each stock's price history is scanned for any occurrence of the
following 10 technical indicators within the subperiod: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-
and-shoulders (IRS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle top (TTOP),
triangle bottom (TBOT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP),
and double bottom (DBOT). The 'Sample' column indicates whether the frequency counts are
conditioned on decreasing volume trend ('r(\)'), increasing volume trend ("r(4'), unconditional
('Entire'), or for a sample of simulated geometric Brownian motion with parameters calibrated to
match the data ('Sim. GBM').



     Sample              Raw   US         IHS    BTOP BBOT TTOP TBOT                    RTOP   RUOT   DTOP       DBOT

                                                    All Stocks, 1962 to 1996
  Entire            423,556    1611       1654    725      748      1294        1193    1482   1616   2076       2075
  Sim. GEM          423,556     577        578   1227     1028      1049        1176     122    113    535        574
  r(N)                   —      655        593    143      220       666          710    582    637    691        974
  r(,')                  —      553        614    409      337       300          222    523    552    776        533
                     .
                                                 Smallest Quintile, 1962 to 1996                             .


  Entire             84,363     182       181     78        97        203       159      265    320    261        271
  Sim. GBM           84,363      82        99     279      256       269          295     18     16    129        127
  ,-(.,.)                —       90        Si      13       42       122          119    113    131     78        161
  r(i')                  —       58        76      51       37        41           22     99    120    124         64
                                      .
            .                                      2nd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
  Entire             83,986    309        321     146      150       255          228    299    322    372        420
  Sim. GEM           83,986    108        105     291      251       261          278     20     17    106        126
  T(N)                   —     133        126      25       48       135          147    130    149    113        211
  ,-(,)                  —     112        126      90       63        55           39    104    110    153        107
                                                   3rd Quiotile, 1962 to 1996
  Entire            84,420     361        388     145      161       291          247    334    399    458        443
  Sim. GEM          84,420     122        120     268      222       212          249     24     31    115        125
  r(N)               —         152        131      20       49       151          149    130    160    154        215
  ,-(,')             —         125        146      83       66        67          44     121    142    179        106
                                                   4th Quintile, 1962 to 1996
  Entire            84,780     332        317     176      173       262          255    259    264    424        420
  Sim. GBM          84,780     143        127     249      210       183          210     35     24    116        122
  ,.('.,)            —         131        115      36       42       138          145     85     97    144        184
  r(,)               —         110        126     103       89        56          55     102     96    147        118
                                                 Largest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
  Entire            86,007     427        447     180      167       283          304    325    311    561        521
  Sim. GEM          86,007     122        127     140       89       124          144     25     25     69         74
 t(N)                    —     149        140      49       39       120          150    124    100    202        203
                .
                         —     148        140      82       82        81          62      97     84    173        138
                                   Table I (continued)


   Sample    Raw     US    IllS ETOP BBOT flOP TBOT aTOP RBOT DTOP DBOT
                                       All Stocks, 1962 to 1966
• Entire    55,254   276   278    85       103       179          165   316     354   356   352
 Sim. GBM 55,254      56    58   144       126       129          139     9      16    60    68
 7(N)        — 104          88    26        29        93          109   130     141   113   188
                      96   112    44        39        37           25   130     122   137    88
                                       All Stocks, 1967 to 1971
 Entire     60,299   179   175   112       134        227       172     115     117   239   258
 Sim. GEM 60,299      92    70   167       148       150          180    19      16    84    77
 7(N)         —       68    64    16        45       126          111    42      39    80   143
 r(,)         —       71    69    68        57        47           29    41      41    87    53
                                       All Stocks, 1972 to 1976
 Entire     59,915   152   162    82        93       165          136   171     182   218   223
 Sim. GEM 59,915      75    85   183       154       156          178    16      10    70    71
 7(N)         —       64    55    16        23        88           78    60      64    53    97
 r(,)         —       54    62    42      :50         32           21    61      67    80    59
                                       All Stocks, 1977 to 1981
 Entire     62,133   223   206   134       110       188          167   146     182   274   290
 Sun. GUM 62,133      83    88   245       200       188          210    18      12    90   115
              —      114    61    24        39       100           97    54      60    82   140
              —       56    93    78        44        35           36    53      71   113    76
                                       All Stocks, 1982 to 1986
 Entire     61,984   242   256   106       108       182          190   182     207   313   299
 Sim. GUM 61,984     115   120   188       144       152          169    31      23    99    87
              —      101   104    28        30        93          104    70      95   109   124
              —       89    94    51        62        46           40    73      68   116    85
                                       All Stocks, 1987 to 1991
 Entire     61,780   240   241   104         98       180       169     260     259   287   285
 Sim. GEM 61,780      68    79   168        132       131       150      11      10    76    68
 7(N)        —        95    89    16         30        86       101     103 •   102   105   137
 r(,)        —        81    79    68         43        53        36      73      87   100    68
                                       All Stocks, 1992 to 1996
 Entire     62,191   299   336   102       102       173          194   292     315   389   368
 Sim. GEM 62,191      88    78   132       124       143          150    18      26    56    88
 r(N)        —       109   132    17        24        80          110   123     136   149   145
             —       106   105    58        42        50           35    92      96   143   104
                                                   Table II
Frequency counts for 10 technical indicators detected among NASDAQ stocks from 1962 to 1996,
in 5-year subperiods, in size quintiles, and in a sample of simulated geometric Brownian motion.
In each 5-year subperiod, 10 stocks per quintile are selected at random among stocks with at
least 80% non-missing prices, and each stock's price history is scanned for any occurrence of the
following 10 technical indicators within the subperiod: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-
and-shoulders (IRS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle top (TTOP),
triangle bottom (TBOT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP),
and double bottom (DBOT). The 'Sample' column indicates whether the frequency counts are
conditioned on decreasing volume trend ('r(N)'), increasing volume trend ('r(4'), unconditional
('Entire'), or for a sample of simulated geometric Brownian motion with parameters calibrated to
match the data ('Sim. GBM').



     Sample    Raw      115   1115   ETOP BBOT flop TBOT                           ETOP   RBOT   DTOP   DBOT

                                         All Stocks, 1962 to 1996
   Entire     411,010   919   817     414     508       850       789              1134   1320   1208   1147
   Sun. GBM   411,010   434   447    1297    1139      1169      1309                96     91    567    579
   r(N)
                —       408   268     69      133       429       460              488     550    339    580
   r(.,)        —       284   325    234      209       185       125              391     461    474    229
                                       Smallest Quintie, 1962 to 1996
   Entire      81,754    84    64     41           73         111         93        165    218    113    125
   Shn. GEM    81,754    85    84    341          289         334        367         11     12    140    125
   t(N)         —        36    25      6           20          56            59      77    102     31     81
   r(,)         —        31    23     31           30          24             15     59     85     46     17
                                            2nd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
   Entire      81,336   191   138     68          88        161       148          242     305    219    176
   Sim. GBM    81,336    67    84    243          225         219        229         24     12     99    124
   7(N)         —        94    51      11          28          86            109    111    131     69    101
   r(,')
                —        66    57     46           38          45            22      85    120     90     42

                                            3rd Quintile,   1962 to   1996
   Entire      81,772   224   186    105          121         183        155       235     244    279    267
   Sim. GEM    81,772    69    86    227          210         214        239         15     14    105    100
   r(..)
                —       108    66      23          35          87            91      90     84     78    145
   r(i')
                —        71    79     56           49          39            29      84     86    122     58

                                            4th Quintile, 1962 to     1996
   Entire      82,727   212   214     92          116         187        179       296     303    289    297
   Sim. GBM    82,727   104    92    242          219         209        255         23     26    115     97
   r(,.)
                —        88    68      12          26         101        101       127     141     77    143
   r(,')
                —        62    83     57           56          34         22       104      93    118     66

                                       Largest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
   Entire      83,421   208   215    108          110         208        214       196     250    308    282
   Sim. GEM    83,421   109   101    244          196         193        219         23     27    108    133
   7(N)         —       82     58     17           24          99        100        83      92     84    110
   i-(,)                 54    83     44           36          43         37         59     77     98     46
                                  Table II (continued)

  Sample    Raw      ES IHS BTOP BBOT flop TBOT RTOP RBOT DTOP DBOT
                                       All Stocks, 1962 to 1966
Entire     55,969    274   268    72        99       182          144   288   329   326   342
Slim. GBM 55,969      69    63   163       123       137          149    24    22    77    90
             —       129    99    10        23       104           98   115   136    96   210
             —        83   103    48        51        37           23   101   116   144   64
                                       All Stocks, 1967 to 1971
Entire     60,563    115   120   104       123        227       171      65    83   196   200
Slut GBM 60,563       58    61   194       184        181       188       9     8    90    83
'-(N)        —        61    29    15         40       127       123      26    39    49   137
T(/)         —        24    57    71        51        45           19    25    16    86    17
                                       All Stocks, 1972 to 1976
Entire     51,446     34    30    14        30         29        28      51    55    55    58
Sim. GBM 51,446       32    37   115       113        107       110       5     6    46    46
'-(N)        —         5     4     0         4         5            7    12     8     3     8
'-(A)        —         8     7     1         2         2            0     5    12     8     3
                                     All Stocks, 1977 to 1981
Entire     61,972     56    53    41       36        52        73        57    65    89    96
Sim. GBM 61,972       90    84   236     165        176       212        19    19   110    98
             —         7     7     1         2         4            8    12    12     7     9
             —         6     6     5         1         4            0     5     8     7     6
                                       All Stocks, 1982 to 1986
Entire     61,110     71    64
Sim. GEM 61,110 ..    86    90   162       168       147          174    23    21    97    98
T(N)
             —        37    19     8        14      .46            58    45    52    40    48
             —        21    25    24.       18        26           22    42    42    38    24
                                       All Stocks, 1987 to 1991
Entire     60,862    158   120    50         61       120       109     265   312   177   155
Sim. GEM 60,862       59    57   229       187        205       244       7     7    79    88
            —         79    46    11         19        73        69     130   140    50    69
r(,)        —         58    56    33        30        26           28   100   122    89    55
                                       All Stocks, 1992 to 1996
Entire     59,088    211   162    87       115       143          157   299   361   245   199
Sim. GEM 59,088       40    55   198       199       216          232     9     8    68    76
'-(N)       —        90     64    24        31        70           97   148   163    94    99
            —        84     71    52        56        45           33   113   145   102    60
                                                  Table III
Summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, skewness, and excess kurtosis) of raw and condi-
tional 1-day normalized returns of NYSE/AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996, in 5-year subperiods,
and in size quintiles. Conditional returns are defined as the daily return three days following
the conclusion of an occurrence of one of 10 technical indicators: head-and-shoulders (HS), in-
verted head-and-shoulders (IllS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle
top (TTOP), triangle bottom (TROT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double
top (DTOP), and double bottom (DBOT). All returns have been normalized by subtraction of
their means and division by theft standard deviations.



 Moment    Raw        115      IRS     BTOP BBOT flop TBOT                        RTOP          RBOT DTOP          DEOT

                                              An Stocks, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000    —0.038     0.040   —0.005 —0.062        0.021     —0.009       0.009         0.014    0.017     0.0O1
 S.D.       1.000     0.867    0.937     1.035    0.979     0.955      0.959       0.865         0.883    0.910     0.999
 Skew      0.345      0.135    0.660   —1.151     0.090      0.137       0.643    —.0.420        0.110    0.206     0.460
 Kurt      8.122      2.428    4.527   16.701     3.169      3.293       7.061     7.360         4.194    3.386     7.374
                                         Smallest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000
                    -—0.014    0.036   —0.093   —0.188       0.036 —0.020          0.037        —0.093    0.043    —0.055
 S.D.      1.000      0.854    1.002    0.940     0.850      0.937     1.157       0.833         0.986    0.950     0.962
 Skew      0697       0.802    1.337   —1.771    —0.367      0.861       2.592    —0.187         0.445    0.511     0.002
 Kurt     10.873      3.870    7.143    6,701     0.575      4.185       12.532    1.793         4.384    2.581     3.989
                                            2nd Qthntile, 1962 to 1996                                              .
 Mean     —0.000    —0.069     0.144    0.061 —0.113         0.003     0.035       0.018         0.019    0.067    —0.011
 S.D.      1.000     0.772     1.031    1.278     1.004      0.913     0.965       0.979         0.868    0.776     L069
 Skew      0.392     0.223     1.128   —3.296     0.485    —0.529      0.166      —1.375         0.452    0.392     1.728
 Kurt      7.836      0.657    6.734   32.750     3.779      3.024     4.987      17.040         3.914    2.151    15.544
                                            3rd QuintiIe, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000    —0.048    —0.043   —0.076 —0.056         0.036       0.012     0.075         0.028   —0.039    —0.034
 S.D.      1.000      0.888    0.856    0.894     0.925      0.973       0.796     0.798         0.892     0.956    1.026
 Skew      0.246    —0.465     0.107   —0.023     0.233      0.538       0.166     0.678        —0.618     0.013   —0.242
 Kurt      7.466      3.239    1.612    1.024     0.611      2.995       0.586     3.010         4.769    .4.517    3.663
                                            4th Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000    —0.012     0.022    0.115     0.028      0.022    —0.014      —0.113         0.065    0.015    —0.006
 S.D.      1.000      0.964    0.903    0.990     1.093     0.986        0.959     0.854         0.821    0.858     0.992
 Skew      0.222      0.055    0.592    0.458     0.537    —0.217    —0.456       —0.415         0.820    0.550    —0.062
 Kurt      6.452      1.444    1.745    1.251     2.168     4.237        8.324     4.311    .    3.632    1.719     4.691
                                          Largest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000    —0.038     0.054   —0.081    —0.042     0.010    —0.049        0.009         0.060    0.018     0.067
 S.D.      1.000     0.843     0.927    0.997    0.951      0.964     0.965        0.850         0.820    0.971     0.941
 Skew      0.174     0.438     0.182    0.470   —1.099      0.089     0.357       —0.167        —0.140    0.011     0.511
 Kurt      7.992     2.621     3.465    3.275     6.603     2.107        2.509     0.816         3.179    3.498     5.035
                                     Table III (continued)

Moment    Raw      H5       IHS     ETOP BBOT flOP TBOT RTOP IthOT DTOP DBOT
                                          All Stocks, 1962 to 1966
Mean     —0.000    0.070    0.090    0.159      0.079   —0.033     —0.039        —0.041    0.019   —0.071   —0.100
S.D.      1.000    0.797    0.925    0.825      1.085     1.068     1.011         0.961    0.814    0.859    0.962
Skew      0.563    0.159    0.462    0.363      1.151   —0.158      1.264        —1.337   —0.341   —0.427   —0.876
Kurt      9.161    0.612    1.728    0.657      5.063     2.674     4.826        17.161    1.400    3.416    5.622
                                         All Stocks, 1967 to 1971
Mean     —0.000   —0.044    0.079   —0.035      —0.056      0.025        0.057   —0.101    0.110    0.093    0.079
S.D.      1.000    0.809    0.944    0.793        0.850     0.885        0.886    0.831    0.863    1.083    0.835
Skew      0.342    0.754    0.666    0.304        0.085     0.650        0.697   —1.393    0.395    1.360    0.701
Kurt      5.810    3.684    2.725    0.706        0.141     3.099        1.659    8.596    3.254    4.487    1.853
                                             All Stocks, 1972 to 1976
Mean     —0.000   —0.035    0.043    0.101      —0.138     —0.045       —0.010   —0.025   —0.003   —0.051   —0.108
S.D.      1.000    1.015    0.810    0.985        0.918     0.945        0.922    0.870    0.754    0.914    0.903
Skew      0.316   —0.334    0.717   —0.699        0.272    —1.014        0.676    0.234    0.199    0.056   —0.366
Kurt      6.520    2.286    1.565    6.562        1.453     5.261        4.912    3.627    2.337    3.520    5.047
                                          All Stocks, 1977 to 1981
Mean     —0.000   —0.138   —0.040    0.076    —0.114      0.135    —0.050        —0.004    0.026    0.042    0.178
S.D.      1.000    0.786    0.863    1.015      0.989     1.041     1.011         0.755    0.956    0.827    1.095
Skew      0.466   —0.304    0.052    1.599    —0.033      0.776     0.110        —0.084    0.534    0.761    2.214
Kurt      6.419    1.132    1.048    4.961    —0.125      2.964     0.989         1.870    2.184    2.369   15.290
                                             All Stocks, 1982 to 1986
Mean     —0.000   —0.099   —0.007    0.011        0.095    —0.114       —0.067    0.050    0.005    0.011   —0.013
S.D.      1.000    0.883    1.002    1.109        0,956     0.924        0.801    0.826    0.934    0.850    1.026
Skew      0.460    0.464    0.441    0.372      —0.165      0.473       —1.249    0.231    0.467    0.528    0.867
Kurt      6.799    2.280    6.128    2.566        2.735     3.208        5.278    1.108    4.234    1.515    7.400
                                             All Stocks, 1987 to 1991
Mean     —0.000   —0.037    0.033   —0.091      —0.040      0.053        0.003    0.040   —0.020   —0.022 —0017
S.D.      1.000    0.848    0.895    0.955        0.818     0.857        0.981    0.894    0.833    0.873    1.052
Skew     —0.018   —0.526    0.272    0.108        0.231     0.165       —1.216    0.293    0.124   —1.184   —0.368
Kurt     13.478    3.835    4.395    2.247        1.469     4.422        9.586    1.646    3.973    4.808    4.297
                                             All Stocks, 1992 to 1996
Mean     —0.000   —0.014    0.069   —0.231      —0.272      0.122        0.041    0.082    0.011    0.102   —0.016
S.D.      1.000    0.935    1.021    1.406        1.187     0.953        1.078    0.814    0.996    0.960    1.035
Skew      0.308    0.545    1.305   —3.988      —0.502     —0.190        2.460   —0.167   —0.129   —0.091    0.379
Kurt      8.683    2.249    6.684   27.022        3.947     1.235       12.883    0.506    6.399    1.507    3.358
                                                      Table IV
Summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, skewness, and excess kurtosis) of raw and condi-
tional 1-day normalized returns of NASDAQ stocks from 1962 to 1996, in 5-year subperiods, and
in size quintiles. Conditional returns are defined as the daily return three days following the con-
clusion of an occurrence of one of 10 technical indicators: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-
and-shoulders (IHS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle top (TTOP),
triangle bottom (TBOT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP),
and double bottom (DBOT). All returns have been normalized by subtraction of their means and
division by their standard deviations.



 Moment    Raw       115        IllS    BTOP BBOT flOP TBOT                          ICOP      REOT     DTOP     DROT

                                                 All Stocks, 1962 to 1996
 Mean      0.000   —0.016       0.042   —0.009        0.009   —0.020         0.017    0.052     0.043    0.003   —0.035
 S.D.      1.000    0.907       0.994    0.960        0.995     0.984        0.932    0.948     0.929    0.933    0.880
 Skew      0.608   —0.017       1.290    0.397        0.586     0.895        0.716    0.710     0.755    0.405   —0.104
 Kurt     12.728    3.039       8.774    3.246        2.783     6.692        3.844    5.173     4.368    4.150    2.052
                                           Smallest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000    0.018      —0.032    0.087 —0.153          0.059     0.108        0.136     0.013    0.040    0.043
 S.D.      1.000    0.845       1.319    0.874      0.894      1.113     1.044        1.187     0.982    0.773    0.906
 Skew      0.754    0.325       1.756   —0.239 —0.109          2.727     2.300        1.741     0.199    0.126   —0.358
 Kurt     15.859    1.096       4.221    1.490      0.571     14.270    10.594        8.670     1.918    0.127    0.730
                                             2nd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000   —0.064       0.076   —0.109      —0.093    —0.085        —0.038   —0.066    —0.015    0.039   —0.034
 S.D.      1.000    0.848       0.991    1.106        1.026     0.805        0.997    0.898     0.897    1.119    0.821
 Skew      0.844    0.406       1.892   —0.122        0.635     0.036        0.455   —0.579•    0.416    1.196    0.190
 Kurt     16.738    2,127      11.561    2.496        3.458     0.689        1.332    2.699     3.871    3.910    0.777
                           .
                                             3rd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean     —0.000    0.033       0.028    0.078    0.210      —0.030     0.068         0.117     0.210   —0.109   —0.075
 S.D.      1.000    0.933       0.906    0.931        0.971     0.825        1.002    0.992     0.970    0.997    0.973
 Skew      0.698    0.223       0.529    0.656        0.326     0.539        0.442    0.885     0.820    0.163    0.123
 Kurt     12.161    1.520       1.526    1.003        0.430     1.673        1.038    2.908     4.915    5.266    2.573
                                             4th Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean      0.000   —0.079       0.037   —0.006    —0.044 —0.080         0.007         0.084     0.044    0.038   —0.048
 S.D.      1.000    0.911       0.957    0.992     0.975      1.076     0.824         0.890     0.851    0.857    0.819
 Skew      0.655   —0.456       2.671   —0.174     0.385      0.554     0.717         0.290     1.034    0.154   —0.149
 Kurt     11.043    2.525      19.593    2.163     1.601      7.723     3.930         1.555     2.982    2.807    2.139
                                           Largest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
 Mean      0.000    0.026       0.058   —0.070        0.031     0.052    —0.013       0.001    —0.024    0.032   —0.018
 S.D.      1.000    0.952       L002     0.895        1.060     1.076     0.871       0.794     0.958   .0.844    0.877
 Skew      0.100   —0.266      —0.144    1.699        1.225     0.409     0.025       0.105     1.300    0.315   —0.363
 Kurt      7.976    5.807       4.367    8.371        5.778     1.970        2.696    1.336     7.503    2.091    2.241
                                       Table IV (continued)


Moment    Raw      HS       1115     BTOP BEOT TTOP TEOT RTOP RBOT DTOP DBOT

                                           All Stocks, 1962 to 1966
Mean     —0.000    0.116     0.041    0.099      0.090     0.028    —0.066          0.100     0.010    0.096     0.027
S.D.      1.000    0.912     0.949    0.989      1.039     1.015     0.839          0.925     0.873    1.039     0.840
Skew      0.575    0.711     1.794    0.252      L258      1,601     0.247          2.015     1.021    0.533    —0.351
Kurt      6.555    1.538     9.115    2.560      6.445     7.974     1.324         13.653     5.603    6.277     2.243
                                           All Stocks, 1967 to 1971
Mean     —0.000   —0.127     0.114    0.121      0.016     0.045    0.077           0.154     0.136   —0.000     0.006
S.D.      1.000    0.864     osos     0.995     1.013      0.976         0.955      1.016     1.118    0.882     0.930
Skew      0.734   —0.097     1.080    0.574     0.843      1.607         0.545      0.810     1.925    0.465     0.431
Kurt      5.194    1.060     2.509    0.380     2.928     10.129         1.908      1.712     5.815    1.585     2.476
                                           All Stocks, 1972 to 1976
Mean      0.000    0.014     0.089   —0.403   —0.034     —0.132        —0.422      —0.076     0-108   —0.004    —0.163
S.D.      1.000    0.575     0.908    0.569     0.803      0.618         0.830      0.886     0.910    0.924     0.564
Skew      0,466   —0.281     0.973   —1.176     0.046    —0.064        -'--1.503   —2.728     2.047   —0.551    —0.791
Kurt     17.228    2.194     1.828    0.077     0.587    —0.444          2.137     13.320     9.510    1.434     2.010
                                           All Stocks, 1977 to 19-81
Mean     —0.000    0.025   —0.212    —0.112   —0.056     —0.110          0.086      0.055     0.177    0.081.    0.040
S.D.      1.000    0.769    1.025     1.091     0.838      0.683         0.834      1.036     1.047    0.986     0.880
Skew      1.092    0.230   —1.516    —0.731     0.368      0.430         0.249      2.391     2.571    L520     —0.291
Kurt     20.043    1.618    4.397     3.766     0.460      0.962         4.722      9.137    10.961    7.127     3.682
                                           All Stocks, 1982 to 1986
Mean      0.000   —0.147    0.204    —0.137   —0.001     —0.053        —0.022      —0.028     0.116   —0.224    —0.052
S.D.      1.000    1.073     1.442    0.804     1.040      0.982         1.158      0.910     0.830    0.868     1.082
Skew      1.267   —1.400    2.192     0.001     0.048      1.370         1.690     —0.120     0.048    0.001    —0.091
Kurt     21.789    4.899   10.530     0,863     0.732      8.460 -       7.086      0.780     0.444    1.174     0.818
                                           All Stocks, 1987 to 1991                                              -


Mean.     0.000    0.012    0.120    —0.080   —0.031     —0.052          0.038      0.098     0.049   —0.048    —0.122 -
S.D.      1.000    0.907   - 1.136    0.925     0.826      1.007         0.878      0.936     1.000    0.772     0.860
Skew      0.104   —0.326     0.976   —0.342     0.234    —0.248          1.002      0.233     0.023   —0.105    —0.375
Kurt     12.688    3.922    .5.183    1.839     0.734      2.796         2.768      1.038.    2.350    0.313     2.598
                                          All Stocks, 1992 to 1996
Mean      0.000   —0.119   —0.058    —0.033 —0.013 —0.078          0.086           —0.006    —0.011    0.003    —0.105
S.D.      1.000    0.926    0.854     0.964     1.106     1.093          0.901      0.973     0.879    0.932     0.875
Skew     —0.036    0.079   —0.015     1.399     0.158    —0.127          0.150      0.283     0.236    0.039    —0.097
Kurt      5.377    2.818   —0.059     7.584     0.626     2.019          1.040      1.266     1.445    1.583     0.205
                                                                      Table V

Goodness-of-fit diagnostics for the conditional 1-day normalized returns, conditional on 10 technical indicators, for a sample of 350
NYSE/AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996 (10 stocks per size-quintile with at least 80% non-missing prices are randomly chosen in each
five-year subperiod, yielding 50 stocks per subperiod over 7 subperiods). For each pattern, the percentage of conditional returns that
fall within each of the 10 unconditional-return deciles is tabulated. If conditioning on the pattern provides no information, the expected
percentage falling in each decile is 10%. Asymptotic t-statistics for this null hypothesis are reported in parentheses, and the x2 goodness-
of-fitness test statistic Q is reported in the last column with the p-value in parentheses below the statistic. The 10 technical indicators
are: head-and-shoulders (US), inverted head-and-shoulders (IllS), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangleS top
(TTOP), triangle bottom (TBOT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP), and double bottom (DBOT).


                                                                          DeciIe
                 Pattern
                              1         2         3        4         5              6          7         5         9        10      (p-Value)

                 HS          8.9      10.4      11.2     11.7      12.2             7.9       9-2      10.4      10.8       7.1     39.31
                           (—1.49)    (0.56)    (1.49)   (2.16)     (2.73)    (—3.05)       (—1.04)    (0.48)    (1.04)   (—4.46)    (0.000)
                 Ills        8.6       9.7       9.4     11.2      13.7             7.7       9.1      11.1       9.6      10.0     40.95
                           (—2.05)   (—0.36)   (—0.88)   (1.60)     (4,34)    (—3.44)       (—1.32)    (1.38)   (—0.62)   (—0.03)    (0.000)
                 ETOP        9.4      10.6      10.6     11.9       8.7            6.6        9.2      13.7       9.2      10.1     23.40
                           (—0.57)    (0.54)    (0.54)   (1.55)   (—1.25)     (—3.66)       (—0.71)    (2.87)   (—0.71)    (0.06)    (0.005)
                 BBOT       11.5       9.9      13.0     11.1.      7.8            9.2        8.3       9.0      10.7       9.6     16.87
                            (1.28)   (—0.10)    (2.42)   (0.95)   (—2.30)     (—0.73)       (—1.70)   (—1.00)    (0.62)   (—0.35)    (0.051)
                 TTOP        7.8      10.4      10.9     11.3       9.0            9.9        10.0     10.7      10.5       9.7     12.03
                           (—2.94)    (0.42)    (1.03)   (1.46)   (—1.30)     (—0.13)       (—0.04)    (0.77)    (0.60)   (—0.41)    (0.212)
                 TBOT        8.9      10.6      10.9     12.2       9.2            8.7        9.3      11.6       8.7       9.8     17.12
                           (—1.35)    (0.72)    (0.99)   (2.36)   (—0.93)     (—1.57)       (—0.83)    (1.69)   (—1.57)   (—0.22)   (0.047)
                 RTOP        8.4       9.9       9.2     10.5      12.5        10.1           10.0     10.0      11.4       8.1     22.72
                           (—2.27)   (—0.10)   (—1.10)   (0.58)     (2.89)         (0.16)   (—0.02)   (—0.02)    (1.70)   (—2.69)   (0.007)
                 RBOT        8.6       9.6       7.8     10.5      12.9            10.8      11.6       9.3      10.3       8.7     33.94
                           (—2.01)   (—0.56)   (—3.30)   (0.60)     (3.45)         (1.07)    (1.98)   (—0.99)    (0.44)   (—1.91)   (0.000)
                 DTOP        8.2      10.9       9.6     12.4      11.8             7.5       8.2      11.3      10.3       9.7     50.97
                           (—2.92)    (1.36)   (—0.64)   (3.29)    (2.61)     (—4.39)       (—2.92)    (1.83)    (0.46)   (—0.41)   (0.000)
                 DBOT        9.7       9.9      10.0     10.9      11.4            8.5        9.2      10.0      10.7       9.8     12.92
                           (—0.48)   (—0.18)   (—0.04)   (1.37)     (1.97)    (—2.40)       (—1.33)    (0.04)    (0.96)   (—0.33)   (0.166)
                                                                     Table VT

Goodness-of-fit diagnostics for the conditional 1-day normalized returns, conditional on 10 teclmical indicators, for a sample of 350
NASDAQ stocks from 1962 to 1996 (10 stocks per size-quintile with at least 80% non-missing prices are randomly chosen in each five-
year subperiod, yielding 50 stocks per subperiod over 7 subperiods). For each pattern, the percentage of conditional returns that fall
within each of the 10 unconditional-return deciles is tabulated. If conditioning on the pattern provides no information, the expected
percentage falling in each decile is 10%. Asymptotic t-statistics for this null hypothesis are reported in parentheses, and the x2 goodness-
of-fitness test statistic Q is reported in the last column with the p-value in parentheses below the statistic. The 10 technical indicators
are: head-and-shoulders (118), inverted head-and-shoulders (Ills), broadening top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle top
(TTOP), triangle bottom (TBOT), rectangle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP), and double bottom (DBOT).


                                                                          Decile;
                                                                             .
                 Pattern
                              1        2         3         4         5              6         7         8                  10      (p-Value)


                 HS         10.8     10.8      13.7       8.6       8.5            6.0       6.0      12.5      13.5       9.7     64.41
                            (0.76)   (0.76)    (3.27)   (—1.52)   (—1.65)        (—5.13)   (—5.13)    (2.30)    (3.10)   (—0.32)   (0.000)
                 fl-IS       9.4     14.1      12.5       8.0       7.7             4.8      6.4      13.5      12.5      11.3     75.84
                           (—0.56)   (3.35)    (2.15)   (—2.16)   (—2.45)        (—7.01)   (—4.26)    (2.90)    (2.15)    (1.14)   (0.000)
                 BTOP       11.6     12.3      12.8       7.7       8.2             6.8      4.3      13.3      12.1      10.9     34.12
                            (1.01)   (1.44)    (1.71)   (—1.73)   (—1.32)        (—2.62)   (—5.64)    (1.97)    (1.30)    (0.57)   (0.000)
                 BBOT       11.4     11.4      14.8       5.9       6.7             9.6      5.7      11.4       9.8      13.2     43.26
                            (1.00)   (1.00)    (3.03)   (—3.91)   (—2.98)        (—0.27)   (—4.17)    (1.00)   (—0.12)    (2.12)   (0.000)
                 TTOP       10.7     12.1      16.2       6.2       7.9             8.7      4.0      12.5      11.4      10.2     92.09
                            (0.67)   (1.89)    (4.93)   (—4.54)   (—2.29)        (—1.34)   (—8.93)    (2.18)    (1.29)    (0.23)   (0.000)
                 TBOT        9.9     11.3      15.6       7.9       7.7             5.7      5.3      14.6      12.0      10.0     85.26
                           (—0.11)   (1.14)    (4.33)   (—2.24)   (—2.39)        (—5.20)   (—5.85)    (3.64)    (1.76)    (0.01)   (0.000)
                 RTOP       11,2     10.8       8.8       8,3      10.2             7.1      7.7       9.3      15.3      11.3     57.08
                            (1.28)   (0.92)   (—1.40)   (—2.09)    (0.25)        (—3.87)   (—2.95)   (—0.75)    (4.92)    (1.37)    (0.000)
                 RBOT        8.9     12.3       8.9       8.9      11.6             8.9      7.0       9.5      13.6      10.3     45.79
                           (—1.35)   (2.52)   (—1.35)   (—1.45)    (1.81)        (—1.35)   (—4.19)   (—0.66)    (3.85)    (0.36)    (0.000)
                 DTOP       11.0     12.6      11.7       9.0       9.2             5.5      5.8      11.6      12.3      11.3     71.29
                            (1.12)   (2.71)    (1.81)   (—1.18)   (—0.98)        (—6.76)   (—6.26)    (1.73)    (2.39)    (1.47)    (0.000)
                 DBOT       10.9     11.5      13.1       8.0       8.1             7.1      7.6      11.5      12.8       9.3     51.23
                            (0.98)   (1.60)    (3.09)   (—2.47)   (—2.35)        (—3.75)   (—3.09)    (1.60)    (2.85)   (—0.78)    (0.000)
                                                     Table VII
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equality of conditional and unconditional 1-day return distributions
for NYSE/AMEX stocks from 1962 to 1996, in 5-year subperiods, and in size quintiles. Conditional
returns are defined as the daily return three days following the conclusion of an occurrence of one of
10 technical indicators: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders (1115), broadening
top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle top (PTOP), triangle bottom (TBOT), rect-
angle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP), and double bottom (DBOT).
All returns have been normalized by subtraction of their means and division by their standard
deviations, p-values are with respect to the asymptotic distribution of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test statistic. The symbols 'r(x,j' and '-r(4' indicate that the conditional distribution is also
conditioned on decreasing and increasing volume trend, respectively.



        Statistic     HS     IllS    BTOJ>   BROT flOP TBOT              aro     RBOT    DTOP    DBOT

                                              All Stocks, 1962 to 1996
                     1,89    1.22    1.15    1.76      0.90     1.09     1.84    2.45    1.51    1.06
        p-value      0.002   0.104   0.139   0.004     0.393    0.185    0.002   0.000   0.021   0.215
        7 ,-('...)   1.49    0.95    0.44    0.62      0.73     1.33     1.37    1.77    0.96    0.78
        p-value      0.024   0.327   0.989   0.839     0.657    0.059    0.047   0.004   0.319   0.579
          r(,)       0.72
                     0.671
                             1.05
                             0.220
                                     1.33
                                     0.059
                                             1.59
                                             0.013
                                                       0.92
                                                       0.368
                                                                1.29
                                                                0.073
                                                                         1.13
                                                                         0.156
                                                                                 1.24
                                                                                 0.090
                                                                                         0.74
                                                                                         0.638
                                                                                                 0.84
                                                                                                 0.481
        p-value
          Duff.      0.88    0.54    0.59    0.94      075      1.37     0.79    1.20    0.82    0.71
        p-value      0.418   0.935   0.879   0.342     0.628    0.046    0.557   0.111   0.512   0.698
                                    Table VII (continued)


Statistic    HS     IHS ETOP BBOT flOP TEOT RTOP REOT DTOP DBOT

                                    Smallest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           0.59    1.19    0.72      1.20      0.98      1.43        1.09     1.19     0.84    0.78
p-value     0.872   0.116   0.679     0.114     0.290     0.033       0.188    0.120    0.485   0.583
7           0.67    0.80    1.16      0.69      1.00      1.46        1.31     0.94     1.12    0.73
p-value     0.765   0.540   0.136     0.723     0.271     0.029       0.065    0.339    0.165   0.663
7           0.43    0.95    0.67      1.03      0.47      0.88        0,51     0.93     0.94    0.58
p-value     0.994   0.325   0.756     0.236     0.981     0.423       0.959    0.356    0.342   0.892
7 Duff.     0.52    0.48    1.14      0.68      0.48      0.98        0.98     0.79     1.16    0.62
p-value     0.951   0.974   0.151     0.741     0.976     0,291       0.294    0.552    0.133   0.840

                                      2nd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           1.82    L63     0.93      0.92      0.62      0.84        0.88     1.29     1.46    0.84
p-value     0.003   0.010   0.353     0.365     0.505     0.485       0.417    0.073    0.029   0.478
            1.62    L03     0.88      0.42      0.91      0.90        0.71     0.86     1,50    0.97
p-value     0.010   0.242   0.427     0.994     0.378     0.394       0.703    0.443    0.022   0.298
77(4        1.06
            0.213
                    1.63
                    0.010
                            0.96
                            0.317
                                      0.83
                                      0.497
                                                0.89
                                                0.407
                                                          0.98
                                                          0.289
                                                                      1.19
                                                                      0.119
                                                                               1.15
                                                                               0.141
                                                                                        0.96
                                                                                        0.317
                                                                                                0.99
                                                                                                0.286
p-value
7 Duff.     0.78    0.94    1.04      0.71      1.22      0.92        0.99     0.79     1.18    0.68
p-value     0.576   0.334   0.228     0.687     0.102     0.361       0.276    0.564    0.126   0.74 5
                                       3rd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           0.83    1.56    1.00      1.28      0.57      1.03        1.96     1.50     1.55    1.14
p-value     0.502   0.016   0.266     0.074     0.903     0.243       0.001    0.023    0.016   0.150
7           0.95    0.94    0.66      0.76      0.61      0.82        1.45     1.61     1.17    1,01
p-value     0.326   0.346   0.775     0.613     0.854     0.520       0.031    0.012    0.131   0.258
77(4        1.05
            0.223
                    1.43
                    0.033
                            0.93
                            0.350
                                      1.14
                                      0.147
                                                0.63
                                                0.826
                                                          0.80
                                                          0.544
                                                                      0.93
                                                                      0.354
                                                                               0.78
                                                                               0.578
                                                                                        0.59
                                                                                        0.878
                                                                                                0.86
                                                                                                0.450
p-value
7 Duff.     1.02    1.14    0.45      0.48      0.50      0.89        0.66     0.91     0.72    1.15
p-value     0.246   0.148   0.986     0.974     0.964     0.413       0.774    0.383    0.670   0.143
                                       4th Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           0.72    0.61    1,29      0.84      0.61      0.84        1.37     1.37     0.72    0.53
p-value     0.683   0.852   0.071     0.479     0.855     0.480       0.048    0.047    0.682   0.943
7           1.01    0.95    0.83      0.96      0.78      0.84        1.34     0.72     0.62    1.01
p-value     0.255   0.330   0.504     0.311     0.585     0.487       0.056    0.680    0.841   0.258
77(4        0.93    0.66
                    0.772
                            1.29
                            0.072
                                      0.96
                                      0.316
                                                1.16      0.69        0.64
                                                                      0.8 10
                                                                               1.16
                                                                               0.136
                                                                                        0.69
                                                                                        0.720
                                                                                                0.85
                                                                                                0.468
p-value     0.349                               0.137     0.731
7 Duff.     1.10    0.97    0.64      1.16      1.31      0.78        0.64     0.92     0.66    1.10
p-value     0.175   0.301   0.804     0.138     0.065     0.571       0.806    0.363    0.780   0.176
                                     Largest QuintiIe, 1962 to 1996
7           1.25    1.16    0.98       0.48     0.50      0.80        0.94     1.76     0.90    1.28
p-value     0.088   0.136   0,287      0.977    0.964     0.544       0.346    0.004    0.395   0.077
77(N)       1.12    0.90    0.57       0.78     0.64       1.17       0.91     0.87     0.64    1.20
p-value     0.164   0.386   0.906      0.580    0.806     0.127       0.379    0.44 2   0.802   0.114
7 7(1')     0.81    0.93    0.83       0.61     0.69      0.81        0.73     0.87     0.46    0.88
p-value     0.522   0.350   0.495      0.854    0.729     0.532       0.661    0.432    0.982   0.4 18
7 Duff.     0.71    0.54    0.59       0.64     0.76       1.21       0.85     1.11     0.54    0.79
p-value     0.699   0.934   0.874      0.800    0.607     0.110       0.467    0.170    0.929   0.552
                                     Table VII (continued)

 Statistic    115     IllS   UTOP BBOT flop TBOT ItTOP RBC)T DTOP DBOT


             1.29    1.67    1.07      0.72     0.75       1.32    1.20     1.53    2.04    1.73
p-value      0.072   0.007   0.202     0.671    0.634      0.062   0.112    0.018   0.001   0.005
7 r('..)     0.83    1.01    1.04      0.80     0.63       1.80    0.66     1.84    1.03    1.54
p-value      0.499   0.260   0.232     0.539    0.826     0.003    0.771    0.002   0.244   0.017
7 r(,)       1.13    1.13    0.84      0.84     0.58      1.40     1.12     0.83    1.09    1.16
p-value      0.156   0.153   0.480     0.475    0.894     0.040    0.163    0.492   0.183   0.135
7 Duff.      0.65    0.71    0.75      0.76     0.60      1.90     0.68     1.35    0.73    0.83
p-value      0.799   0.691   0.629     0.615    0.863     0.001    0.741    0.052   0.657   0.503
                                        All Stocks, 1967 to 1971
             1,10    0.96    0.60      0.65     0.98      0.76     1.29     1.65    0.87    1.22
p-value      0.177   0.317   0.867     0.797    0.292     0.606    0.071    0.009   0.436   0.101
7 i-(',)     1.02    0.80    0.53      0.85     0.97      0.77     0.71     1.42    0.97    1.06
p-value      0.248   0.551   0.943     0.464    0.303     0.590    0.700    0.035   0.300   0.214
7 r(i')      1.08    0.86    0.68      0.91     1.11      0.82     0.79     0.73    0.71    0.96
p-value      0.190   0.454   0.750     0.373    0.169     0.508    0.554    0.660   0.699   0.315
    Duff.    1.36    0.51    0.53      0.76     0.68      0.71     0.71     0.98    1.06    1.12
p-value      0.049   0.956   0.942     0.616    0.751     0.699    0.701    0.290   0.210   0.163
                                        All Stocks, 1972 to 1976
7            0.47    0.75    0.87      1.56     1.21      0.75     0.87     0.94    1.64    1,20
p-value      0.980   0.620   0.441     0.015    0.106     0.627    0.441    0.341   0.009   0.113
7 r(')       0.80    0.40    0.50      1.24     1.21      0.65     1.26     0.63    0.70    1.39
p-value      0.539   0.998   0.966     0.093    0.106     0.794    0.084    0.821   0.718   0.041
7 r(,)       0.49    0.78    0.94      1.21     1.12      1.03     0.81     0.95    0.84    0.70
p-value      0.970   0.577   0.340     0.108    0.159     0.244    0.521    0.331   0.485   0.7t9
'y Duff.     0.55    0.56    0.51      0.95     0.81      1.11     1.15     0.62    0.67    1.31
p-value      0.925   0.915   0.960     0.333    0.525     0.170    0.141    0.836   0.767   0.065
                                        All Stocks, 1977 to 1981
7            1.16    0.73    0.76      1.16     0.82      1.14     1.01     0.87    0.86    1.79
p-value      0.138   0.665   0.617     0.136    0.506     0.147    0.263    0.428   0.449   0.003
7 T(\)       1.04    0.73    1.00      1.31     1.10      1.32     0.83     0.80    1.20    1.81
p-value      0.228   0.654   0.274    0.065     0.176     0.062    0.494    0.550   0.113   0.003
7 t(,)       0.75    0.84    0.88     0.65      0.67      0.76     1.51     1.41    0.86    0.99
p-value      0.623   0.476   0.426    0.799     0.754     0.602    0.020.   0.037   0.450   0.280
7 Duff.      0.67    0.94    0.88     0.70      0.65      0.70     1.11     1.29    1.16    0.70
p-value      0.767   0.335   0.423    0.708     0.785     0.716    0.172    0.073   0.137   0.713
                                     Table VII (continued)

Statistic     HS     IRS . BTOP       BBOT flop TROT RTOP RHOT DTOP DBOT

                                        AU Stocks, 1982 to 1986
             1.57    0.99    0.59      1.46      1.47       1.04     0.87    0.68    0.76      0.90
p-value      0.015   0.276   0.883     0.029     0.027      0.232    0.431   0.742   0.617     0.387
'7 r(".)     1.17    0.68    0.44      1.30.     1.53       1.21     1.08    0.93     0.84     0.88
p-value      0.129   0.741   0.991     0.070     0.018      0.106    0.190   0.356    0.478    0.421
'y i-(,)     0.81    1.03    0.74      0.62      0.83       1.23     0.77    0.79     0.63     0.81
p-value      0.533   0.243   0.640     0.831     0.499      0.097    0.597   0.564    0.821    0.528
  Duff.      0.51    0.79    0.70      0.81      0.74       1.21     0.73    0.75     0.93     0.74
p-value      0.961   0.567   0.717     0.532     0.643      0.107    0.657   0.623    0.352    0.642
                                        All Stocks,   1987 to 1991
             1.36    1.53    1.05      0.67      0.75       0.86     0.60    1.09     1.20     0.67
p-value      0.048   0.019   0.219     0.756     0.627      0.456    0.862   0.185    0.111    0.764
  ,-('-.,)   0.52    1.16    1.25      0.72      1.03       0.81     0.81    0.61     1.07     0.68
p-value      0.953   0.135   0.087     0.673     0.235      0.522    0.527   0.848    0.201    0.751
'7 T(/)      1-72    1.03    0.64      137       0.74       1.10     1.04    1.20      1.02    1.32
p-value      0.006   0.241   0.813     0.046     0.639      0.181    0.232   0.111   . 0.250   0.062
  Duff.      1.11    1.29    1.07      1.06      0.67       0.93     0.89    0.74     0.84     1.17
p-value      0.168   0.072   0.201     0.215     0.753      0.357    0.403   0.638    0.483    0.129
                                        All Stocks,   1992 to 1996
             1.50    1.31    1.05      1.89      1.27       0.94     1.23    0.66     1.72     1.54
p-value      0.022   0.066   0.222     0.002     0.078      0.343    0.095   0.782    0.005    0.018
7 r(',)      0.87    1.05    0.60      0.89      1.11       1.03     0.90    0.65     0.99     1.12
p-value      0.443   0.218   0.858     0.404    0.174       0.242    0.390   0.787    0.2.83   0.165
7 r(t)       0.72    0.66    0.75      1.42      1.02       0.58     0.61    0.64     1.36     0.93
p-value      0.670   0.778   0.624     0.036     0.246      0.895    0.854   0.813    0.048    0.357
7 Duff.      0.58    0.88    0.50      0.49     0.43        0.81     0.60    0.46     0.96     0.99
p-value      0.887   0.422   0.966     0.971    0.993       0.528    0.858   0.984    0.314    0.282
                                                  TabLe VIII
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equality of conditional and unconditional 1-day return distribu-
tions for NASDAQ stocks from 1962 to 1996, in 5-year subperiods, and in size quintiles. Conditional
returns are defined as the daily return three days following the conclusion of an occurrence of one of
10 technical indicators: head-and-shoulders (HS), inverted head-and-shoulders (IHS), broadening
top (BTOP), broadening bottom (BBOT), triangle top (TTOP), triangle bottom (TBOT), rect-
angle top (RTOP), rectangle bottom (RBOT), double top (DTOP), and double bottom (DBOT).
All returns have been normalized by subtraction of their means and division by their standard
deviations, p-values are with respect to the asymptotic distribution of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test statistic. The symbols 'r(N)' and 'r(4'           indicate that the conditional distribution is also
conditioned on decreasing and increasing volume trend, respectively.



        Statistic    HS     IRS     DTOP    BBOT flop TEOT              RTOP    REOT    DTOP    DEOT

            ••!                              All Stocks, 1962 to 1996
                    2.31    2.68    1.60    184      2.81      2.34     2.69    1.90    2.29    2.06
        p-vatue     0.000   0.000   0.012   0.002    0.000     0.000    0.000   0.001   0.000   0.000
        'y r(s,)    1.86    1.53    1.35    0.99     1.97      1.95     2.16    1.73    1.38    1.94
        p-value     0.002   0.019   0.052   0.281    0.001     0.001    0.000   0.005   0.045   0.001
        'y r(i.)    1.59    2.10    1.82    1.59     1.89      1.18     1.57    1.22    2.15    1.46
        p-value     0.013   0.000   0.003   0.013    0.002     0.126    0.014   0.102   0.000   0.028
        ' Duff.     1.08    0.86    1.10    0.80     1.73      0.74     0.91    0.75    0.76    1.52
        p-value     0.195   0.450   0.175   0.542    0.005     0.637    0.379   0.621   0.619   0.020
                                    Table VIII (continued)

Statistic    IIS     IllS   BTOP BBOT flop TEOT RTOP R.BOT DTOP DBOT

                                     Smallest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           1.51    2.16    1.72       1.68      1.22      1.55        2,13    1.70     1.74     1.98
p-value     0.021   0.000   0.006      0.007     0.101     0.016       0.000   0.006    0.005    0.001
77(N)       1.16    1.30    0.85       1.14      1.25      1.62        1.43    1.05     1.08     1.95
p-value     0.139   0.070   0.463      0.150     0.089     0.010       0.033   0.2 16   0.19 1   0.001
7 r(,')     0.85    1.73    1.61       2.00      1.34      0.79        1.58    1.52     1.47     1.20
p-value     0.462   0.005   0.012      0.001     0.055     0.553       0.014   0.019    0.026    0.115
7 Duff.     1.04    0.95    0.83       1.44      1.39      0.72        0.95    0.73     0.94     1.09
p-value     0.227   0.334   0.493      0.031     0.042     0.574       0.326   0.654    0.338    0.184
                                       2nd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           1.55    1.46    0.94       1.44      1.24      1.08        1.20    1.10     1.90     1.27
p-value     0.016   0.029   0.341      0.031     0.095     0.192       0.113   0.175    0.001    0.078
77(N)       1.11    1.13    1.08       0.92      1.23      0.79        1.34    1.19     1.09     1.61
p-value     0.173   0.157   0.192      0.371     0.097     0.557       0.055   0.117    0.185    0.011
7 r(,)      1.37    0.87    0.73       0.97      1.38      1.29        1.12    0.91     1.12     0.94
p-value     0.048   0.439   0.665      0.309     0.044     0.073       0.162   0,38 1   0.165    0.343
7 Duff.     1.23    0.62    0.97       0.69      1.02      1.05        1.09    0.78     0.58     0.51
p-value     0.095   0.535   0.309      0.733     0.248     0.224       0.183   0.579    0.894    0.955
                                       3rd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           1.25    1.72    0.82       1.71      1.41      L52         1.25    1.84     1.86     1.82
p-value     0.087   0.005   0.510     0.006     0.038      0.020       0.089   0.002    0.002    0.003
77(N)       0.93    1.08    0.54      1.23      1.06       1.02        0.79    1.47     1.38     0.88
p-vaLue     0.348   0.194   0.930     0.097     0.213      0.245       0.560   0.026    0.044    0,423
7 r(,)      0.59    1.14    0.97      1.37      0.75       1.01        1.13    1.34     1.37     1.78
p-value     0.873   0.146   0.309     0.047     0.633      0.262       0.159   0.054    0.047    0.003
7 flit      0.61    0.89    0.58      0.46      0.61      0.89         0.52    0.38     0.60     1.09
p-value     0.852   0.405   0.890     0.984     0.844     0.404        0.947   0.999    0.864    0.188
                                       4th Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           1.04    0.82    1.20      0.98      1.30      1.25         1.88    0.79     0.94     0.66
p-value     0.233   0.510   0.111     0.298     0.067     0.087        0.002   0.553    0.341    0.779
7           0.81    0.54    0.57      1.05      0.92      1.06         1.23    0.72     1.53     0.87
p-value     0.528   0.935   0.897     0.217     0.367     0.215        0.097   0.672    0.019    0.431
7 r(,)      0.97    1.04    1.29      0.53      2.25      0.71         1.05    0.77     1.20     0.97
p-value     0.306   0.229   0.071     0.938     0.000     0.696        0.219   0.589    0.114    0.309
7 Duff.     1.17    0.89    0.98      0.97      1.86      0.62         0.93    0.73     1.31     0.92
p-value     0.128   0.400   0.292     0.301     0.002     0.843        0.352   0.653    0.065    0.371
                                     Largest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
7           1.08    1.01    1.03      0.66      0.92      0.68         0.85
p-value     0.190   0.255   0.242     0.778     0.360     0.742        0.462   0.137    0.150    0.756
7           1.03    0.54    0.93      0.47      0.77      0.76         0.85    0.62     0.85     1.14
p-value     0.237   0.931   0.356     0.981     0.587     0.612        0.468   0.840    0.465    0.149
7           1.18    1.39    0.50      0.93      0.88      1.25         0.77    1.13     0.98     1.12
p-value     0.123   0.041   0.967     0.358     0.415     0.089        0.597   0.156    0.292    0.160
7 Duff.     0.94    1.25    0.73      0.84      0.76      1.11         0.73    0.86     0.86     0.77
p-value     0.342   0.090   0.668     0.476     0.617     0.169        0.662   0.457    0.454    0598
                                    Table VIII (continued)

Statistic    HS     IHS     BTOP BBOT flOP TEOT RTOP RBOT DTOP DBOT

                                        All Stocks, 1962 to 1966
            1.01    0.84    1.08       0.82     0.71      0.70     1.59    0.89    1.12    1.10
p-value     0.261   0.481   0.193      0.508    0.697     0.718    0.013   0.411   0.166   0.115
7 T(\.)     0.95    0.65    0.41       1.05     0.51      1.13     0.79    0.93    0.93    1.21
p-value     0.322   0.798   0.997      0.224    0.956     0.155    0.556   0.350   0.350   0.108
7 T(/')     0.77    0.96    0.83       0,73     1.35      0.49     1.17    0.62    1.18    1.15
p-value     0.586   0.314   0.489      0.663    0.052     0.972    0.130   0.843   0.121   0.140
7 Duff.     1.10    0.67    0.32       0.69     1.29      0.58     0.80    0.75    0.98    1.06
p-value     0.174   0.761   1.000      0.735    0.071     0.892    0.551   0.620   0.298   0.208
                                        All Stocks, 1967 to 1971
            0.75    1.10    1.00       0.74     1.27      1.35     1.16    0.74    0.74    1.21
p-value     0.636   0.175   0.273      0437     0.079     0.052    0.136   0.642   0.638   0.107
7 r("..)    1.03    0.52    0.70       0.87     1.24      1.33     1.29    0.83    0.72    1.45
p-value     0.241   0.947   0.714      0.438    0.092     0.058    0.072   0.490   0.684   0.031
7 r(,s)     1.05    1.08    1.12       0.64     0.79      0.65     0.55    0.53    0.75    0.69
p-value     0.217   0.192   0.165      0.810    0.566     0.797    0.923   0.941   0.631   0.723
  Duff.     1.24    0.89    0.66       0.78     1.07      0.88     0.88    0.40    0.91    0.76
p-value     0.093   0.413   0.770      0.585    0.203     0.418    0.423   0.997   0.385   0.602
                                        All Stocks, 1972 to 1976
            0.82    1.28    1.84       1.13     1.45      1.53     1.31    0.96    0.85    1.76
p-value     0.509   0.077   0.002      0.156    0.029     0.019    0.064   0.314   0.464   0.004
7 r('.)     0.59    0.73 —99.00        0.91     1.39      0.73     1.37    0.98    1.22    0.94
p-value     0.875   0.669   0.000      0.376    0.042     0.654    0.046   0.292   0.100   0.344
7 r(,')     0.65    0.73 —99.00      —99.00 —99.00 —99.00          0.59    0.76    0.78    0.65
p-value     0.800   0.653   0.000      0.000    0.000     0.000    0.878   0.611   0.573   0.798
7 Duff.     0.48    0.57 —99.00      —99.00 —99.00 —99.00          0.63    0.55    0.92    0.37
p-value     0.974   0.902   0.000      0.000    0.000     0.000    0.828   0.925   0.362   0.999
                                        All Stocks, 1977 to 1981
    •
            1.35    1.40    1.03       1.02     1.55   2.07        0.74    0.62    0.92    1.28
p-value     0.053   0.039   0.23t      0.249    0.016  0.000       0.636   0.842   0.369   0.077
'y ,j)      1.19
            0.117
                    1.47 —99.00
                    0.027   0.000
                                     —99.00
                                   0.000
                                                0.96
                                                0.317
                                                       0.98
                                                       0.290
                                                                   0.86
                                                                   0.453
                                                                           0.79
                                                                           0.554
                                                                                   0.81
                                                                                   0.522
                                                                                           0.68
                                                                                           0.748
p-value
  ,-(i')    0.69    0.94    0.80 —99.00         1.46 —99.00        0.56    0.82    1.06    094
p-value     0.728   0.341   0.542  0.000        0.028  0.000       0.918   0.514   0.207   0.336
  Diff.     0.73    0.90 —99.00 —9900           0.35 —99.00        0.44    0.37    0.80    0.53
p-value     0.665   0.395   0.000      0.000    1.000  0.000       0.991   0.999   0.541   0.944
                                    Table VIII (continued)

Statistic    US      IllS   BTOP BBOT flop TBOT RTOP RBOT DTOP DBOT
                                       All Stocks, 1982 to 1986
            166     1.59    1.17      0.73     1.46      1.69     1.04    1.24    2.44    1.27
p-value     0.008   0.013   0.129     0.654    0.028     0.006    0.232   0.093   0.000   0.078
7 ,-()      1.65    1.10    0.46      0.74     0.95      1.47     0.83    1.18    1.20    0.59
p-value     0.009   0.176   0.984     0.641    0.330     0.027    0.503   0.121   0.112   0.873
7 T(/)      1.13    1.31    0.86      0.42     1.17      1.04     0.97    1.13    1.68    0.89
p-value     0.153   0.065   0.445     0.995    0.129     0.231    0.302   0.155   0.007   0.405
7 Duff.     0.67    0.39    0.51      0.42     0.85      0.43     0.41    0.67    0.66    0.75
p-value     0.755   0.998   0.957     0.994    0.462     0.993    0.996   0.766   0.782   0.627
                                       AU Stocks, 1987 to 1991
-y          1.24    1.29    0.91      0.88     1.28      1.41     2.01    1.49    1.55    1.53
p-value     0.091   0.070   0.384     0.421    0.074     0.039    0.001   0.024   0.017   0.019
7 r(',.)    1.05    1.00    1.00      0.78     1.68      0.92     1.67    1.25    0.61    0.86
p-value     0.221   0.266   0.274     0.580    0.007     0.369    0.008   0.087   0.849   0.448
7 T(/)      1.23    1.26    1.06      1.32     0.65      1.27     1.10    1.26    1.67    1.81
p-value     0.099   0.084   0.208     0.060    0.787     0.078    0.176   0.085   0.007   0.003
7 Duff.     0.80    0.91    1.22      1,28     1.22      0.92     0.87    0.81    1.07    1.05
p-value     0.552   0.375   0.103     0.075    0.102     0.360    0.431   0.520   0.202   0.217
                                       All Stocks, 1992 to 1996
            1.21    1.61    0.84      0.90     0.97      0.91     L60     1.51    1.13    LOU
p-value     0.108   0.011   0.476     0.394    0.299     0.379    0.012   0.021   0.156   0.265
7 t('.)     0.68    L02     0.81      0.78     0.81      0.93     0.79    1.07    0.94    0.64
p-value     0.752   0.246   0.530     0.578    0.532     0.357    0.558   0.201   0.340   0.814
7 T(/)      1.56    0.85    0.71      L00      1.10      1.04     1.43    0.93    0.90    1.44
p-value     0.015   0.470   0.688     0.275    0.180     0.231    0.034   0.352   0.392   0.031
yDiff.      1.45    0.59    0.94      0.62     1.15      1.14     0.64    0.52    0.59    1.35
p-value     0.030   0.879   0.346     0.840    0.139     0.148    0.814   0,953   0.874   0.052
                                                   Table IX
Bootstrap percentiles for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equality of conditional and uncondi-
tional 1-day return distributions for NYSE/AMEX and NASDAQ stocks from 1962 to 1996, and
for size quintiles, under the null hypothesis of equality. For each of the two sets of market data,
two sample sizes, in1 and in2, have been chosen to span the range of frequency counts of patterns
reported in Table 1. For each sample size mj, we resample 1-day normalized returns (with replace-
ment) to obtain a bootstrap sample of mj observations, compute the Kohnogorov-Smirnov test
statistic (against the entire sample of 1-day normalized returns), and repeat this procedure 1,000
times. The percentiles of the asymptotic distribution are also reported for comparison.


                              NYSE!AMEX Saznpe                                NASDAQ Sample
          Percentile
                              Ami,n   '712                 A                Ami,n   m2 .           A

                                              All Stocks, 1962 to 1996
            0.01       2076   0.433   725       0.435    0.441       1320   0.430   414   0.438   0.441
            0.05       2076   0.515   725       0.535    0.520       1320   0.514   414   0.522   0.520
            0.10       2076   0.568   725       0.590    0.571       1320   0.573   414   0.566   0.571
            0.50       2076   0.827   725       0.835    0.828       1320   0.840   414   0.826   0.828
            0.90       2076   1.219   725       1.237    1.224       1320   1.244   414   1.229   1.224
            0.95       2076   1.335   725       1.395    1.358       1320   1.373   414   1.340   1.358
            0.99       2076   1.608   725       1.611    1.628       1320   1.645   414   1.600   1.628
                                        Smallest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
            0.01       320    0.456    78       0.406    0.441        218   0.459    41   0.436   0.441
            0.05       320    0.535    78       0.502    0.520        218   0.533    41   0.498   0.520
            0.10       320    0.586    78       0.559    0.571        218   0.590    41   0.543   0.571
            0.50       320    0.848    78       0.814    0.828        218   0.847    41   0.801   0.828
            0.90       320    1.231    78       1.204    1.224        218   1.229    41   1.216   1.224
            0.95       320    1.357    78       1.330    1.358        218   1.381    41   1.332   1.358
            0.99       320    1.661    78       1.590    1,628        218   1.708    41   1.571   1.628
              .
                                             2nd Quintile, 1962 to 1996
            0.01       420    0.445   146       0.428     0.441     305     0.458    68   0.426   0.441
            0.05       420    0.530   146       0.505    0.520-       305   0.557    68   0.501   0.520
            0.10       420    0.580   146       0.553    0.571        305   0.610    68   0,559   0.571
            0.50       420    0.831   146       0.823    0.828        305   0.862    68   0.804   0.828
            0.90       420    L197    146       1.210    1.224        305   1.265    68   1.210   1.224
            0.95       420    1.349   146       1.343    1.358        305   1.407    68   1.409   1,358
            0.99       420    1.634   146       1.626    1.628        305   1.686    68   1.614   1.628
                                             3rd Quintile, 1962 to   1996
            0.01       458    0.442   145       0.458     0.441       279   0.464   105   0.425   0.441
            0.05       458    0.516   145       0.508     0.520       279   0.539   105   0.525   0.520
            0.10       458    0.559   145       0.557     0.571       279   0.586   105   0.570   0.571
            0.50       458    0.833   145       0.835     0.828       279   0.832   105   0.818   0.828
            0.90       458    1.216   145       1.251    1.224        279   1.220   105   1.233   1.224
            0.95       458    1.406   145       1.397    1.358        279   1.357   105   1.355   1.358
            0.99       458    1.660   145       1.661    1.628        279   1.606   105   1.638   1.628
                           Table IX (continued)

                   NYSE/AMEX Sample                               NASDAQ Sample
Percentile
             mj    An,,,   7712                 A        tvij   Ams,n         Am,,n    A

                                  4th Qiiotile, 1962 to 1996
  0.01       424   0.429   173       0.418    0.441       303   0.454   92    0.446   0,441
  0.05       424   0.506   173       0.516    0.520       303   0.526   92    0.506   0.520
  0.10       424   0.552   173       0.559    0.571       303   0.563   92    0.554   0.571
  0.50       424   0.823   173       0.815    0.828       303   0.840   92    0.818   0.828
  0.90       424   1.197   173       1,183    1.224       303   1.217   92    1.178   1.224
  0.95       424   1.336   173       1.313    1.358       303   1.350   92    1.327   1.358
  0.99       424   1.664   173       1.592    1.628       303   1.659    92   1.606   1.628
                             Largest Quintile, 1962 to 1996
  0.01       561   0.421   167       0.425     0.441      308   0.441   108   0.429   0.441
  0.05       561   0.509   167       0.500     0.5W       308   0.520   108   0.508   0.520
  0.10       561   0.557   167       0.554     0.571      308   0.573   108   0.558   0.571
  0.50       561   0.830   157       0.817     0.828      308   0.842   108   0.816   0.828
  0.90       561   1.218   167       1.202     1.224 ,    308   1.231   108   1.226   1.224
  0.95       561   1.369   167       1.308     1.358      308   1.408   108   1.357   1.358
  0.99       561   1.565   167       1.615     1.628      308   1.724   108   1.630   1.628
                                 Table X (continued)
                                                                                                  .

                       NYSE/AMEX Sample                             NASI)AQ Sample
    Percentile
                 mj    Ami,,.   2      am,,,.      a       lThi   a1,. 2       a,,.,,,.    a
                                      All Stocks, 1982 to 1986
      0.01       313   0.462    106     0.437    0.441      120   0.448   44   0.417      0.441
      0.05       313   0.542    106     0.506    0.520      120   0.514   44   0.499      0.520
      0.10       313   0.585    106     0.559    0.571      120   0.579   44   0.555      0.571
      0.50       313   0.844    106     0.819    0.828      120   0.825   44   0.802      0.828
      0.90       313   1.266    106     1.220    1.224      120   1.253   44   1.197      1.224
•
      0.95       313   1.397    106     1.369    1.358      120   1.366   44   1.337      1.358
      0.99       313   1.727    106     1.615    1.628      120   1.692   44   1.631      1.628
                                      All Stocks, 1987 to 1991
       0.01      287   0.443     98     0.449    0.441      312   0.455   50    0.432     0.441
       0.05      287   0.513     98     0.522    0.520      312   0.542   50    0.517     0.520
       0.10      287   0.565     98     0.566    0.571      312   0.610   50    0.563     0.571
       0.50      287   0.837     98     0.813    0.828      312   0.878   50    0.814     0.828
       0.90      287   1.200     98     1.217    1.224      312   1.319   50    1.216     1.224
       0.95      287   1.336     98     1.348    1.358      312   1.457   50    1.323     1.358
       0.99      287   1.626     98     1.563    1.628      312   1.701   50    1.648     1.628
                                      All Stocks, 1992 to1996
       0.01      389   0.438    102     0.432    0.441      361   0.447   87    0.428     0.441
       0.05      389   0.522    102     0.506    0.520      361   0.518   87    0.492     0.520
       0.10      389   0.567    102     0.558    0.571      361   0.559   87    0.550     0.571
       0.50      389   0.824    102     0.818    0.828      361   0.817   87    0.799     0.828
       0.90      389   1.220    102     1.213    1.224      361   1.226   87    1,216     1.224
       0.95      389   1.321    102     1.310    1.358      361   1.353   87    1.341     1.358
       0.99      389   1.580    102     1.616    1.628      361   1.617   87    1.572     1.628
