                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            COVARIANCE RISK, MISPRICING, AND THE
                             CROSS SECTION OF SECURITY RETURNS


                                               Kent D. Daniel
                                             David Hirshleifer
                                          Avanidhar Subrahmanyam


                                             Working Paper 7615
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w7615

                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        March 2000



We thank Jonathan Berk, Michael Brennan, Bob Jones, Gautam Kaul, Blake LeBaron, Simon Gervais, Rick Green, Terry
Odean, Canice Prendergast, Matt Spiegel, Tyler Shumway, Siew Hong Teoh, Sheridan Titman, Ingrid Werner, and
seminar participants at Boston College, Carnegie Mellon University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, Emory
University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, London School of Economics, MIT, NYU, Ohio State
University, Princeton University, Stockholm School of Economics, and USC for helpful comments and discussions. This
paper was presented at the 1998 Econometric Society Meetings in Chicago, the 1998 conference on behavioral finance
at Yale, the 1998 conference on efficient markets at UCLA, the 1998 Berkeley Program in Finance at Santa Barbara,
and the NBER 1998 Asset Pricing Meetings in Chicago, and the 1999 WFA meetings. Hirshleifer thanks the Nippon
Telephone and Telegraph Program of Asian Finance and Economics for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Kent D. Daniel, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Covariance Risk, Mispricing, and the Cross Section of Security Returns
Kent D. Daniel, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
NBER Working Paper No. 7615
March 2000
JEL No. G1

                                               ABSTRACT


           This paper offers a multisecurity model in which prices reflect both covariance risk and
misperceptions of firms’ prospects, and in which arbitrageurs trade to profit from mispricing. We derive
a pricing relationship in which expected returns are linearly related to both risk and mispricing variables.
The model thereby implies a multivariate relation between expected return, beta, and variables that proxy
for mispricing of idiosyncratic components of value tends to be arbitraged away but systematic mispricing
is not. The theory is consistent with several empirical findings regarding the cross-section of equity returns,
including: the observed ability of fundamental/price ratios to forecast aggregate and cross-sectional returns,
and of market value but not non-market size measures to forecast returns cross-sectionally; and the ability
in some studies of fundamental/price ratios and market value to dominate traditional measures of security
risk. The model also offers several untested empirical implications for the cross-section of expected returns
and for the relation of volume to subsequent volatility.


Kent D. Daniel                                                      David Hirshleifer
Finance Department                                                  Fisher College of Business
Kellogg School                                                      The Ohio State University
Northwestern University                                             740A Fisher Hall
Evanston, IL 60208-2006                                             2100 Neil Avenue
and NBER                                                            Columbus, OH 43210-1144
kent@kent.kellogg.nwu.edu                                           hirshleifer.2@osu.edu

Avanidhar Subrahmanyam
Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of California at Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
subra@anderson.ucla.edu
    The classic theory of securities market equilibrium beginning with Sharpe, Lintner,
and Black is based on the interaction of fully rational optimizing investors. In recent
years, several important studies have explored alternatives to the premise of full ratio-
nality. One approach models market misvaluation as a consequence of noise or positive
feedback trades (see, e.g., Black (1986), De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldman
(1990a, 1990b), Campbell and Kyle (1993)). Another branch of literature makes as-
sumptions about imperfect rationality of individuals to derive trades and misvaluation.1
    The above studies provide many valuable insights in settings with risk-neutral in-
vestors and/or a single risky security. In this study we build upon this literature to
examine how the cross-section of expected security returns is related to risk and in-
vestor misvaluation. To address these issues we therefore examine a setting with both
risk aversion and multiple securities.
    Many empirical studies attempt to predict security stock returns using not just risk
measures like CAPM beta, but also variables such as book/market that are open to
multiple interpretations as either proxies for factor risk or for market misvaluation. The
debate over empirical results has been pursued in the absence of an explicit model of the
ability of di erent proxies to predict returns when there are both misvaluation e ects
and risk e ects among a cross-section of securities.
    Furthermore, it has often been argued that mispricing e ects will tend to be `ar-
bitraged away' by smart traders. Such arbitrage strategies may include diversi cation
by trading portfolios of mispriced securities, and hedging away of factor risk. The risk
and pro tability of multi-security arbitrage strategies, and the extent to which these do
indeed eliminate mispricing are issues that have yet to be explored in the literature.
    This paper o ers a model in which investors who are both imperfectly rational and
risk averse solve a multisecurity portfolio problem, and in which arbitrageurs can pro t
by trading against mispricing. Based on extensive psychological evidence2 , our premise
is that investors are overcon dent about their abilities, and hence overestimate the qual-
ity of information signals they have generated about security values. Other individuals
exploit the pricing errors introduced by the trading of the informed overcon dent indi-
viduals, but do not eliminate all mispricing because of risk aversion. The theory o ers
   1 See Shiller (1981), De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1991), Benartzi and Thaler (1995),
Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (1994), Kyle and Wang (1997), Odean (1998), Wang (1998),
Benos (1998), Caballe and Sakovics (1996), Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer,
and Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999); see also Barberis, Huang, and Santos (1999)
on time-inconsistent, loss-averse investor preferences.
   2 See for example, the discussions and references in DeBondt and Thaler (1995), Odean (1998) and
Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998).

                                                   1
an explanation for some known cross-sectional empirical patterns in the predictability of
security returns, describes the e ects of rational risk arbitrage activity upon factor and
idiosyncratic of mispricing, and o ers new empirical implications relating fundamental
price ratios, volume, future returns, and future volatility.
    Our analysis di ers from previous models of investor overcon dence3 in examining
how covariance risk and misvaluation jointly determine the cross-section of expected
security returns. Our speci cation of overcon dence is most similar to those of Kyle and
Wang (1997), Odean (1998), and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998). The
latter paper assumed risk neutrality and a single risky security in order to examine the
dynamics of con dence as a result of biased self-attribution, and the possibility of either
over- or under-reaction.
    In contrast, this paper examines only static overcon dence in a single period. We
can thereby allow tractably for risk aversion, multiple risky securities, and can examine
how prices balance the views of overcon dent traders and arbitrageurs. Our focus is
on providing a cross-sectional asset pricing model when there is long-run overreaction
and correction; the analysis does not address the patterns of short-term versus long-
term return autocorrelations studied in Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998),
Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and Hong and Stein (1999).4
    The model addresses a variety of cross-sectional empirical ndings (see Appendix B),
including: (1) the ability of fundamental/price ratios (dividend yield, earnings/price, and
book/market) to predict cross-sectional di erences in future returns, incrementally to,
and in some tests dominating, the e ect of market beta, (2) the ability of rm size to
predict future returns when size is measured by market value, but not when measured
by non-market proxies such as book value, (3) greater ability of book/market than rm
size to predict future returns in both univariate and multivariate studies, and (4) the
positive association between aggregate fundamental-scaled price measures and future
aggregate stock market returns.
   3 See, for example, De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1991), Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam,
and Titman (1994), Kyle and Wang (1997), Odean (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(1998), Gervais and Odean (1999), Benos (1998), Wang (1998), Caballe and Sakovics (1996), and
Hirshleifer and Luo (1999).
   4 Put di erently, we look at overreaction and its correction, but do not model extra dates in which
overreaction can temporarily become more severe, and in which overreaction can be only partially cor-
rected. Such a dynamic pattern can lead to short-term positive return autocorrelations (`momentum')
as well as long term negative autocorrelation (`reversal'). Recently, Jegadeesh and Titman (1999) have
provided evidence that momentum, though often interpreted as a simple underreaction, results from a
process of overreaction and correction.


                                                  2
    Some recent papers have attempted to explain these patterns with rational asset
pricing models. The challenges faced by risk-based explanations are signi cant (see Ap-
pendix B for details). Within the standard asset-pricing framework, the high Sharpe
ratios achieved by trading strategies based on these patterns would imply extreme varia-
tion in marginal utility, especially given that returns to such strategies seem to have low
correlations with plausible risk factors. While we cannot rule out explanations based on
risk or market imperfections, it is reasonable to consider alternative explanations based
on imperfect rationality.
    In the model, investors receive private information about, and misvalue, both sys-
tematic factors and rm-speci c payo s.5 In equilibrium, expected security returns are
linearly increasing in the beta of the security with an adjusted market portfolio, as per-
ceived by the overcon dent investors. However, expected returns also depend on current
mispricing, so returns can be predicted better by conditioning on proxies for misvalua-
tion. A natural ingredient for such a proxy is the market price itself, since price re ects
misvaluation. For example, following a favorable information signal, the price of the
security overreacts, so price is too high. A misvaluation proxy that contain price in the
denominator therefore decreases. (It helps to scale the proxy in the numerator with a
non-market fundamental measure such as book value, earnings or dividends.) In this
setting, rms with low (high) fundamental/price ratios are overvalued (undervalued),
and tend to have low (high) expected future returns.
    A prevalent intuition is that whenever the market makes valuation errors, high fun-
damental/price ratios predict high returns.6 This intuition is just that if the market
overvalues a stock, both its fundamental/price ratio and the future return tend to be
low. This argument implicitly assumes that the pricing error is uncorrelated with shifts
in the rm's true conditional expected value. However, as we show, this premise is not
in general true if errors arise from misinterpretation of new information. In our setting,
informed investors generally have favorable private information about low book/market
   5 The existence of an active industry selling macroeconomic forecasts to investors suggests that,
rightly or wrongly, investors believe that something akin to private information about aggregate fac-
tors exists. Consistent with genuine private information about aggregate factors, several studies have
provided evidence that aggregate insider trading forecasts future industry and aggregate stock market
returns (see, e.g., Lakonishok and Lee (1998)). In addition, there are many market timers who trade
based on what they perceive to be information about market aggregates, and investors looking for
industry plays such as internet or biotech stocks.
   6 Berk (1995a) derives an explicit set of statistical conditions under which a price-related variable
such as size has incremental power to predict future returns. Here we o er an equilibrium model in
order to explore the economic conditions under which this occurs.


                                                   3
  rms. If the informed were to systematically underreact to this private information
(because of undercon dence) then a low book/market ratio would forecast high future
returns. Thus, the simpler intuition is not correct. The empirical direction of these
e ects supports theories based on overreaction and correction (such as the psychological
theory proposed here) over theories based on pure underreaction.
    The model implies that even when covariance risk is priced, fundamental-scaled price
measures can be better forecasters of future returns than covariance risk measures such
as beta (Appendix B describes existing evidence). Intuitively, the reason that funda-
mental/price ratios have incremental power to predict returns is that a high fundamen-
tal/price ratio (e.g., high book/market) can arise from high risk and/or overreaction
to an adverse signal. If price is low due to a risk premium, on average it rises back to
unconditional expected value. If there is an overreaction to genuine adverse information,
then the price will on average recover only part way toward the unconditional expected
terminal cash ow. Since high book/market re ects both mispricing and risk, whereas
beta re ects only risk, book/market can be a better predictor of returns.
    In general, knowing the level of covariance risk (beta) helps disentangle risk and
mispricing e ects. This is consistent with the ndings of several (but not all) empirical
studies (discussed in Appendix B) that beta positively predicts future returns after
controlling for fundamental/price ratios or size. However, interestingly, there is a special
case in which, even though risk is priced and beta is a perfect proxy for risk, beta does not
have any incremental explanatory power. Thus, such a test may create the appearance
that market risk is not priced even if it were fully priced. Subsection 1.3.1 provides a
numerical illustration of the basic intuition for these implications.7
    The theory has other implications about the ability of alternative misvaluation prox-
ies to predict future returns. First, since the market value of the rm re ects misvalua-
tion, rm size as measured by market value will predict future returns but non-market
measures of rm size will not. Price (or market value) of course varies for reasons other
than misvaluation. Such di erences in scale (unconditional expected rm payo ) are
noise to an econometrician who seeks to extract misvaluation from market price. Scal-
ing prices by fundamental measures (e.g., book value, earnings, or dividends) tends to
   7An alternative approach to securities pricing is o ered by Shefrin and Statman (1994), who analyze
the e ect of mistaken beliefs on equilibrium in stock, option and bond markets. Their model allows
for general beliefs, and therefore for a wide range of possible patterns. However, their focus is not
on empirically predicting the direction of pricing errors or addressing evidence on the cross-section of
security returns. In a contemporaneous paper, Shumway (1998) examines the e ects of loss-aversion on
securities prices. He does not, however, examine whether this approach can explain the known patterns
in the cross-section of securities prices.

                                                   4
improve predictive power by ltering out irrelevant scale variability. Thus, a variable like
book/market should predict future returns better than size. Nevertheless, if the funda-
mental proxy measures expected future cash ows with error, market value will still have
some incremental ability beyond the fundamental/price ratio to predict future returns.
To lter out industry-wide noise in fundamental measures, it can also be useful to use
a price-related industry normalization (such as measuring a rm's fundamental/price
ratio relative to industry ratios). Such ltering will, however, unavoidably remove not
just noise, but the industry-related component of mispricing.
    The theory also o ers empirical implications that are untested or that have received
ex post con rmation. The theory predicts that fundamental/price ratios should better
forecast risk-adjusted returns for businesses that are hard to value (e.g., R&D-intensive
  rms comprised largely of intangible assets). Recent empirical research has provided
evidence consistent with this implication (see Section 3). The theory also o ers impli-
cations about the cross-sectional dispersion in fundamental/price ratios and their power
to predict future returns in relation to market-wide levels of fundamental/price ratios.
    Further untested empirical implications relate to current volume as a predictor of
future market return volatility. High volume indicates extreme signals values and strong
disagreement between overcon dent traders and arbitrageurs. High volume therefore
predicts a larger future correction. This leads to an increasing quadratic relation be-
tween current volume and future market volatility. Furthermore, periods in which the
volume/volatility relation is strong are associated with a strong relation between the
market fundamental/price ratio and future returns.
    As noted above, a common objection to models of price anomalies based upon im-
perfect rationality is that smart traders should be able to trade against mispricing, and
thereby eliminate it. In our setting, risk aversion limits the extent of such risk arbitrage
activity. However, there is an incentive for arbitrageurs to invest in value or small-cap
funds{diversi ed portfolios that are long in stocks with high fundamental/price ratios
or low market values, and short in stocks with the opposite characteristics. With many
securities, arbitrageurs are able to almost eliminate the idiosyncratic mispricing, but do
not eliminate the systematic mispricing.
    A further objection to models with imperfect rationality is that if such trading causes
wealth to ow from irrational to smart traders, eventually the smart traders may dom-
inate price-setting. In our setting, arbitrageurs exploit the mispricing, but do not earn
riskless pro ts. Furthermore, as in De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a),
overcon dent individuals invest more heavily in risky assets, and thereby may earn higher

                                             5
or lower expected pro ts than the arbitrageurs.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 presents a pricing
model based on investor psychology. Section 2 examines forecasting future returns using
both mispricing measures and traditional risk-based return measures (such as the market
beta), and develops further empirical implications. Section 3 examines further empirical
implications relating to the circumstances a ecting the degree of overcon dence. Section
4 examines volume and future future volatility. Section 5 examines the pro tability of
trading by arbitrageurs and overcon dent individuals.

1 The Model
1.1 The Economic Setting
We have argued that the psychological basis for overcon dence is that people overvalue
their own expertise. This suggests that people will tend to be overcon dent about
private signals. A signal that only a subset of individuals receive presumably re ects
special expertise on the part of the recipients. We therefore examine a setting in which
some traders possess private information and some do not. The traders who possess
private information are overcon dent: they overestimate the precision of their signals.
The uninformed traders have no signals to be overcon dent about.8
    The analysis has two other equivalent interpretations. First, the uninformed class of
investors could instead be viewed as a set of fully rational uninformed investors. The
second interpretation relies on the fact that, in equilibrium, prices are fully revealing, so
that the `uninformed' traders end up making full use of the private information of the
informed. In consequence, some or all of the uninformed traders can instead be viewed
as being fully rational informed arbitrageurs. All three interpretations lead to identical
results. We refer to the signals the informed individuals receive as `private'.9 Individuals
   8  A purely rational trader would disagree with the overcon dent investors as to posterior payo
variances. This suggests that there may be pro t opportunities for trading in options markets. If
the model were extended to continuous time using the stylized assumptions of arbitrage-based option
pricing (smooth di usion of information, non-stochastic volatility), then rational traders would be able
to obtain large riskfree pro ts by forming hedge portfolios of options, stocks and bonds. However, as
options professionals are well aware, information arrives in discrete chunks such as earnings reports, and
volatility evolves stochastically. Thus, even a trader who has a better assessment of volatility cannot
make riskfree pro ts. In other words, a reasonable dynamic extension of the model would provide risky
pro t opportunities, but not arbitrage opportunities, to rational agents.
    9 Overcon dent investors recognize that other overcon dent investors perceive a similarly high pre-
cision for the signal. Since they share this perception, they do not regard the others as overcon dent.


                                                    6
who receive a private signal about a factor or about a security's idiosyncratic payo
component are referred to as the overcon dent informed with respect to that signal.
Individuals who do not receive a given signal are referred to as arbitrageurs with respect
to that signal.10
1.1.1 Timing
A set of identical risk averse individuals who are each endowed with baskets containing
shares of N + K risky securities and of a riskfree consumption claim with terminal (date
2) payo of 1. At each date individuals can trade the consumption claims for shares.
There are three dates. At date 0, individuals hold identical prior beliefs about the risky
security payo s. At date 1 some, but not all, individuals receive noisy private signals
about the risky security payo s. Whether or not an individual receives a signal a ects
his belief about the precision of that signal. Individuals then trade securities based on
their beliefs. At date 2, conclusive public information arrives, the N + K securities
pay liquidating dividends of  = (1 ; :::N +K )0 , the risk-free security pays 1, and all
consumption takes place. Appendix A provides a guide to the model notation.
1.1.2 Individuals and the Portfolio Problem
All individuals have identical preferences. Individual j selects his portfolio to maximize
Ej [ exp( Ac~j )], where c~j , date 2 consumption, is equal to his portfolio payo . The
j subscript here denotes that the expectations are taken using individual j 's beliefs,
conditional on all information available to j as of date 1. Let P denote the date 1
vector of prices of each security relative to the riskfree security, and xj denote the
vector of risky security demands by individual j , and let xj be the vector of individual
j 's security endowment. Let j  Ej [] denote the vector of expected payo s, and
   j  Ej [(    Ej [])( Ej [])0 ] denote the covariance matrix of security payo s.
     Since all asset payo s are normally distributed, individual j solves:
                                A 0
                   max
                    xj
                        x 0
                          j  j
                                2 xj j xj subject to xj P = xj P:
                                                         0      0

All individuals act as price takers. Di erentiating the Lagrangian with respect to x0j
gives the rst order condition:
                                   @L
                                   @ x0j
                                         = j A j xj LP = 0:
  10 We therefore allow for the possibility that an individual is overcon dent with respect to one signal,
but acts rationally to arbitrage mispricing arising from a di erent signal.

                                                    7
The condition that the price of the riskfree security in terms of itself is 1 implies that
the Lagrangian multiplier L = 1, so
                                       P = j          A   x
                                                           j j:                                 (1)
1.1.3 Risky Security Payo s - The Factor Structure
Before any information signals are received, the distribution of security payo s at date
2 are described by the following K -factor structure:
                                                 K
                                                 X
                                    i = i +         ik fk   + i ;                           (2)
                                                 k=1

where ik is the loading of the ith security on the kth factors, fk is realization of the kth
factor, and i is the ith residual. As is standard with factor models, we specify w.l.o.g.
that E [fk ] = 0, E [fk2] = 1, E [fj fk ] = 0 8i 6= j , E [i ] = 0, E [ifk ] = 0 8i; k. The values
of i and ik are common knowledge, but the realizations of fk and i are not revealed
until date 2. Let Vi denote V ar(i).
     With many securities, K mimicking portfolios can be formed that correlate arbitrar-
ily closely with the K factors and diversify away the idiosyncratic risk. As a convenient
approximation, we assume that each of the rst K securities is a factor-mimicking port-
folios for factor K , and therefore that each of these assets has zero residual variance,
has a loading of 1 on factor k, and zero on the other K 1 factors.
1.1.4 An Equivalent Maximization Problem
Since an individual can, by means of the K mutual funds, hedge out the factor risk of
any individual asset, he can construct a portfolio with arbitrary weights on the K factors
and N residuals. Therefore, the individual's utility maximization problem is equivalent
to one in which the investor directly chooses his portfolio's loadings on the K factors and
N residuals, and his holdings of the risk-free asset. This can be viewed as the problem
that arises when the risky securities are replaced with a set of N + K uncorrelated risky
porfolios each of which has a expected payo (at date 0) of zero and a loading of one on
the relevant factor or residual and zero on all others. That is, the k'th factor portfolio
(k = 1; : : : ; K ) has a date 2 payo of fk , and the n'th residual portfolio (n = 1; : : : ; N )
has a date 2 payo of n.
    Since this set of portfolios spans the same space as the original set of securities, opti-
mizing the weights on these portfolios generates the same overall consumption portfolio.
                                                  8
We solve for the market prices of these portfolios, and then for the market prices of the
original securities. One unit of the i'th original asset (as described in equation (2)) can
therefore be reproduced by holding i of the risk-free asset, one unit of the i'th residual
portfolio, and i;k units of each of the k = 1; :::; K factor portfolios. At any date, the
price of this security is the sum of the prices of these components. From this point on
we number assets so that the rst K risky assets (i = 1; : : : ; K ) in the equivalent setting
are the K factor portfolios, and the remaining N (i = K + 1; : : : ; K + N ) are the N
residual portfolios.
1.1.5 Date 1 Signals
Some individuals receive signals at date 1 about the K factors and N residuals. We
assume that it is common knowledge that a fraction i; i = 1; :::; K + N of the population
receives a signal about the payo of the ith asset. For i = 1; :::; K the signal is about a
factor realization and for i = K + 1; :::; K + N it is about a residual. Before receiving
signals, the individuals are essentially identical (under exponential utility, di erences
in wealth do not a ect demands for risky assets); the only thing that di erentiates
them is whether signals they receive about asset payo s. The key is not the mere
possession of the information | in the model all private signals are revealed through
prices. Without overcon dence, all individuals would therefore have identical posterior
beliefs. The heterogeneity instead arises because individuals who obtain a signal are
overcon dent about that signal, while individuals who only infer the signal through
prices are not overcon dent about it.
    We assume that all individuals who receive a signal about a factor or residual receive
precisely the same signal.11 The noisy signals about the payo of the k'th factor portfolio
and i'th residual portfolio take the form
                                sfk = fk + efk     and si = i + ei:
The true variance of the signal noise terms efk ei are VkRf and ViR, respectively (R de-
notes \Rational"), but because the informed investors are overC on dent, the mistakenly
believes the variance to be lower: VkCf < VkRf , and ViC < ViR. In much of the analysis,
  11Our assumption that all individuals receive exactly the same signal is not crucial for the results,
but signal noise terms must be correlated. Some previous models with common private signals include
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Admati and P eiderer (1988), and Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and
Titman (1994). If, as is true in practice, some groups of analysts and investors use related information
sources to assess security values, and interpret them in similar ways, the errors in their signals will be
correlated.

                                                    9
it will be more convenient to use the precision,   1=V . Thus we de ne kCf  1=VkCf ,
kRf  1=VkRf , iC  1=ViC , and iR  1=ViR .
    Finally, we assume independence of this signal errors, i.e., cov(ei; ei ) = 0 for i 6= i0 ,
                                                                                        0


cov (efk ; efk ) = 0 for k 6= k0 , and cov (ei; efk ) = 0 for all i; k. This set of assumptions
          0


makes the model tractable and is without loss of generality.
1.1.6 Expectations and Variances of Portfolio Payo s
Let the superscript  = C; R denote a quantity that can be calculated with respect to
either overcon dent (C ) or rational (R) expectations. To solve for price in terms of
exogenous parameters, we rst calculate the expectation of portfolio i's terminal value
given all of the signals.
     For convenience we will now slightly abuse the notation by letting the variable 
refer to means for the factor and residual portfolios instead of the original assets, and
x the number of shares of the factor and residual portfolios. Since all variables are
jointly normally distributed, the posterior distributions for fk and i are also normal.
We de ne the \" notation next to an expectation operator as implying conditioning
upon all signals available to the individual. The posterior mean and variance of payo s
of factor and residual portfolios are
                             s                       1
          i  E  [Æi ] = i i  ; E  (Æi i )2 =           for i = 1; : : : ; N + K (3)
                           i + i                    i + i
where Æi is the payo of the ith asset in the equivalent setting, and Æk = fk for k =
1; : : : ; K , and Æi = i K for i = K + 1; : : : ; N + K , and where i denotes the prior
precision of the portfolio (i.e., 1=Vi, where Vi = Vi for a residual, and Vi = 1 for a
factor). Since the precision of the prior on f is 1 by assumption, k = 1 for k = 1; : : : ; K .
1.1.7 Prices and Portfolio Holdings
Because the payo s of the K factor portfolios and N residual portfolios are uncorrelated,
the covariance matrix in equation (1) is diagonal, and we can rewrite equation (1) on
an element-by-element basis as
                                                             
                                                      A
                                  Pi = i                        xi ;
                                                   i + i
or
               1                          i + i 
        xi = (i + i ) (i   Pi ) =           E [Ri ]                 for i = 1; : : : ; N + K;   (4)
             A                               A

                                                10
where xi denotes the number of shares of portfolio i an individual would hold. Also,
since individuals have constant absolute risk aversion, it is convenient to de ne the date
1-2 `return' of portfolio i as the terminal payo minus the price, Ri  Æi Pi.
    In this setting each individual knows the others' preferences, initial endowments, the
number of individuals who receive signals, and how other individuals interpret their sig-
nals. There is no noise trading or shock to security supply. In consequence, uninformed
individuals can infer all the signals perfectly from market prices. The uninformed end
up with the same information as the informed traders, but use it di erently as they are
not overcon dent about these signals (see the discussion in Subsection 1.1.5).
    We impose the market clearing condition that that the average holding of each asset
equal the number of endowed shares per individual, i, of each factor or residual portfolio
(This is the number of shares that would be required to construct the market portfolio
using just the N +K factor and residual portfolios, divided by the number of individuals.)
Recall that i denotes the fraction of the population which receives information about,
and is overcon dent about, portfolio i. Then by equation (4),
             i = i xCi + (1 i )xRi
                = A1 i(i + iC )(Ci Pi) + (1 i)(i + iR )(Ri Pi) :
                                                                     


   Using the Bayesian expression for i in (3), the above equation yields:
                                                                      
                      iR + i (iC iR )                    A
            Pi =                             s                             :      (5)
                   i + iR + i (iC iR ) i     i + iR + i(iC iR ) i
Let iA be the consensus precision (A for Average), or, more formally, the population-
weighted average assessment of signal precision for signal i:
                                iA  iiC + (1 i )iR :                                        (6)
Then (5) can be rewritten as
                                                               
                                   iA                    A
                           Pi =          s                            i :                        (7)
                                i + iA i             i + iA
This expression shows that prices are set as if all agents were identically overcon dent
and assessed the signal precision to be  A. We further de ne
                iA         iR               iC
      i            ; R
                                and  C
                                                   ;                 for i = 1; : : : ; N + K:   (8)
             i + iA i i + iR       i
                                           i + iC

                                              11
i is the actual response of the market price of asset i to a unit increase in the signal si ;
Ri is what the response would be if all individuals in the population behaved rationally,
and Ci is what the response would be were all individuals overcon dent.
    If there is a mixture of arbitrageurs and overcon dent informed individuals in the
population, 0 <  < 1, then Ci > i > Ri. Prices respond too strongly to private
signals, but not as strongly as they would were there no arbitrageurs to trade against
the overcon dence-induced mispricing. The higher the fraction of overcon dent informed
agents i, the greater the amount of overreaction to the private signal.
    Substituting these de nitions into (7), we can calculate the price and expected return
of asset i (expectation at date 1 of the date 1-2 price change), conditional on the signal.
                                                                       
                                                                A
           Pi =       Ri si   + (i   Ri   )si                            i                                    (9)
                                                             i + iA
                                                                                
                                                                        A
     E [Ri ] =
       R
                      Ri      Pi = (i  )si +  +  A i; for i = 1; : : : ; N + K: (10)
                                                   Ri
                                                  i    i

The price equation has three terms. The rst, Risi = E R [Æi], is the expected payo of
the security from the perspective of a rational investor. The extra term, (i Ri )si, is
the extra price reaction to the signal si due to overcon dence. The right-hand term of
the equation is the price-discount for risk. The (rationally assessed) expected return on
portfolio i depends only on the i-signal. Intuitively, with constant absolute risk aversion
news about other components of wealth does not a ect the premium individuals demand
for trading in the ith portfolio.
    The expected return then consists of two terms: the correction of the extra price
reaction to the signal, and the a risk premium that compensates for the risk of the
portfolio. The risk premium is proportional to the coeÆcient of risk aversion, A, share
endowment i, and the consensus-variance 1=(i + iA) (the representative individual's
assessed cash- ow variance of asset i). Recall that an overcon dent informed individual
always thinks that the security is less risky than it really is. Hence, the greater the
fraction of overcon dent individuals in the population (the greater ), and the greater
their overcon dence, the lower its risk premium.
    Equation (10) gives the expected return, as assessed by a rational arbitrageur. The
more general expression that gives the expected return as assessed by either overcon dent
informed traders or arbitrageurs is
                                                                   
                                                               A
     E  [R ] =       Pi = (i      i )si +                         i ;         for i = 1; : : : ; N + K;   (11)
           i      i
                                                         i + iA

                                                              12
Since under overcon dence, Ci > i > Ci , the rst term of this equation shows that the
arbitrageurs and the informed overcon dent traders disagree on whether securities are
over- or under-priced. Ignoring the risk-premium (the last term), if si is positive, than
an arbitrageur thinks that the price is too high by (i Ri )si, and an overcon dent
thinks that the price is too low by approximately (Ci i)si. Because of these di ering
beliefs, the arbitrageurs and informed overcon dent traders, whose holdings are given
by equation (4), take opposing positions following a signal.12
    The expressions for the price and expected return can be expressed more compactly
with the following rescaling:
                                   and !i  i Ri for i = 1; : : : ; N + K:
                                                          R
                  Si  Ri si ;                                                                      (12)
                                                      i
Here Si is rescaled so that a unit increase in the signal would cause a unit increase in
the price, were all agents rational. However, with overcon dent traders there is excess
sensitivity to the signal: !i denotes the fractional excess sensitivity for the ith signal.
Given these de nitions, equations (9) and (10) become:
                                                  A
                      Pi = (1 + !i)Si                     i                                         (13)
                                              i + iA
                                             A
                E R [Ri ] =       !i Si +         ;                for i = 1; : : : ; N + K:        (14)
                                          i + iA i
1.1.8 The Adjusted Market Portfolio
Using equation (14), we can write the returns on each of the N + K portfolios as:
                        Ri = E R [Ri ] + ui        for i = 1; : : : ; N + K;
where by rationality of the true expectation E R [ui] = 0 and E R [Ri ui] = 0. Also,
from (3), E R [u2i ] = 1=(i + iR ): And, as discussed previously E [uiuj ] = 0 for i 6= j and
 = fC; Rg; since rational and overcon dent agree that the N +K assets are uncorrelated
with one another.
   Let the true (per capita) market return be the return on the porfolio with security
weights equal to the endowed number of shares of each security per individual (i.e., the
weights are the total market portfolio weights divided by the population size):
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                           Rm =           i Ri ;
                                                    i=1
  12The overcon dent also think that the security is less risky than do the arbitrageurs. Hence, they
are willing to hold a larger position. For a favorable signal, the return and risk e ects are reinforcing,
but for an adverse signal they are opposing.

                                                   13
and let the adjusted market portfolio M be the portfolio with weights
                                              
                                      i + iR
                           i = i               ; i = 1; : : : ; N + K:                  (15)
                            0


                                      i + iA
The adjustment factor in parentheses is the ratio of the asset's consensus variance 1=[i +
iA ] to the true variance 1=(i + iR ). The rationally assessed covariance between the asset
i return and the adjusted market return is cov R (Ri ; RM ) = i =(i + iA ): Substituting
this into equation (14) gives
             E R [Ri ] = !i Si + A cov R (Ri ; RM )                 for i = 1; : : : ; N + K:   (16)
Thus, the expected return is the sum of a mispricing component and a risk component
which is based on the covariance with the adjusted market portfolio.
1.2 Pricing Relationships
The previous subsection derived expressions for prices and expected returns for the
factor and residual portfolios. For the original N + K assets, equation (16) implies the
following asset pricing relationship. We now let !i and Si, for i = 1; :::; N , and !kf and
Skf , for k = 1; :::; K , denote the fractional overreaction (!i ) and scaled signal (Si ) for the
N residuals and K factors.
Proposition 1 If risk averse investors with exponential utility are overcon    dent about
the signals they receive regarding K factors and about the idiosyncratic payo components
of N securities, then securities obey the following relationships:
                                                                     K
                                                                     X
                       Pi = i           iM   + (1 + ) +
                                                        !i   Si          ik   (1 + !kf )Skf   (17)
                                                                     k=1
                                                    K
                                                    X
                  E R [Ri ] =      iM     !iSi                  f f
                                                              ik !k Sk ;                        (18)
                                                    k=1

for all i = 1; : : : ; N + K , where

                                  iM     cov(Ri; RM )=var(RM ):
Equation (18) implies that true expected return decomposes additively into a risk pre-
mium (the rst term) and components arising from mispricing (the next two terms).


                                                   14
    Mispricing arises from the informed's overreaction to signals about the factors and
the idiosyncratic payo components. The mispricing due to overreaction to factor in-
formation is proportional to the security's sensitivity to that factor. In addition, the
securities expected return includes a premium for market risk.13 If there were no over-
con dence (i = Ri and k = Rk ), this equation would be identical to the CAPM with
zero riskfree rate.
    We now use the fact that the expected value of the signals is zero to derive the optimal
predictor of future returns for an observer who does not condition on current market
prices nor on any other proxy for investors' private signals. The following corollary
follows by taking the rational expectation of (18); and then taking a weighted sum of
security expected returns to show that = E [RM ].
Corollary 1      Conditioning only on         iM ,   expected security returns obey the pricing rela-
tionship:
                         E [Ri ] = E [RM ] iM ; i = 1; : : : ; N + K;
where E [RM ] is the expected return on the adjusted market portfolio, and                        iM   is the
security's beta with respect to the adjusted market portfolio.
This is identical in form to the CAPM security market line (with zero riskfree rate).
However, here M is the adjusted market porfolio. This relationship holds for the true
market portfolio m as well in the natural benchmark case in which investors are equally
overcon dent about all signals, i.e., the ratio
                                      i + iR j + jR
                                               =
                                      i + iA j + jA
                                                                                        (19)
is equal for all factors and residuals i and j .14 This can be seen by substituting equation
(19) into equation (15).15
    Although consistent with the univariate evidence that mean returns are increasing
with beta, the model implies that there are better ways to predict future returns than
the CAPM security market line. Proposition 1 implies that better predictors can be
obtained by regressing not just on beta, but on proxies for market misvaluation.
  13 The coeÆcient iM is a price-change beta, not the CAPM return beta. That is, iM is the regression
coeÆcient in i Pi = i + iM (M PM ) where Pi and PM are known. The CAPM return beta is
the coeÆcient in the regression (i Pi )=Pi = Ri + iM    Ret (M PM )=PM , and is equal to (PM =Pi ) iM :
  14 If there are many securities, as discussed in Section 5, all that is required is that this ratio be equal
across factors, but not necessarily across residuals.
  15 Empirically, as discussed in Appendix B, the evidence is supportive of a positive univariate relation
between market beta and future returns, although estimates of the strength and signi cance of the
e ect varies across studies.

                                                      15
1.3 Proxies for Mispricing
Since mispricing is induced by signals that are not directly observable by the econo-
metrician, it is important to examine how expected returns are related to observable
proxies for mispricing, and with measures of risk. We begin with a simple numerical
illustration of the basic reasoning.
1.3.1 A Simple Example
We illustrate here (and formalize later) three points:
   1. High fundamental/price ratios (henceforth in this subsection, F=P 's) predict high
       future returns if investors are overcon dent, and low future returns if investors are
       suÆciently undercon dent.
   2. Regressing on as well as an F=P yields positive coeÆcients on both and the
       F=P .
   3. If overcon dence about signals is extreme, even though is priced by the market,
         has no incremental power to predict future returns over an F=P .
    To understand parts (1)-(3), suppose for presentational simplicity that there is only
information about idiosyncratic risk, and consider a stock that is currently priced at 80.
Suppose that its unconditional expected cash ow is known to be 100. The fact that
the price is below the unconditional fundamental could re ect a rational premium for
factor risk, an adverse signal, or both.
    Suppose now that investors are overcon dent, and consider the case in which = 0.
Then the low price (80 < 100) must be the result of an adverse signal. Since investors
overreacted to this signal, the true conditional expected value is greater than 80| the
stock is likely to rise. Thus the above-average F=P (100=80) is associated with a positive
abnormal expected return. Of course, the reverse reasoning indicates that a below-
average value (e.g, 100=120) predicts a negative expected return. Thus, when investors
are overcon dent, a high fundamental/price ratio predicts high future returns, consistent
with a great deal of existing evidence.
    If instead investors were undercon dent, then the price of 80 would be an un-
derreaction to the signal, so price could be expected to fall further. Thus, the high
fundamental/price ratio would predict low returns, inconsistent with the evidence.
    If we allow for di ering 's, there is a familiar interfering e ect (Berk (1995a)): a
high beta results in a higher risk discount and hence also results in a high F=P . Thus,
                                            16
even if there is no information signal, a high F=P predicts high returns. This illustrates
point (1) above. The confounding of risk and mispricing e ects suggests regressing future
returns on beta as well as on F=P .
    This confounding leads to point (2). Thus, if the econometrician knew that the
discounting of price from 100 to 80 was purely a risk premium, then the expected terminal
cash ow would still be 100. In contrast, if this is a zero- (zero risk premium) stock,
the true conditional expected value (90, say) would lie between 80 and 100: the signal
is adverse (90 < 100), and investors overreact to it (80 < 90). Thus, the true expected
return is positive, but not as large as in the case of a pure risk premium. By controlling
for as well as the F=P , the econometrician can disentangle whether the price will rise
to 100 or only to 90.
    To understand point (3), consider now the extreme case where overcon dence is
strong, in the sense that the `signal' is almost pure noise and investors greatly underesti-
mate this noise variance. In this case, even when the price decreases to 80 purely because
of an adverse `signal,' it will still on average recover to 100. This leads to exactly the
same expected return as when the price of 80 is a result of a high beta. Both e ects are
captured fully and equally by F=P , whereas beta captures only the risk e ect. So even
though beta is priced, the F=P completely overwhelms beta in a multivariate regression.
    Our reasoning is not based on the notion that if investors were so overcon dent that
they thought their signals were perfect, they would perceive risk to be zero, which would
cause to be unpriced. Even if investors are only overcon dent about idiosyncratic risk,
so that covariance risk is rationally priced, has no incremental power to predict returns.
In contrast, the e ect described here is not founded on weak pricing of risk.
    The Part (3) scenario, while extreme, does o er an explanation for why the incre-
mental beta e ect can be weak and therefore hard to detect statistically. The following
subsections develop these insights formally, and provide further implications about the
usefulness of alternative mispricing proxies.
1.3.2 Noisy Fundamental Proxies
Consider an econometrician who wishes to forecast returns. Since prices re ect misvalu-
ation, it is natural to include a price-related predictor. However, it is hard to disentangle
whether a low price arises because i, its unconditional expected payo , is low, or be-
cause the security is undervalued. The econometrician can use a fundamental measure
as a noisy proxy for the unconditional expected value. We examine here how well scaled
price variables can predict returns when the fundamental proxy is the true expected
                                             17
cash ow plus noise,
                                            Fi = i + eFi :                                        (20)
Here eFi is i.i.d. normal noise with zero mean, and V F  E [(eF )2] is the variance of the
error in the fundamental measure of a randomly selected security.
    Suppose that the econometrician randomly draws a security, observes the fundamental-
scaled price variable Fi Pi, and uses this to predict the future return. We let variables
with i subscripts omitted denote random variables whose realizations include a stage in
which a security is randomly selected (i.e., there is a random selection of security char-
acteristics). This stage determines security parameters such as  or !. Other random
variables, such as the price, return and signal variables R, P , and S , require a second
stage in which signal and price outcomes are realized.
    Security expected payo s i , i = 1; : : : N are assumed to be distributed normally
from the econometrician's perspective,
                                         N ( ; V);
                                                =
                                                                                       (21)
        =
where  is the cross-sectional expectation of the unconditional expected values, and V
is the variance of .
    We denote the moments of the factor loading distribution k (the loading of a ran-
domly selected security on factor k) by E [ k ]; V k ; of M (the beta of a randomly selected
security with the adjusted market price change) by E [ M ]; V M ; of ! (the excess sen-
sitivity of price to a unit increase in the signal about idiosyncratic risk for a randomly
selected security) by E [!]; V ! ; of !kf (the excess sensitivity of prices to a unit increase
in the signal about factor k) by E [!f ]; V f! (moments assumed to be independent of k);
of Skf (the normalized signal about factor k) by VkSf ; and of S  (the normalized signal
about idiosyncratic risk for a randomly selected security i) by V S (by our earlier as-
sumptions, the last two random variables have means of zero). Further, we assume that
the choice of rm is independent of the signal realization, so that signal realizations are
uncorrelated with the !'s and .16
    Now, consider the linear projection of the security return R onto F P ,
                                    R = a + bF P (F P ) + e;
  16 The restriction on exogenous parameters that achieves this is that the signal realizations be uncor-
related with factor loadings and with variances of signals and noises.


                                                   18
where e is mean-zero independent noise. The slope coeÆcient value that minimizes error
variance is
                                        cov (R; F P )
                               bF P =                 :                           (22)
                                         var(F P )
Let
                                                                                   K
                                                                                 X
 covOC          E [! ] + E [(! )2 ] E [(S  )2 ]         E [! f ] + E [(! f )2 ]       E [ k2 ]E [(Skf )2 ]   (23)
                                                                                    k=1
                                                                                       K
                                                                                       X
                                                                               f! 
varOC     (1 + E [!])2 + V ! E [(S )2 ] + (1 + E [!f ])2 + V                            E [ k2 ]E [(Skf )2 ]: (24)
                                                                                      k=1

We will show that the quantities covOC and varOC are the contributions of the individ-
uals' private information to the covariance and variance respectively in equation (22).
We then have the following proposition (The proof is presented in Appendix C).
Proposition 2 The regression of the return R on the fundamental-scaled price F                                     P
yields the following coeÆcient:
                                                   var( P )
                                                                                     
                                        V M
                            = 2V M + varcovOC
                                    2
                   bF                            =            b ;                                               (25)
                                        OC + V     var(F P )  P
                        P                      F

where
                                                         M covOC
                                                    2VV M + var
                                                     2
                                         b   P                                                                 (26)
                                                                 OC

is the regression coeÆcient when the fundamental proxy is perfect ( instead of F ).
The coeÆcient is positive if:
  1. Investors are on average overcon dent, E [! ]  0 and E [! f ]  0, with at least one
     inequality strict, or
  2. Investors are rational, and not all security betas are equal, i.e., E [! ] = E [! f ] = 0,
     and V M 6= 0.
If we restrict the distribution of ! f and !  so that investors are not overcon dent about
any signal and are undercon dent about at least one signal (!kf  0, !i  0, with at least
one inequality strict), and if V M is suÆciently small, then the coeÆcient is negative.
The R2 of the regression is
                                                 var( P )
                                                           
                    RF P =
                        2   [ cov (R; F P )]2
                                              = var(F P ) R2 P :
                           var(R)var(F P )

                                                       19
Intuitively, overcon dent investors overreact to their private signals, so a high price (low
F P ) probably means too high a price, and consequently that expected risk-adjusted
returns are negative.17 Any cross-sectional variation in beta contributes further to the
tendency of high price to predict low future returns. High beta implies low current price
and a high future expected return.18
    On the other hand, if investors are on average under-con dent then a high fundamen-
tal/price ratio is associated with a low expected future return (if V ! is not too large and
if risk e ects, re ected in V M , are small). Intuitively, if investors are undercon dent
and hence underreact to their private signals, then a high price means that the price is
likely to increase still more.
    The slope coeÆcient bF P in (25) is smaller than that in (26) because Fi is a noisy
proxy for i, so that var(F P ) > var( P ); similarly, the regression R2 is also
lower. Any adjustment of the fundamental proxy F that decreases the measurement
error variance improves RF2 P . One method of doing so is to adjust fundamental ratios
relative to industry values. Accounting measures of value di er across industry for
reasons that do not re ect di erences in fundamental value. For example, di erent
businesses have di ering importance of intangible assets, which are imperfectly re ected
in accounting measures of value. This suggests that industry adjustment, by ltering
out measurement noise that is correlated for rms within an industry, can improve the
ability of fundamental measures to predict return. This is consistent with the evidence
of Cohen and Polk (1995) and of Dreman and Lufkin (1996).
    We have assumed that the public information signal is conclusive. Similar results
would apply with noisy public information arrival. Basically, a noisy public signal only
partly corrects the initial overreaction to the private signal. So high fundamental/price
still indicates undervaluation (even though the public signal on average has partly cor-
rected the market price upwards). However, as analyzed in Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998), in a setting with dynamic overcon dence overreactions can tem-
porarily continue before eventually being corrected. If we were to combine such dynamics
with our assumptions here of risk aversion and multiple risky securities, since any mis-
valuation must eventually be corrected, it is intuitively reasonable to conjecture that
  17In equation (26), varOC > 0 by its de nition in (24). If the E [!]'s are positive for all signals, then
covOC is negative, so the regression coeÆcient is positive.
  18Equation (26) shows that even with no overcon dence, there is still be a risk-based relationship
between  P and R arising from risk e ects. The V M term in the numerator and denominator re ects
cross-sectional variation in risk and risk premia. If there is no overcon dence, then E [!] and V ! are
zero for all signals, which implies covOC = 0. In standard pricing models such as the CAPM, low price
 rms are those that are discounted heavily, i.e., high beta/high return rms (see Berk (1995a)).

                                                    20
the cross-sectional relationship between fundamental/price ratios and future returns in
such a setting will still be positive.
1.4 Aggregate Fundamental-Scaled Price Variable E ects
This subsection examines the special case of a single risky security (N = 0; K = 1),
which we interpret as the aggregate stock market portfolio. The implications for the
aggregate market are obtained from the general model by deleting all i subscripts.
    The model then predicts that future aggregate market returns will be predicted by
variables of the form F=M , where F is a publicly observable non-market measure of
expected fundamental value and M is aggregate market value. Four examples are ag-
gregate dividend yield, aggregate earnings/price ratio, the aggregate book/market ratio,
and the reciprocal of market value (where the numerator F  1 is a constant). Noisy
public information may moderate, but does not eliminate this e ect. These deviations
will gradually be corrected, though this correction may be slow. Thus, the model ex-
plains the empirical nding of a dividend yield e ect, and predicts aggregate earnings
yield and book/market e ects as well. Thus, the model is consistent with the prof-
itable use of asset allocation strategies wherein arbitrageurs tilt their portfolios toward
investment toward either the riskfree asset or toward the stock market depending upon
whether variables such as the market dividend/earnings yield are high or low.

2 Risk Measures versus Fundamental-Scaled Price
  Ratios
2.1 Analytical Results
Often tests of return predictability look simultaneously at standard risk measures and
measures of mispricing. These regressions usually involve the market , and variables
such as market value, or a fundamental-scaled variable such as the book-to-market (see,
e.g., Fama and French (1992) and Jagannathan and Wang (1996)). Firm `size' or market
value (P ) is a special case of a fundamental scaled measure in which the fundamental
proxy is a constant.19
   19 P can be interpreted as either a per-share price or a total rm market value. Here we assume that 
                                                                                                          i
is proportional to the total value of the rm. However, the analysis is equally valid on a per-share basis,
and is therefore consistent with the empirical evidence that, cross-sectionally, share price is negatively
correlated with future returns. A fuller analysis of this topic would include the number of shares relative
to total rm value as a source of cross-sectional noise, so that rm value versus share price could have

                                                    21
    In our setting, if the expected fundamental value is measured with noise, as in Section
1.3.2, the fundamental-scaled variable is an imperfect proxy for the private signal, and
both size (P ) and a fundamental-scaled variable (Fi Pi), in addition to the risk measure
 , predicts future returns. To see this, consider the linear projection of R onto M , F P
and P :
                           R = a + by    M   + byF P (F P ) + byP P + e:              (27)
The optimal coeÆcients come from the standard matrix equation (see Appendix C).
Proposition 3 The regression of the return       R on M , the price-scaled fundamental
P    F , and the price P yields the following set of coeÆcients:
                                                                  
                                          varOC + covOC + K1
                                 by=                                                  (28)
                                               varOC + K1
                                                             
                              y            V        covOC
                             bF P =                                                   (29)
                                       V + V F varOC + K1
                                                           
                                 y       VF         covOC
                                bP =                                                  (30)
                                     V + V F varOC + K1
where
                                              VV F
                                           K1 
                                            V + V F
is half the harmonic mean of V and V F , and K1 = 0 if either V F = 0 or V = 0. Under
overcon dence, the coeÆcient on the fundamental/price ratio is positive and on the price
is negative.
This proposition provides a theoretical motivation for the use of book/market ratios in
the well-known regressions (and cross-classi cations) of Fama and French (1992) and
Jagannathan and Wang (1996).
    If individuals are on average overcon dent, E [!f ] > 0, then equation (23) shows that
covOC is negative. Also, provided the fundamental measure is not perfect (i.e., V F > 0),
these equations show that: (1) the regression coeÆcient on is positive but less than
  (the CAPM `market price of risk'); (2) the coeÆcient on size (P ) is negative; and (3)
the coeÆcient on a F P variable (such as book/market) is positive. These results are
thus consistent with the evidence of Fama and French (1992).
    If the fundamental proxy is a noiseless indicator of unconditional expected returns,
V = 0, then the coeÆcient on P is zero, because F P captures mispricing perfectly
  F

di erent degrees of predictive power for future returns.

                                                  22
whereas P re ects not just mispricing but scale variability. Alternatively, if there is no
variability in fundamental values across rms (if V = 0), then Pi is a perfect proxy for
the signal si, and the fundamental-scaled price variable has no additional explanatory
power for future returns. Further, if a multiple regression is run with any number of
fundamental-scaled price variables, such as book/market and price/earnings ratios, and
if the errors of the di erent fundamental proxies are imperfectly correlated, so that each
proxy adds some extra information about i, the coeÆcient on each variable is non-zero.
If the errors are independent, then the coeÆcient on price is negative and the coeÆcient
on each regressor that contains price inversely (such as book/market) is positive.
    As the variability in unconditional expected cash ows across securities becomes
large, V ! 1, byP ! 0 and byF P does not. Thus, if the variance of expected cash ows
across securities is large relative to the noise in the fundamental proxy, the size variable is
dominated by the fundamental/price variable in the multiple regression. More broadly,
when V is large, the coeÆcient on size will be less signi cant than the coeÆcient on
a fundamental/price variable such as book market. Intuitively, if securities have very
di erent expected cash ows (as is surely the case), it becomes very important to nd
a proxy to lter out scale variation in order to locate mispricing e ects. Two recent
studies nd that in a multivariate regression or cross-classi cation, book/market is more
signi cant than size (Fama and French (1992), Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam
(1998)); see also Davis, Fama, and French (2000).
    The model implies that future returns should be related to market-value, but not
to non-price measures of size. Non-price measures of size such as number of employees
or book-value are unrelated to the error in the informed's signal ei , and are therefore
also unrelated to the future return on the security. This is consistent with the empirical
  ndings of Berk (1995b).
    The analysis suggests that the relationship between book/market and future returns
is a valid one rather than an ex post relationship arising from data-snooping. However,
there is no implication that there exists any meaningful book/market factor, nor that
sensitivities with respect to a factor constructed from book/market portfolios can be used
to price assets. In this regard, our analysis is consistent with the evidence of Daniel and
Titman (1997) that the book-market e ect is associated with the book/market char-
acteristic, not an underlying factor (distinct from the market return). Speci cally, our
analysis suggests that book/market captures a combination of market risk and mispric-
ing.20
  20   To see this, consider the special case in which there is just a single factor (essentially the market) and

                                                        23
Corollary 2   If the fundamental measure is noiseless, V F = 0, if the expected tendency
to overreact approaches in nity, E [! ]; E [! f ] ! 1, and variability in overcon dence
(as re ected in V ! and V f! ) remains nite then the regression coeÆcient on , by in
Proposition 3 approaches zero, whereas the coeÆcient on the fundamental-scaled price
approaches unity.

The limiting case of in nite tendency to overreact occurs with C constant and R ! 0.
In other words, signals become close to pure noise and investors drastically underestimate
this noise.21 Alternatively, C could approach in nity, but this would lead to in nitely
volatile prices. In the limit trading strategies can be viewed as noise trading, because
nontrivial price revisions are triggered by very little information. As this occurs, the
coeÆcient on approaches zero, and the coeÆcient on F P approaches 1. Intuitively,
if investors push prices away from fundamentals based on pure noise alone, then F P
is equal to the sum of (1) the future price change due to the correction of the mispricing,
and (2) the future price change due to risk. Since F P is a proxy for both terms, beta
adds no information, and its coeÆcient is therefore zero.
     With regard to the last point, if investors' private signals are very noisy, the statistical
relationship between fundamental/price ratios and expected return will be strong, and
the relation between and expected return will be weak. Thus, the theory is consistent
with the di ering ndings of several studies regarding the existence of a cross-sectional
relation between return and after controlling for book-to-market or for market-value
(see Appendix B).
     Intuitively, a high fundamental/price ratio (low value of market price relative to
unconditional expected terminal cash ow) could arise from adverse private information,
or from high risk. In either case, price should rise (because overreaction is reversed, or
because of a risk premium), but in general by di erent amounts. If price is low because
of a risk premium, on average it should rise back to the unconditional expected terminal
value. But if price is low because of adverse information, then the conditional expected
value is below the unconditional expected value. A risk measure such as in general
helps disentangle these two cases, so it has incremental explanatory power.
in which there is no information about the factor, only about idiosyncratic security return components.
Clearly there is no book/market factor as distinct from the market factor. Nevertheless, a price-scaled
fundamental (such as book/market) predicts future returns, and may dominate beta.
  21 As signals become close to pure noise, the rational reaction to a signal becomes close to zero. By
equations (8) and (9), if the consensus signal precision approaches zero at the rate of the square root of
the rational precision, price volatility is asympotically proportional to 1 (i.e., i.e., it approaches neither
zero nor in nity.

                                                     24
    However, when overcon dent individuals trade based on pure noise (V R ! 1), the
conditional expected value of  is equal to the unconditional value. Thus, risk measures
such as provide no incremental explanatory power for future returns. In contrast,
fundamental/price does have explanatory power when is held constant, because the
fundamental/price ratio re ects both the risk premium and the mispricing.
    Analogous to the discussion in Subsection 1.4, it is sometimes asserted that almost
any model with valuation errors would imply that high fundamental/price to predict
high returns. However, our analysis shows that this is not the case. The conclusion
would reverse in settings where investors underreacted to private information (such as an
undercon dence setting). In such a setting, a low fundamental/price ratio could re ect
favorable private information, so that in the long run market price needs to rise still
further. Thus, the direction of the fundamental/price e ect is not a general implication
of irrationality, but an implication of a speci c type of bias (overcon dence).

3 Variations in Con dence: Empirical Implications
There is evidence that individuals tend to be more overcon dent in settings where feed-
back on their information or decisions is slow or inconclusive than where the feedback
is clear and rapid (Einhorn (1980)). Thus, mispricing should be stronger for businesses
which require more judgment to evaluate, and where the feedback on the quality of this
judgment is ambiguous in the short run. This line of reasoning suggests that funda-
mental/price e ects should be stronger for businesses that are diÆcult to value, as with
high-tech industries (as measured by high R&D expenditures) or industries (e.g. service
industries) with high intangible assets.22 Subsequent to our developing this prediction,
Chan, Lakonishok, and Sougiannis (1999) investigated this question, and have reported
evidence consistent with this empirical implication of the model.23
    A further implication of our approach is based on the notion that market overcon -
dence can vary over time. To develop this implication, we begin by stating the following
  22 A low book/market ratio is itself an indicator of high intangible assets, but can also be low for
other reasons such as a risk premium or market misvaluation. Thus, conditioning on other intangible
measures provides a test of how intangible measures a ect the misvaluation-induced relation between
fundamental-price ratios and future returns.
  23 Their Table 3 sorts rms into ve groups based on R&D expenditures relative to sales. They then
sort each of these portfolios into high and low sales/market rms. Sales/market is a fundamental/price
variable here. The average return di erential between the high and low sales/market rms for the low
R&D rms was 3.54% per year over the three post-formation years. For the high R&D rms, this
di erential was 10.17% per year. This evidence indicates that the fundamental/price ratio e ect is far
higher for the high R&D rms then for the low R&D rms.

                                                 25
corollary (proved in Appendix C).24
Corollary 3    If the conditions in Corollary 2 are satis ed, then as the average level of
con dence (E [! ] and E [! f ]) increases
(1) the cross-sectional variance in fundamental/price ratios increases without bound, and
(2) the R2 of the regression coeÆcient of returns on fundamental/price ratios approaches
1.
Treating shifts in con dence as exogenous, periods of high overcon dence tend to be
associated with extreme values for aggregate stock market fundamental/price ratios
(dividend yield, book/market, and so on). Corollary 3 suggests that such periods of
high con dence (very high or very low fundamental/price ratios) should be associated
with greater cross-sectional dispersion in both fundamental/price ratios and in return,
and with a closer relation between the two.

4 Market Volume and Future Volatility
We now examine the relationship between the market's current trading volume and its
future return volatility. Consider the special case of model in which N = 0; K = 1. We
call this single security the market portfolio; it has no idiosyncratic risk. Let
                                           R = s+
be the theoretical regression of the future (date 1-2) market return on the signal about
the market at date 1. Under overcon dence, < 0, so is an index of overcon dence.
   To calculate , use (5) (but with mean  restored), giving the market's price as
                                                     A
                             P =  + s                          ;
                                               + (1 ) R +  C
where
                                       (1   ) R +  C
                                   + (1 ) R +  C :
   The signal is s =  + f + e. For convenience and without e ect on the results, we set
the market's sensitivity to the factor to be one, so R =  + f P , and the regression
   We derive this corollary for the conditions under which Corollary 2 holds, but the intuition seems
  24
more general.


                                                 26
coeÆcient is
                           = cov   (R; s)
                                 var(s)
                           = covvar(f s; s)
                                     (f + e)
                           = (1 +  R )[1+( R +() C  R )] :
                                             R     C



    Assume that all individuals begin with identical endowments. We refer to the over-
con dent/informed as those who observe the signal s. Let the signed turnover be de ned
as twice the di erence between the total position of the overcon dent/informed traders
and their endowment  :
                            Signed Turnover = 2(xC  ):
By (4),
2(xC  ) = 2A ( +  C )(C P )
                           C                                                
            2                s    (1   ) R +  C         A
          = A ( +  )  +  C  + (1 ) R +  C s +  + (1 ) R +  C 
                       C


          = A2 1   ( +  R ) s 1   ( +  R ) 
          = (s + A );                                                  (31)
where
                               
                                      2(1 )( +  R ) :
                                           A
The e ect we wish to focus on is signal-induced volume. Because overcon dence causes
underestimation of risk, the overcon dent/informed trade with the arbitrageurs in the
mistaken belief that this improves risk-sharing. This e ect is nonstochastic. We therefore
deduct from turnover the risk-shifting induced component A on the RHS of (31), the
aggregate pure risk-shifting position the overcon dent informed would have taken if
s = 0. This gives the signal-induced residual turnover,
                                2(xC  ) A = s:
We de ne the absolute signal-induced turnover, or volume, as
                                        X  jsj:

                                           27
Then by symmetry,
                                                     A
                                 E [RjX ] =                       ;
                                               + (1 ) R +  C
which is independent of X and the same as the unconditional expected return. Intu-
itively, each value of X corresponds to two equiprobable signal values, one of which is
associated with high future return and the other with low.
    Conditional return volatility is
                                 var(RjX ) = E [R2jX ]
                                           = E [( s + )2jX ]
                                              2
                                           =  X 2 + 2 ():
Thus, conditional volatility increases quadratically in absolute turnover X .
Proposition 4         1. The market's future volatility is an increasing quadratic function
       of its current volume.
   2. A greater mass of overcon dent/informed individuals uniformly increases the ab-
      solute slope of this relationship.
   3. A strong relation between volatility and volume is associated with a strong relation
      between the market fundamental/price ratio and future returns.
    Part 2 follows because the greater is the mass of the overcon dent/informed, the
greater is the ratio =. Thus the greater the mass of overcon dent agents, the stronger
is the convex relationship between future volatility and current volume.25
    Part 3 follows from Proposition 2 applied to the special case of a time-series regression
for a single security whose with the market is know with certainty (= 1), and for which
overcon dence is a constant. This eliminates the V M terms in equation (26), and sets
the K = 1, !  0, V ! = 0, E [!f ] = ! (a constant), E [!2] = !2, and V f! = 0
in equations (23) and (24). It follows from the proposition that the coeÆcient of the
fundamental price ratio is increasing in !. From the de nition of ! (see equation (12),
 (see equation (8)) and  A (see equation (6)), this is increasing in , the fraction of
informed/overcon dent investors. Thus, Part 3 obtains. Treating shifts in con dence
  25 Our analysis focuses on volume arising from traders receiving information and taking positions
based on this information. In a dynamic setting, it would be important to take into account volume
generated by unwinding of trades. Intuitively, such volume will be unrelated to future volatility, because
it is not indicative of any current market price overreaction. This will make volume a noisier predictor
of future volatility, but will not reverse the e ect identi ed here.

                                                   28
as exogenous, this suggests during time periods where a stronger convex relationship
between volatility and volume obtains, the e ect of fundamental/price ratios on price is
particularly strong.
    Most past empirical studies of volume and volatility focus on relatively shorter hori-
zons of days or weeks. Our results in this section come from corrections of mispricings.
Empirical evidence such as fundamental-scaled price variable e ects and return rever-
sals suggest that these e ects are important at horizons of several years. Thus, the
volatility and volume e ects that we describe here are predicted to occur at these longer
horizons.26
    Reasoning very similar to the above demonstrates that Proposition 4 also extends to
the relation between securities' idiosyncratic volume and their idiosyncratic volatility.
This relationship holds even when the number of securities becomes large. However,
with many securities, the fraction of idiosyncratically informed traders per security be-
comes very small, so that information-induced volatility becomes extremely small. The
result for individual securities is therefore not very interesting in our setting. However,
a broader interpretation of our approach is that market imperfections limit arbitrage
of idiosyncractic mispricing (see the discussion near the end of Section 5 regarding this
arbitrage strategy). This suggests that there could be a substantial fraction of idiosyn-
cratically informed investors who substantially in uence price. In such a broader setting
we conjecture that a similar result will apply relating idiosyncratic volume to idiosyn-
cratic volatility for individual securities.

5 Pro tability of Trading, Mispricing, and Diversi-
   ed Arbitrage Strategies
This section analyzes the pro tability of trading for the overcon dent informed, and
the extent to which arbitrageurs can eliminate mispricing through diversi ed trading
   26 Numerous theoretical papers have analyzed determinants of volume and volatility. However, most
focus on a contemporaneous relation between the two. Odean (1998) and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) theoretically examined the relation of overcon dence to volatility and/or vol-
ume. However, in Odean's single-period setting volatility is non-stochastic; and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998) did not focus on volume. In contrast, here we examine how current volume
is correlated with stochastic shifts in subsequent long-horizon volatility. Empirical researchers have
identi ed a contemporaneous volume/volatility relation (see, e.g., Daigler and Wiley (1999)). We are
not aware of any empirical work relating variations in volume to subsequent volatility at a long horizon.



                                                   29
strategies.27 ;28 To allow for diversi ed trading strategies, we analyze what occurs in the
limit as the number of available securities becomes large. An argument sometimes put
forth in favor of eÆcient markets is that if a large number of securities were mispriced,
a portfolio that is long on underpriced stocks and short on overpriced stocks would
diversify risk and thus achieve near-in nite Sharpe ratios. This would imply near-in nite
volume of trade and a nearly in nite ow of wealth from imperfectly rational traders to
arbitrageurs. Thus, it is argued that such mispricing should not exist in equilibrium.
    This conclusion does not follow in our setting. Based on a reasonable speci cation
of information arrival, we show that the mispricing of most residuals approaches zero,
but factor mispricing does not. Thus, although all securities are mispriced, and trading
against mispricing is pro table, there are no riskfree arbitrage opportunities, and volume
of trade remains nite. Indeed, for the reasons analyzed by De Long,Shleifer, Summers,
and Waldman (1990a, 1991) (DSSW), the overcon dent informed in our setting may
make as much or greater expected pro ts than the arbitrageurs. Intuitively, if people
believe they have information about a `new economy' factor (for example), they may
misprice an entire industry that loads upon this factor. Playing an arbitrage game based
on such a mispriced factor could be pro table, but is certainly risky.
    Using the equivalent setting presented in Subsection 1.1.4, we analyze on a security-
by-security basis how much an arbitrageur gains as a result of the overcon dence of
others in relation to the relative numbers of arbitrageurs versus informed overcon dent
traders. We then examine overall portfolio pro tability, and examine how pro tability
changes as the number of available securities becomes large.
    We compare the expected pro t of an individual who is overcon dent about every
security to that of an arbitrageur whose beliefs about all securities are rational. The
expressions derived generalize easily to give the expected return of an individual who
receives (and is overcon dent about) private information on only a subset of securities.
The true expected returns (based on rational beliefs) of an investor's optimal portfolios
can be derived from (4) by substituting for expected returns from equation (11), taking
  27 Several previous papers have argued that there are limits to the degree that arbitrage reduces
market ineÆciencies, and that imperfectly rational or overcon dent traders can earn higher expected
pro ts than fully rational traders and therefore can be in uential in the long run; see, e.g., De Long,
Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990a), Kyle and Wang (1997), and Shleifer and Vishny (1997).
Also, even if overcon dent traders make less money, it may also be the case that those traders who
make the most money become more overcon dent (see Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998)
and Gervais and Odean (1999)).
  28 As described earlier, these arbitrageurs can be viewed either as fully rational uninformed traders,
fully rational informed traders, or as overcon dent uninformed traders, without a ecting the analysis.

                                                  30
expectations over si, and simplifying:
                                         +K                              
        E [ ] =
                     NX
                      +K
                                     1
                            [ Ri ] = A
                                       NX
                                             i Ci +
                                                      (i + iR )
             RpR           xRi E R
                                                     (i + iA )2 (Ai)                  (32)
         R                                    2                         2

                   i=1                  i=1
                                         +K                                           
        E [Rp ] =
                  NX+K
                       xi E [Ri ] =
                                     1 NX
                                               i (1 i )Ci +
                                                                  (i + iC )
                                                                          A )2 (Ai ) ; (33)
         R C            C R                                                          2

                   i=1
                                     A  i=1
                                                                 ( i +  i

where
                                 Ci 
                                            (iC iR )2i2 :                           (34)
                                      iR (i + iR )(i + iA )2
The rst term in the brackets in equations (32) and (33) is the expected return gain
(or loss) that results from the trading on the overcon dence-induced mispricing. The
population-weighted sum of the mispricing terms (with weights i and 1 i) is zero,
i.e., the mispricing results in a wealth transfer from the overcon dent/informed to the
arbitrageurs.
     The second term in the brackets above is larger for the overcon dent/informed than
for the arbitrageurs (because iC > iR ). Since an overcon dent informed individual
underestimates risk, he holds a larger position in riskier assets than does an arbitrageur,
and thereby captures a greater risk premium (the right-hand-side term in brackets); see
DSSW. Thus, whether the overcon dent make more or less money than would a rational
`arbitrageur' depends on a balance of e ects. There is no presumption that rational
traders will drive out overcon dent ones.
     In order to analyze mispricing a limiting economy with many securities, we need to be
more speci c about how many signals of di erent kinds individuals obtain. We assume
  rst that each individual receives a nite number of signals about rm-speci c payo s.
Implicitly this re ects the notion that it is costly to obtain information about a very
large number of rms. Second, each individual receives at least one factor signal, with
no factor shunned by all individuals. This re ects in a simple way the intuitive notion
that even if individuals were to study only individual rms, since the aggregate market
is the sum of its constituent rms, such study provides information about the xed set
of market factors. Third, we assume that who observes what factor is independent of
the number of securities. Assumptions 2 and 3 imply that as the number of securities
N grows, a xed positive fraction of the population continues to receive a signal about
any given factor. (Assumption 3 is not important for the result, but allows simple
presentation.)
                                             31
    Mathematically, the assumption that each individual observes only a nite number
of signals implies that for all but a nite number of the N securities, the fraction of
individuals who are informed about the residual component is O(1=N ) (i.e., the fraction
approaches zero proportional to 1=N ). This is consistent with a nite number of rms
receiving a great deal of attention; for example, even if there are many internet stocks,
a few like Amazon.com or Yahoo may garner attention from a substantial portion of
the public. In contrast, the assumption that everyone observes a factor signal (and no
factor is shunned) in a xed observation structure implies that as N varies the fraction
of individuals informed about any given factor is a positive constant.
    Now, equation (10) can be rewritten as:
                                 C                                                  
                                        iR           i                        A
                E [Ri ] = i
                  R                 i
                                                                   si +                      i
                                    i + iR        i + iA                  i + iA
giving the expected return for each portfolio. The rst term is the extra return from
mispricing, and is proportional to i. When the fraction of overcon dent informed
investors is small, the rational investors compete to drive away almost all mispricing.
This removes the component of return deriving from correction of mispricing (the term
multiplied by si). When the number of securities N is large, and since for residuals,
i = O(1=N ), the mispricing term tends to zero at the rate 1=N . In contrast, factor
mispricing in not arbitraged away; for factors, fi = O(1), i.e., fi does not approach
zero as N becomes large.
    Consider how much an arbitrageur gains as a result of mispricing. Rewriting equation
(32) in terms of factors and residuals gives
           E R [RpR ] =
                        1X K
                              2i Ci +
                                       1 NX+K
                                                2i Ci +
                                                         1 NX+K
                                                                  (i + iR ) (A )2:     (35)
                       A i=1           A i=K +1          A i=1+1 (i + iA )2 i
The last term is the risk premium. The second term is the portfolio return gain for the
arbitrageur resulting from mispricing of residuals, and is proportional to (i)2 . Since
i = O(1=N ), and there are N residuals, this term approaches zero at the rate 1=N (i.e.,
it is O(1=N )) so long as the cross-sectional variation in Ci is not too large (e.g., the Ci's
are bounded above by a nite number):
                                                                  
                                1   NX
                                     +K
                                           ( )
                                           i 2 Ci   = O N1 :
                                A i=K +1
The arbitrageur's portfolio variance remains above zero, even in the limit as N ! 1,
so the Sharpe ratios of the arbitrageurs' portfolios do not explode, even for large N .
                                                 32
   Despite disagreement, volume of trade in each security remains nite. Under the
assumption of Section 4 that the date 0 endowments of all agents are identical (and
therefore equal to i), an arbitrageur's expected date 1 trade in security i is
                                                         C         
                                                                iR
                             E[ xRi     i ] = i           i
                                                                     :
                                                            i + iA i
This is negative because, on average, an overcon dent individual underestimates the risk
of a security he has information about, and therefore tends to purchase it.
    Beyond this non-stochastic risk-sharing component of volume is the volume induced
by the value of the signal realization. This extent of this stochastic volume is measured
by the variability of the trade. The variance of the trade is obtained by substituting
equations (8) and (11) into equation (4), and taking expectations over si:
                                                                        2            
                                            i + iR
              var( xRi   i ) = i i
                                  2
                                               iR
                                                             iR iC
                                                            A(i + iA )
                                                                                = O N12
for residual (but not factor) portfolios. In the limit, the variability of the arbitrageur's
trade in each residual portfolio approaches zero. So does the risk-shifting component of
volume mentioned earlier. It follows that expected per-capita volume E (jxRi ij) also
approaches zero for residual portfolios. Intuitively, as the number of securities grows
large, if each individual only receives information about a nite number of securities,
residual mispricing becomes very small so arbitrageurs take vanishingly small bets on
each residual. Thus, even with many securities the volume of trade based on residual
mispricing remains bounded. We summarize this analysis as follows.
Proposition 5 Suppose that Ci as de       ned in (34) is bounded above, that each individual
receives a nite number of signals about rm-speci c payo s, that each individual receives
at least one factor signal with no factor shunned by all individuals, and that who observes
what factor is independent of the number of securities. Then as the number of securities
N grows large:
  1. The idiosyncratic mispricing of all but a nite number of residuals approaches zero.
  2. The systematic mispricing of each of the K factors is bounded above zero
  3. Per capita volume in every residual approaches zero.
    Going beyond the formal model, transaction costs of trading could limit arbitrage
activity enough to allow substantial idiosyncratic mispricings to persist. For example,
                                                   33
if a set of residuals are underpriced, an arbitrageur must buy the underpriced securities
and short the correct amount of each of the relevant factor portfolios, each of which is
constructed from many securities. In a dynamic world with evolving factor sensitivities,
the weights on securities within each portfolios and the weights placed upon each of these
portfolios would have to be readjusted each period. Taking into account the cognitive
costs of identifying mispriced securities and of calculating optimal arbitrage strategies
would widen the bounds for possible mispricing. Thus, the conclusion that idiosyncratic
mispricing vanishes may be sensitive to our assumptions of perfect markets and near-
perfect rationality. In contrast, the conclusion that factor mispricing persists is robust.

6 Conclusion
This paper o ers a multisecurity theory of asset pricing based on investor risk aversion
and overcon dence. In the model covariance risk and mispricing jointly determine the
cross-section of expected security returns. Several insights derive from this approach:
    Generally, beta and price-related misvaluation measures jointly predict future re-
     turns. However, when investors are overcon dent about pure noise and the fun-
     damental measure is perfect, fundamental/price ratios completely dominate beta{
     even though covariance risk is priced. These results are consistent with the joint
     e ects found in several empirical studies.
    Existing evidence on the psychology of the individual is consistent with capital
     market evidence of predictability of returns based on size and fundamental/price
     ratios. The pervasive psychological bias of overcon dence implies stock market
     overreaction and correction. This leads to a positive fundamental/price e ect and
     a negative size e ect. Pure underreaction, as would be implied by undercon dence,
     would reverse the directions of these e ects, inconsistent with the evidence.
    The analysis provides a conceptual basis for choosing between alternative measures
     of mispricing as predictors of future returns. Normalizing price by a fundamental
     measure such as book value helps lter out variations in market value that arises
     from di erences in scale rather than mispricing (book-to-market versus rm size).
     However, a fundamental measure such as book value measures scale (unconditional
     expected payo s) with error, and thereby introduces its own noise. Adjusting a
     mispricing measure by examining deviations from industry levels can lter out

                                            34
     industry-related noise in the fundamental measure, at the cost of ltering out some
     industry-level mispricing as well. The theory therefore o ers predictions about the
     relative predictive power of rm size (market value), fundamental-scaled variables
     such as book/market or p/e, variables based on deviations from industry averages,
     and variables that use constructed accounting measures of fundamentals.
    The theory provides additional empirical implications regarding the strength of
     fundamental/price e ects in stocks that are diÆcult to value, about the cross-
     sectional dispersion and predictive power of fundamental/price ratios as a function
     of aggregate levels of fundamental/price ratios, and about the relation of volume to
     subsequent returns. One of these implications has received some ex post validation
     (see Section 3), but most remain to be tested.
    When there are many securities, owing to the activities of `risk arbitrageurs', mis-
     valuations of most idiosyncratic components of security payo s approach zero. In
     contrast, misvaluation of industry or market-wide factors persists. In our model
     size and value funds can be built to exploit factor mispricing. Such funds do not
     provide arbitrage pro ts because they load on systematic risk factors.
    It is likely that the relative numbers of overcon dent individuals and fully rational
`arbitrageurs' varies with stock characteristics such as liquidity and rm size. Explicit
modeling of market imperfections, such as xed setup costs of trading in a given security,
may o er further implications for the cross-section of expected security returns.
    The e ects of risk and mispricing in our model separate additively into a `beta' term
and a set of `mispricing' terms, where factor mispricing is inherited by securities accord-
ing to their factor sensitivities. The challenge for implementing the model empirically
is to identify good proxies for security and/or factor mispricing. Our main focus has
been on fundamental/price ratios as possible proxies for market mispricing. However,
fundamentals such as dividends, earnings and book value are very crude proxies for
unconditional expected value. An accounting index in which some of the noise is re-
moved should be a better forecaster of future returns. Abarbanell and Bushee (1999)
and Frankel and Lee (1996) show that such an approach can be e ective.
    Another possible proxy for market misvaluation could be publicly disclosed insider
trading; Lakonishok and Lee (1998) provide evidence that imitation of insider trades
for up to about two years after disclosure is a pro table strategy even after controlling
for size and book/market. Another set of possible proxies for market misvaluation

                                            35
involve corporate actions such as aggregate new-issue versus repurchase activity. Indeed,
Loughran and Ritter (1995) explicitly propose that managers time new issues in order
to exploit market misvaluation.
    It would be interesting to extend our approach to address the issues of market seg-
mentation and closed-end fund discounts, in the spirit of De Long, Shleifer, Summers,
and Waldmann (1990a), and Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991)). In the pure noise ap-
proach, discounts re ect mispricing and therefore forecast future stock returns. In our
approach, since the mispricing arises from overreaction to genuine information, changes
in fund discounts should predict not just future stock performance, but also future fun-
damentals such as accounting performance. Swaminathan (1996) nds such predictive
power for future fundamentals, which he interprets as tending to support a rational risk
premium hypothesis as opposed to a noise/sentiment approach. His evidence at lags
of greater than one year is surprising, because high discounts predict both low future
accounting pro ts and high future stock returns. This evidence is consistent with an
overcon dence approach, wherein genuine adverse information is associated with large
discounts and low future pro tability, yet high future stock returns as the market corrects
its overreaction.
    An important question is whether the misvaluation e ects identi ed in our model
should persist in the long run. We mentioned models in which biased learning can cause
traders, based on experience, to become more overcon dent instead of converging toward
rationality. In our model (see Section 5), the overcon dent can make greater expected
pro ts than rational traders, a possibility demonstrated in several papers cited earlier.
    Stepping beyond the model, suppose initially arbitrageurs are not sure whether there
are overcon dent traders in the market, and that some sort of noise prevents an arbi-
trageur from inferring instantly and perfectly the information of overcon dent traders.
Over time, by statistical analysis of the history of fundamentals and prices, arbitrageurs
will learn that other players were in fact overcon dent. This encourages more aggres-
sive contrarian trading strategies. (One might interpret these arbitrageurs as `quants'.)
Thus, one interpretation of the high predictability of stock returns over the last several
decades is that some investors are overcon dent, and this was not fully recognized by
other investors who could have exploited this. This interpretation suggests that as arbi-
trageurs' expectations become more accurate, anomalous predictability of returns should
diminish but not vanish. However, arbitrageurs themselves could be overcon dent about
their abilities to identify statistical patterns or be too attached to the patterns they have
identi ed. If so, then mispricing e ects could uctuate dynamically over time.

                                             36
                                                  Appendices
        A A Guide to the Model Notation
 Symbol De Pnition                                                          Description
      i           i + k        ik fk + i     Security i payo at date 2; price at date 2
     i            E  [ i ]                  Expected payo based on all information at date 1,  2 fC; Rg
     Pi                                          Date 1 Security Price
     Ri             i Pi                       date 1-2 price change
      i                                         Fundamental value, or expected security i payo based on all info
                                                 Cross-sectional mean and variance of i .
    =
     ; V
   Vkf ; Vi       = E [(fk ) ]; E [(i ) ]
                                  2          2   factor k/residual i variance
      A                                          Investor coeÆcient of absolute risk aversion
     xi                                         Number of shares of portfolio i held by informed (overC on dent) agent
                                                 or uninformed (Rational) agent,  2 fC; Rg.
       i                                        Fraction of population informed about portfolio i
       i                                        Per-capital endowment of portfolio i, or market weight of i
       i0         seePeqn. (15)                 Adjusted per-capital market weight of portfolio i
     RM             i i0 (j Pj )              Adjusted Market price change
    si; sfk       = i + ei ; fk + efk         factor/residual signal received by informed at date 1,
  Vi; Vkf                           
                   = E [(ei ) ]; E [(ek ) ]  2 fC; Rg assessment of residual or factor signal error variance
                                  2         f 2

      Fi           = i h+ eFi i               Fundamental measure { a noisy proxy for i
     VF            = E eF           2
                                                 Variance of the fundamental measure of a randomly selected security
       i          = 1=Vi                        The prior precision of factor or residual i
      i          = 1=Vi                       I 's overC on dent or true (Rational) assessment of i'th signal's precision
      iA           i i + (1 i )i Consensus assessment of precision of i'th signal
                            C                  R
       i          = iA =(i + iA )            Weight placed by the market on signal i
      i          = i =(i + i )            Weight placed by OverC on dent I or ARbitrageur on signal i
       si                                       ( 2 ff; g) - signal about factor or residual i
       Si           Ri si                      Normalized signal i
       !i           (Ci Ri )=Ri              Informed's relative overcon dence for signal i
                    Avar (RM )C                 CoeÆcient of absolute risk aversion times the market variance
       iM          = covvar((iR;RMM) )          price-change beta of rm i with respect to the adjusted market
 E [ k ]; V    k                                 The rst and second moments of the loading of a randomly selected
                                                 security on factor k
E [ M ]; V M                                     Moments of the adjusted market beta of a randomly selected security
E [! ]; V !                                    Moments of the excess sensitivity to residual variance ( 2 ff; g).
    ViS                                         second moment of the normalized factor/residual signal ( 2 ff; g)
   covOC           eqn (23), page 19             Covariance between R and P  attributable to I s overcon dence in
                                                 their private signals
    varOC          eqn (24), page 19             Variance of P  that can be attributed to signals received by I s
     b P         eqn (22), page 19             CoeÆcient in linear projection of R on  P
     bF P          eqn (25)                      CoeÆcient in linear projection of R on F P
by ; byP F ; byP   eq. (28)-(30), p. 22 CoeÆcients on M , F P , and P in linear projection of R on M , F P
                                                 and P
       ,                                        CoeÆcient and error term in projection of R on s
                        (1 ) R + C
                    +(1       ) R + C     CoeÆcient on s in the equilibrium formula for price P
                         2(1 )( + R )
                                 A            CoeÆcient in formula for signed turnover in terms of s in (31)
      X                                          Volume (absolute signal induced turnover)

                                                                37
B The Literature on Securities Price Patterns
A positive univariate relation of beta with expected returns is found in some studies and
not others, depending on the country and the time period. Empirically, an incremental
e ect of beta after controlling for market value or fundamental/price ratios is found in
some studies but not others.
    Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972) and Fama and MacBeth (1973) provide evidence
of a signi cant positive univariate relation between security betas and expected returns.
Both studies nd signi cant time variation in this e ect. In a more recent sample Fama
and French (1992) also nd a positive but insigni cant unconditional relation between
return and market beta. Internationally, Rouwenhorst (1999) nds no signi cant uncon-
ditional relation between average return and beta, relative to a local market index, on
common stocks from 20 emerging markets. Heston, Rouwenhorst, and Wessels (1999)
  nd some evidence of an unconditional univariate relation between market beta and
future returns across stocks in 12 European countries.
    On the incremental importance of conventional risk measures versus fundamental-
scaled price variables: Fama and French (1992) nd that size and book/market predict
future returns, and that when rms are sorted simultaneously by and size, or by
and book/market, has no power to explain cross-sectional return di erences. However,
in contrast to the Fama and French (1992) results, Jagannathan and Wang (1996) nd
that the incremental e ect of beta on future returns is signi cant when human capital is
included in the de nition of the market, and conditional rather than unconditional beta's
are calculated. Knez and Ready (1997) present evidence that market is priced after
controlling for size if robust test statistics are used. Heston, Rouwenhorst, and Wessels
(1999) nd that size and international market beta are both positively associated with
future returns in 12 European countries.
    There is strong evidence from numerous studies that rm size as measured by market
value predict future returns. This predictive power vanishes when size is measured by
book value or other non-market measures (see Berk (1995b)).
    Fama and French (1993) provide evidence that a three-factor model explains the
average returns of stocks sorted on market equity and book/market ratio, which they
interpret as a model of equilibrium risk premia. However, Daniel and Titman (1997)
argue that the Fama and French (1993) results are also consistent with a `characteristics'
model, and present evidence that, after controlling for the size and book/market ratios,
returns are not related to loadings on the Fama and French (1993) factors. Jagannathan,

                                           38
Kubota, and Takehara (1998) nd some evidence that, in Japan, both factor loadings
and characteristics determine future returns.
    Furthermore, MacKinlay (1995) nds that high Sharpe-ratios (relative to the market)
can apparently be achieved with strategies based on fundamental-scaled price variables.
As Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) point out, high Sharpe-ratios are only possible in a
rational asset pricing model when there is highly variable marginal utility across states.
Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998) show that these strategies produce Sharpe
ratios about three times as high as what is achievable with the market, and argue, like
MacKinlay, that these are too high relative to the market Sharpe ratio to be plausible
within a rational, frictionless asset pricing model. Moreover, as pointed out in Hawawini
and Keim (1995), the returns from these strategies have very low correlations across
international stock markets, meaning that the achievable Sharpe-ratio with a globally
diversi ed portfolio, and the implied variation in marginal utility, would have been still
higher.
    The ability of fundamental-scaled price variables to predict cross-sectional di erences
in future returns is con rmed by numerous studies. Ja e, Keim, and Wester eld (1989)
  nd that the ratio of earnings to price has predictive power for the future cross-section
of returns. Rouwenhorst (1999) nds evidence that rm size and fundamental-scaled
price measures predict returns on common stocks from 20 emerging markets. He nds
little correlation between book/market- and size-sorted portfolios across 20 countries.
     Several earlier studies found evidence of size and market-to-book e ects (see, e.g.,
DeBondt and Thaler (1987)). Davis (1994) nds that the book/market e ect is present in
pre-COMPUSTAT US common-stock returns, and Fama and French (1998) nd evidence
of an international book/market e ect in the 1975-95 period. Fama and French found
that other fundamental-scaled price variables also had power to forecast the future cross-
section of returns, but that these other variables had no predictive power over and above
book/market and size.
     For the size or book/market ratio of a rm to be a good proxy for risk, the returns of
small and high book/market rms' stocks would have to be negatively correlated with
marginal utility, meaning the returns should be particularly high in good times (relative
to other stocks) and low in bad times. No such correlation is obvious in the data. [See,
for example, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994).] Also, fundamental-scaled price
variables may be related to the liquidity of a rm's stock. However, Daniel and Titman
(1997) nd that, if anything, the common stocks of rms with higher book/market ratios
are more liquid.

                                            39
C Proofs
Proof of Proposition 2 Since the signals in the model are mean zero, by equation
(18), E [R] = E [ P ] = E [ M ]. From equations (17) and (18) (and applying the law
of iterated expectations),
                     "                       K
                                                                                     #
                                             X
 cov (R;  P ) = E ! (1 + ! )(S )2 +             2 f
                                                     k !k   (1 + )( ) +
                                                               !kf   Skf 2   2 2
                                                                                 M
                                                                                             2
                                                                                                 E[   M   ]2 :
                                             k=1
                                                                                        
Now, applying V !  var(!) = E [(!)2] (E [!])2 and V M  E ( M )2                            (E [ M ])2
we have
                        cov (R;  P ) = 2 V M covOC                                                      (36)
                           var( P ) = 2 V M + varOC                                                     (37)
where covOC and varOC are as de ned in the text. k
Proof of Proposition 3 Let the vector X  [ M ; F P; P ] and de ne
                 Y X  [cov(R; M ); cov(R; F P ); cov(R; P )]:
Further, let XX denote the variance-covariance matrix of M ; P F and P . Then
the OLS predictor of R is Y X XX1 X . The vector of regression coeÆcients in (27) can
therefore be written as
                                 [by ; byF P ; byP ] = Y X XX1 :                                        (38)
By (36) and (37), the covariances and variances required to calculate Y X and XX are
                              cov (R; P )   =    2
                                                   V M
                         cov (R; F P )      = covOC + 2V M
                                 var(P )    = varOC + 2V M + V
                           var(F P )        = varOC + 2V M + V F
                               var( M )      V      M
                              cov (R; )     = V M
                         cov ( ; F P )      = V M:
Explicitly calculating these coeÆcients and substituting into (38) yields the expressions
in Proposition 3. k
                                                40
Proof of Corollary 2: In equation (28), since V F = 0, K1 = 0. The term in parentheses
is therefore 1 + (covOC =varOC ). As E [!]; E [!f ] ! 1 in equations (23) and (24), and
noting that E [(!)2] = V ! + E [!]2 and E [(!f )2 ] = V f! + E [!f ]2 , we see that the terms
containing E [(!f )2 ] and E [(!)2] dominate constants (1 or V ! ) and the linear terms
containing E [!f ] or E [!]. It follows that in the limit, covOC =varOC = 1, so the term
in parentheses in (28) approaches zero, proving the result. k
Proof of Corollary 3: As shown in the Proof of Proposition 3:
                           var(F       P ) = varOC + 2 V M + V F
Under the assumptions of Corollary 2, and from the de nition of varOC in equation (37),
varOC ! 1 as E [!  ]; E [! f ] ! 1. This proves part 1.
   Next, from equations (20), (2), and (17),
                                              K
                                              X                                  K
                                                                                 X
  Ri  i     Pi = (Fi    Pi )   eFi   + +
                                        Si               f
                                                      ik Sk   + (i E [i ]) +             ik   (fk E [fk ])
                                              k=1                                    k=1

Since, the expectations in this expression are rational,
                                                              K                      K
                                                                                                   !
                                                              X                      X
            var(Ri   [Fi Pi])  var           eFi + Si +               f
                                                                    ik Sk   + i +         ik fk
                                                              k=1                    k=1

   Since the cross-sectional variance of everything on the RHS of this expression, with
the exception of F P , remains nite, but var(F P ) ! 1 as E [!]; E [!f ] ! 1, this
means that var(R)=var(F P ) ! 1. Since the R2 of the regression of R on F P is
given by
                              RF2 P =
                                        [cov(R; F P )]2 ;
                                       var(R)var(F P )
and since, as shown in the proof of Corollary 2, in the limit, covOC =varOC ! 1, it
follows that R2 ! 1, proving part 2. k




                                                 41
References
Abarbanell, J. S., and B. J. Bushee, 1999, Abnormal returns to a fundamental strategy,
  Accounting Review 73, 19{45.
Admati, A., and P. P eiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price
  variability, Review of Financial Studies 1, 3{40.
Barberis, N., M. Huang, and J. Santos, 1999, Prospect theory and asset prices, University
  of Chicago Manuscript, November 1999.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment, Journal
  of Financial Economics 49, 307{343.
Benartzi, S., and R. H. Thaler, 1995, Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium
  puzzle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 73{92.
Benos, A., 1998, Aggressiveness and survival of overcon dent traders, Journal of Finan-
  cial Markets, Forthcoming.
Berk, J., 1995a, A critique of size related anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 8,
  275{286.
Berk, J., 1995b, An empirical re-examination of the relation between rm size and
  returns, University of British Columbia working paper.
Black, F., 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 529{543.
Black, F., M. Jensen, and M. Scholes, 1972, The capital asset pricing model: Some
  empirical tests, in Michael C. Jensen, ed.: Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets
  pp. 79{121 (Praeger, New York).
Brennan, M., T. Chordia, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Alternative factor speci cations,
  security characteristics and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal of
  Financial Economics 49, 345{373.
Caballe, J., and J. Sakovics, 1996, Overcon dent speculation with imperfect competition,
  Working Paper,Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.
Campbell, J. Y., and A. S. Kyle, 1993, Smart money, noise trading, and stock price
  behaviour, Review of Economic Studies 60, 1{34.
Chan, L. K., J. Lakonishok, and T. Sougiannis, 1999, The stock market valuation of
  research and development expenditures, NBER Working Paper #7223, July.
Cohen, R. B., and C. K. Polk, 1995, An investigation of the impact of industry factors
  in asset-pricing tests, University of Chicago working paper, October 1995.
Daigler, R. T., and M. K. Wiley, 1999, The impact of trader type on the futures volatility-
  volume relation, Journal of Finance 54, ??{??
                                            42
Daniel, K. D., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
  security market under- and over-reactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839{1886.
Daniel, K. D., and S. Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional
  variation in common stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1{33.
Davis, J., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French, 2000, Characteristics, covariances, and average
  returns: 1929-1997, Journal of Finance 55, ??{??
Davis, J. L., 1994, The cross-section of realized stock returns: The pre-COMPUSTAT
  evidence, Journal of Finance 50, 1579{1593.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann, 1990a, Noise trader risk
  in nancial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703{738.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann, 1990b, Positive feedback
  investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation, Journal of Finance 45,
  375{395.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann, 1991, The survival of
  noise traders in nancial markets, Journal of Business 64, 1{20.
DeBondt, W. F. M., and R. H. Thaler, 1987, Further evidence on investor overreaction
  and stock market seasonality, Journal of Finance 42, 557{581.
DeBondt, W. F. M., and R. H. Thaler, 1995, Financial decision-making in markets
  and rms: A behavioral perspective, in Robert A. Jarrow, Voijslav Maksimovic, and
  William T. Ziemba, ed.: Finance, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management
  Science 9, 385{410 (North Holland, Amsterdam).
Dreman, D., and E. A. Lufkin, 1996, Do contrarian strategies work within industries?,
  Dreman Value Advisors.
Einhorn, H. J., 1980, Overcon dence in judgment, New Directions for Methodology of
  Social and Behavioral Science 4, 1{16.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns, Journal
  of Finance 47, 427{465.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
  bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3{56.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1998, Value versus growth: The international evidence,
  Journal of Finance 53, 1975{1999.
Fama, E. F., and J. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
  Journal of Political Economy 81, 607{636.
Frankel, R., and C. Lee, 1996, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and the book-
  to-market e ect, University of Michigan working paper.
                                           43
Gervais, S., and T. Odean, 1999, Learning to be overcon dent, Working paper, Wharton
  School.
Grossman, S. J., and J. E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally eÆcient
  markets, American Economic Review 70, 393{408.
Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of security market data for
  models of dynamic economies, Journal of Political Economy 99, 225{262.
Hawawini, G., and D. B. Keim, 1995, On the predictability of common stock returns:
  World-Wide evidence, in Robert A. Jarrow, Voijslav Maksimovic, and William T.
  Ziemba, ed.: Finance, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science
  and Management Science pp. 497{544 (North Holland, Amsterdam).
Heston, S. L., K. G. Rouwenhorst, and R. E. Wessels, 1999, The role of beta and size in
  the cross-section of european stock returns, European Financial Management 4, 4{28.
Hirshleifer, D., and G. Y. Luo, 1999, On the survival of overcon dent traders in a
  competitive security market, Rutgers University Mimeo.
Hirshleifer, D., A. Subrahmanyam, and S. Titman, 1994, Security analysis and trading
  patterns when some investors receive information before others, Journal of Finance
  49, 1665{1698.
Hong, H., and J. Stein, 1999, A uni ed theory of underreaction, momentum trading and
  overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Ja e, J., D. B. Keim, and R. Wester eld, 1989, Earnings yields, market values, and
  stock returns, Journal of Finance 44, 135{148.
Jagannathan, R., K. Kubota, and H. Takehara, 1998, Relationship between labor-income
  risk and average return: Empirical evidence from the Japanese stock market, Journal
  of Business 71, 319{348.
Jagannathan, R., and Z. Wang, 1996, The CAPM is alive and well, Journal of Finance
  51, 3{53.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1999, Pro tability of momentum strategies: An evaluation
  of alternative explanations, NBER working paper W7159.
Knez, P. J., and M. J. Ready, 1997, On the robustness of size and book-to-market in
  cross-sectional regressions, Journal of Finance 52, 1355{1382.
Kyle, A., and F. A. Wang, 1997, Speculation duopoly with agreement to disagree: Can
  overcon dence survive the market test?, Journal of Finance 52, 2073{2090.
Lakonishok, J., and I. Lee, 1998, Are insiders' trades informative?, University of Illinois
  at Urbana-Champaign manuscript.

                                            44
Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment, extrapola-
  tion and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541{1578.
Lee, C., A. Shleifer, and R. Thaler, 1991, Investors sentiment and the closed-end fund
  puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75{109.
Loughran, T., and J. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, The Journal of Finance 50,
  23{52.
MacKinlay, A. C., 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the CAPM,
  Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3{28.
Odean, T., 1998, Volume, volatility, price and pro t when all traders are above average,
  Journal of Finance 53, 1887{1934.
Rouwenhorst, K. G., 1999, Local return factors and turnover in emerging stock markets,
  Journal of Finance 54, 1439{1464.
Shefrin, H., and M. Statman, 1994, Behavioral capital asset pricing theory, Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 323{349.
Shiller, R. J., 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justi ed by subsequent changes
  in dividends?, American Economic Review 71, 421{498.
Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997, The limits to arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35{55.
Shumway, T., 1998, Explaining returns with loss aversion, University of Michigan Busi-
  ness School Mimeo.
Swaminathan, B., 1996, Time-varying expected small rm returns and closed-end fund
  discounts, Review of Financial Studies 9, 845{888.
Wang, F. A., 1998, Strategic trading, asymmetric information and heterogeneous prior
  beliefs, Journal of Financial Markets 1, 321{352.




                                           45
