                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES FOR LATIN AMERICA


                                          Frederic S. Mishkin
                                          Miguel A. Savastano


                                          Working Paper 7617
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7617

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




Prepared for the Interamerican Seminar on Economics (IASE), Buenos Aires, December 2-4, 1999. The
views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of the authors and not those of Columbia University, the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the International Monetary Fund. We thank the participants at
the Macro Lunch at Columbia University, the participants at IASE, our discussant, Federico Sturzenegger,
and, in particular, Esteban Jadresic, Fernando Losada and Lars Svennson for helpful comments. Iván Guerra
provided competent research assistance.

© 2000 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Miguel A. Savastano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America
Frederic S. Mishkin and Miguel A. Savastano
NBER Working Paper No. 7617
March 2000
JEL No. E5, F33, O54

                                           ABSTRACT

       The paper examines possible monetary policy strategies for Latin America that may help
lock-in the gains in the fight against inflation attained by the region during the 1990s. We start by
calling for a refocus of the debate about the conduct of monetary policy away from thinking that it
is about whether the nominal exchange rate should be fixed or flexible. Instead we argue that the
focus should be on whether the monetary policy regime appropriately constrains discretion in
monetary policymaking. This focus suggest that there are three basic frameworks that deserve
serious discussion as possible, long-run strategies for monetary policy in Latin America: a hard
exchange-rate peg, monetary targeting, and inflation targeting. We look at the advantages and
disadvantages of each of these strategies and then examine the recent track record of monetary policy
in some Latin American countries for clues as to which of the three strategies might be best suited
to economies in the region.


Frederic S. Mishkin                                           Miguel A. Savastano
Graduate School of Business                                   Research Department
Uris Hall 619                                                 International Monetary Fund
Columbia University                                           700 19th Street, N.W.
New York, NY 10027                                            Washington, DC 20431
and NBER                                                      msavastano@imf.org
fsm3@columbia.edu
