NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HORATIO ALGER MEETS THE MOBILITY TABLES
Douglas Holtz-Eakin
Harvey S. Rosen
Robert Weathers
Working Paper 7619
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7619
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

We are grateful to Peter Gottschalk, Bo Honoré, Cordelia Reimers, participants in a seminar at the Russell
Sage Foundation, and an anonymous referee for useful suggestions. This research was conducted while
Rosen was a Visiting Scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation. We thank the Foundation for its support, as
well as Princeton’s Center for Economic Policy Studies and Syracuse’s Center for Policy Research. Esther
Gray displayed tremendous patience in preparing the manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Harvey S. Rosen, and Robert Weathers . All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Horatio Alger Meets the Mobility Tables
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Harvey S. Rosen, and Robert Weathers
NBER Working Paper No. 7619
March 2000
JEL No. D31, J23
ABSTRACT
The question of how entrepreneurship relates to income mobility is cogent given the current
public debate about the sources of income inequality and mobility in United States society. We
examine how experience with entrepreneurship has affected an individual’s place in the earnings
distribution. Our basic tack is to follow individuals’ positions in the income distribution over time,
and to see how their mobility (or lack thereof) was affected by involvement with entrepreneurship.
Our main finding is that for low-income individuals there is some merit to the notion that the selfemployed moved ahead in the earnings distribution relative to those who remained wage earners.
On the other hand, for those at the upper end of the earnings distribution, those who became selfemployed often advanced less in the earnings distribution than their salaried counterparts.

Douglas Holtz-Eakin
Department of Economics
Center for Policy Research
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
(315) 443-3115
djheakin@maxwell.syr.edu

Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
(609) 258-4000
hsr@princeton.edu

Robert Weathers
Department of Economics
Center for Policy Research
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
(315) 443-3114
rrweathe@maxwell.syr.edu

1.

INTRODUCTION
The Horatio Alger theme continues to exert a powerful grip on the American imagination.

Its basic message is that one can get ahead in life by striking out on one’s own as an
entrepreneur.1 This notion is consistent with sociologists’ accounts of the immigrants’
experience in the United States: “But as against the worker, each businessman had the
possibility, slim though it was, of achieving influence and perhaps wealth” [Glazer and
Moynihan, 1970, pp. 30-31]. A recent variation on this theme is that encouraging
entrepreneurship would be a good strategy for improving the economic status of black people.
For example, the distinguished journalist William Raspberry [1991, p. A23] has argued that there
“is a need to shift the black focus from jobs to ownership, from income to wealth, from political
office to using politics to improve the climate for black business development.” More generally,
the question of how entrepreneurship relates to earnings mobility is cogent given the current
public debate about income inequality and mobility in United States society.2 As the Wall Street
Journal recently suggested, the stakes in this debate are high:
a widening wage gap alone doesn’t prove that the rich are getting forever richer and the
poor forever poorer. Annual pay provides only a snapshot of worker well-being...Do
people who hit the skids one year move up the income ladder the next? Do the poor
ascend easily enough to make up for the paltry wages they earn while still at the bottom?
That is the real test of whether the U.S. is an increasingly caste-based society (Phillips
[1996, p. A1]).
Economists have now produced a substantial number of careful empirical studies
designed to address these and related issues, both for the United States and a number of European
countries.3 For the most part, however, these studies have ignored possible links between
entrepreneurship and earnings mobility.4 The purpose of this paper is to provide a statistical
history of how experience with entrepreneurship has affected earnings mobility. Our basic
strategy is to track individuals’ positions in the earnings distribution over time, and to see how

their mobility (or lack thereof) was affected by involvement with entrepreneurship. Of course,
individuals select into and out of entrepreneurship. We do not attempt to analyze this selfselection process, so we cannot determine what would have happened to a randomly selected
person who became an entrepreneur. Rather, we have the more modest goal of summarizing how
entrepreneurship has actually affected the relative positions of those individuals who have
tried it.
Section 2 provides a first cut at the data with a comparison of mobility tables for wageearners and entrepreneurs. The focus here is on movements from one quintile of the earnings
distribution to another. In Section 3 we impose more structure on the data in order to estimate
how entrepreneurship affects one’s position in the distribution conditional on education,
experience, race, gender, and other variables. Our main finding is that there is some merit to the
notion that self-employment has been a way for low-earnings individuals to move up in the
earnings distribution, relative to those who were salaried. On the other hand, high-earnings
individuals who got involved with self-employment tended to move downward relative to their
wage-earning counterparts. These general tendencies were present for all demographic groups,
although there were some interesting differences by gender and race. Section 4 has the
conclusion and suggestions for future research.

2.

PRELIMINARIES: MOBILITY TABLES
Our analysis is based upon the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), which has

interviewed annually a representative sample of some 5,000 families since 1968.5 We analyze
information on men and women between the ages of 25 and 55 for the calendar years 1969 to

-2-

1990. We focus on this “prime-age” group to avoid the complications that arise from younger
individuals’ labor market entry decisions and older individuals’ impending retirements.

2.1

Key Concepts

Our first problem is to identify the entrepreneurs in our sample. The PSID asks each
individual, “On your main job, are you self-employed, are you employed by someone else, or
what?” Throughout this paper, we characterize the self-employed as being “entrepreneurs.” In
the nonstatistical literature on this topic, entrepreneurs are characterized in Schumpeterian
terms—they are daring, overflowing with animal spirits and creativity, and so on. Those who do
statistical work must settle for observable (and hence, more prosaic) criteria for identifying
entrepreneurs. With survey data of this sort, self-employment is a sensible proxy, and it has been
used in a number of previous studies.6 Some individuals indicated that they were simultaneously
self-employed and wage-earners. Somewhat arbitrarily, we put these individuals in the selfemployed category. Fortunately, the decision is not crucial; there are few such observations
(only 0.5 percent on average), and our substantive conclusions are unaffected when we classify
these individuals as wage-earners.
Both salary workers and the self-employed were asked to report their labor earnings; this
figure includes any bonuses, overtime, and commissions. As is the case with most data sets, the
PSID does not allow us to measure comprehensively the economic income accruing to
individuals in the form of in-kind payments and various fringe benefits. In addition to this
familiar difficulty, a particular problem arises in comparing the earnings of entrepreneurs and
wage-earners. The PSID question on self-employment earnings asked, “How much was (your)
share of the total income from business in (the year)—that is, the amount (you) took out plus any

-3-

profit left in?” Total income from business depends not only on the entrepreneur’s labor input,
but any capital invested as well. Thus, we can imagine a situation in which the “earnings” of an
individual increased after he made a transition to entrepreneurship, but this was due to the return
on the capital that he had invested in the enterprise, as opposed to his labor. And the PSID
provides no way to estimate the capital share of self-employment income.
One response to this observation is to note that a great many entrepreneurial enterprises
have little or no capital, so as a practical matter, this is not an important drawback.7 Indeed,
using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), which allows one to
estimate the capital component of self-employment earnings, Hamilton [1995, p. 29] found that,
in general, results relating to earnings differences between entrepreneurs and salaried individuals
do not differ substantively when the capital income component is taken into account. Further, on
the basis of examination of Survey of Consumer Finances data, Yuengert [1996] concluded that
the self-employed actually overstate capital income relative to labor income. Thus, to the extent
there is a bias, its direction is not clear. This may be the reason that most studies of selfemployment income simply ignore this issue.8 That said, we do make an attempt to roughly
gauge its importance for our substantive results. If the individual takes some of his or her
family’s money and invests it in the enterprise, then it might make sense to examine how family
income changes when the individual makes a transition to entrepreneurship. Hence, we repeat
our major analyses focusing on movements within the family income distribution as opposed to
movements within the individual earnings distribution. No important substantive results
emerged.9
A final issue relating to the measurement of earnings concerns the treatment of
individuals with no reported earnings. We assume that those who never reported labor earnings

-4-

during our sample period were not actively participating in the labor market and exclude them
from the analysis. Some individuals, however, reported zero labor earnings in some years and
positive values in others. Movements between positive and zero earnings may be an important
part of our story, so such individuals are kept in the sample.

2.2

Constructing Mobility Tables

With earnings for each individual in hand, the next step is to summarize their movements
through time. The traditional way to do this is to compute mobility tables showing movements
among different parts of the income distribution, so that is how we begin our analysis. Following
Burkhauser, Holtz-Eakin, and Rhody [1997], we computed mobility tables as follows: In each
year, for example 1980, we ranked individuals by their earnings (as defined above), and
calculated each individual’s quintile in the distribution. We then went to the next year (1981)
and calculated the individual’s quintile in that year’s earnings distribution. We know, then,
whether each individual moved up, moved down, or stayed in the same quintile. To get some
sense of “typical” behavior, we averaged over individuals in the sample. Specifically, define the
indicator variables

to be equal to 1 if individual i made a transition from quintile q to quintile

r, and zero otherwise. Our estimate of the probability of moving between quintiles q and r is

(2.1)

where wi is the sample weight for individual i and Nq is the number of individuals initially in
quintile q.

-5-

This process produces a picture of mobility between any two years (1980 and 1981 in this
example). Next, we collected together all the year-to-year comparisons—1970 to 1971, 1971 to
1972, etc.—and calculated the average experience, which we call “one-year” mobility.10 In order
to see how becoming an entrepreneur affected mobility, we divided the set of one-year transitions
into two groups: those in which the individual was a wage-earner in the first year and selfemployed the next, and all the rest. We then computed one-year mobility tables for both groups.
It is well-established that mobility patterns depend on the length of the transition period
(see, for example, Atkinson, Bourguignon, and Morrisson [1992, p. 138]). Hence, in addition to
one year transitions, it is important to analyze the longer term effects of experience with
entrepreneurship on mobility. We therefore computed five-year mobility measures as well. To
do so, we again began by calculating the quintile for each individual in each year (say 1980). We
then examined the individual’s situation five years later (in this case, 1985), and computed
whether he or she moved up a quintile, down a quintile, and so forth. We next calculated the
fraction of individuals who moved up or down by various numbers of quintiles, and took
averages over all the five-year periods. We call this average “five-year” mobility. To assess the
impact of self-employment on five-year mobility, we took all the five-year transitions and
divided them into two groups—those in which the individual was a wage-earner in the initial
year (say 1980) and self-employed in any two of the five subsequent years (in this case 1981-85);
and everyone else. The former are deemed to have become “self-employed” during the period.
We then computed separate mobility tables for both groups.
An obvious problem with this method is that it arbitrarily lumps together individuals who
were self-employed only two years with those who remained self-employed for up to five years
and, similarly, ignores the self-employment experience of those who were in that category for

-6-

only one year. One could address this problem by computing separate mobility tables for those
with one, two, three, four, and five years of self-employment experience during the transition
period, but the number of observations per table would be too small to allow us to make reliable
inferences. Further, one would soon start drowning in numbers. This points to a problem with
using mobility tables to investigate the role of entrepreneurship—it is cumbersome to investigate
how various experiences with self-employment affect mobility, ceteris paribus. More generally,
mobility tables are inconvenient for exploring how other variables such as experience and
education may interact with self-employment experience. Another manifestation of this problem
is that mobility tables do not allow us to distinguish between the effect of a transition per se
versus the impact of additional years of self-employment experience. A discrete model simply
cannot deal with such continuous phenomena. All of this said, the tables provide a wealth of
useful information on the distribution of movements within the population. Further, they
facilitate comparisons with earlier studies. Hence, our tack is to present the mobility tables, even
given their limitations, and then in Section 3 to provide a complementary approach that is more
concise and structural (but has less information about the distribution of transitions).

2.3

Results

Our presentation of the mobility tables begins in Table 1, in which we display one-year
transition results for the entire sample, and transition results broken down by various
demographic groups. In each table, the first figure in cell (i,j) shows the proportion of
individuals originally in quintile i who were in quintile j one year later. The second figure in the
cell is the associated number of observations used to compute the transition rate.11 Transition
matrices on the left-hand side of the page are based on individuals who were wage earners both

-7-

years of the two-year period, and those on the right-hand side are for individuals who began as
wage earners and made a transition to self-employment.12 For example, the first cell of the first
matrix tells us that of the set of individuals who remained wage-earners, about 75 percent of
those who were in lowest quintile of the earnings distribution initially were also in the lowest
quintile one year later. Further, there were 7,204 data points representing such transitions. Note
that the figures on the diagonal tell us the percentage of individuals in each quintile who do not
change quintiles at all. They provide a simple but useful way to characterize the degree of
mobility—the greater the size of the diagonal element, the less the mobility, ceteris paribus.13
Let us first consider the results at the top of the table, which pool together all the
demographic groups. Among individuals who did not make a transition to self-employment,
there was not a great deal of one-year mobility. The figures on the diagonals of the matrix
indicate that, in every earnings quintile, the probability of remaining in that quintile exceeded 60
percent. The likelihood of remaining in the very highest quintile was 85 percent. This finding of
low mobility is no surprise. The salaried-both-periods sample comprises the bulk of individuals
in the data, and it is well known that for the population as a whole, mobility rates are very low
over short time periods (see Atkinson, Bourguignon, and Morrisson [1992, p. 139]).
Comparing these results to those for individuals who made a transition to selfemployment we note that, except in the bottom quintile, the probability of remaining in any given
quintile was lower than the corresponding probability for those who did not make a transition.
For example, of those who started out in the middle quintile and became self-employed, only 40
percent were there a year later, as opposed to 64 percent in the other group. What happened to
the 60 percent of the newly self-employed who changed quintiles? Some of them advanced
substantially in the earnings distribution—5.59 percent of the newly self-employed ended up in

-8-

the top quintile, as opposed to only 1.40 percent of those who remained wage-earners. But about
43 percent of the newly self-employed who started in the third quintile ended up in the lower two
quintiles, as opposed to only about 18 percent of the wage-earners. This theme will repeat itself
throughout our analysis: movements into self-employment were associated with greater mobility,
but it was downward as well as upward.14
The next two pairs of matrices allow us to compare the mobility patterns of males and
females. Consider first individuals who remained wage earners. Comparing the figures on the
diagonals across matrices, we see that except in the top quintile, men were more mobile than
women. Of those who did not make a transition, for example, 60 percent of the males who
started in the third quintile remained there, while for women this figure was 67 percent. In
contrast, when we consider those who became self-employed, except in the bottom quintile, men
were more likely to remain in the quintile in which they began. For both males and females, the
probability of an extreme outcome was higher for those who became self-employed. However,
men appear to have had a better chance of obtaining a positive outcome from a move to selfemployment. For example, about 22 percent of males who started in the third quintile moved
upward in the earnings distribution, while for females this was only 7 percent. Note, however,
that the cell counts are small in the matrix for female entry into self-employment, particularly in
the higher quintiles. Hence, one must be cautious in making inferences about the impact of selfemployment on women who started near the top of the earnings distribution.
The last two sets of matrices in the tables allow us to compare results for blacks and nonblacks.15 For those who remained wage-earners, a comparison of the diagonal elements suggests
that blacks and non-blacks were roughly equally likely to remain in the quintile in which they
started a year before. (In the top quintile, the probability of leaving was somewhat higher for

-9-

blacks than for non-blacks.) For those who became self-employed, except in the top quintile,
blacks were less likely to leave their original quintiles than their non-black counterparts. In the
top quintile, this tendency was reversed. However, as was the case for women, there are very
few observations in this part of the matrix for blacks. In any case, the overall comparison of the
matrices for blacks and non-blacks highlights the necessity of taking care in contrasting racial
differences in this context, because the magnitudes appear to depend on individuals’ starting
places in the earnings distribution.
We now consider the results for five-year transition periods, which are presented in
Table 2. As already noted, for these purposes, an individual is deemed to have made a transition
to self-employment if he or she began as a wage earner, and was then self-employed for at least
two of the next five years. The most apparent difference between the five-year matrices and the
one-year matrices in Table 1 is how much more mobility there is in the former. Consider the
individuals who were wage earners during the entire period, shown on the left hand side of the
page. Of those who began the period in the lowest quintile, only 56 percent were there five years
later. In contrast, from Table 1, 75 percent of the individuals who started in the lowest quintile
were there one year later. Similarly, of those who started in the third quintile, only 46 percent
were there five years later, whereas from Table 1, 64 percent who began in the third quintile were
there one year later.
Turning now to the right side of Table 2 we see that, as before, experience with selfemployment generally increased mobility in both directions. For individuals who began in the
middle quintile and became self-employed, only 21 percent were there five years later; this
proportion was more than twice as high for the wage-earners. At the extremes of the earnings
distribution, entry into self-employment had a negative impact on mobility. For individuals who

-10-

began in the top quintile and became self-employed, 55 percent were there five years later. For
those who were wage earners throughout the period, a higher proportion—about 75 percent—
maintained their places at the top of the earnings distribution. And in the lowest quintile,
individuals who became self-employed were more likely to stay there than their wage-earnings
counterparts—60 percent versus 56 percent.
The next two pairs of matrices in Table 2 indicate that there were marked differences in
the mobility impacts of self-employment on males and females. Generally, it appears to have
been a more successful strategy for males. In the lowest quintile, only 33 percent of the men who
had some experience with self-employment were there five years later; for women, this figure
was 64 percent. For males in the middle quintile who tried self-employment, about 35 percent
were in the two top quintiles five years later. For females, this figure was only 21 percent. We
conjecture that at least some of this difference may be due to the fact that the businesses started
by males could have lasted longer than those by females, and length of survival is related to the
success of the venture.16 Mobility matrices are too crude a tool for sorting out the effects of
differentials in the amount of time devoted to self-employment; this issue is addressed in the next
section.
The last two sets of matrices in Table 2 allow us to compare five-year mobility for blacks
and non-blacks. Generally, over five-year periods, self-employment appears to have been less
successful as a mobility strategy for blacks than for non-blacks. In the third quintile, for
example, about 8 percent of the blacks who became entrepreneurs were in higher quintiles two
years later, while the corresponding figure for non-blacks was 31 percent. In the bottom quintile,
a greater proportion of blacks who entered self-employment were still there five years later—68
percent versus 59 percent. As was the case for the male-female comparisons, some of these

-11-

differences might have been due to differences in the duration of self-employment that are
concealed in the mobility matrices.17 And as was the case for the females, many of the cell
counts in the right hand side matrix for the blacks are very low.
In summary, the matrices in Tables 1 and 2 indicate that mobility patterns differed by
length of transition period and by demographic group, results that are consistent with earlier
research. There are also strong indications that experience with self-employment had important
effects on mobility patterns, both over short and long periods. Importantly, however, the
matrices warn us that it is difficult to characterize these patterns in a simple fashion—they
depend on demographic characteristics and starting position in the earnings distribution, inter
alia. Further, there may be factors that interacted with self-employment experience such as
experience and age that are difficult to capture in a mobility matrix framework. We now turn to
an alternative framework that allows us to take some of these factors into account.

3.

A MULTIVARIATE APPROACH
Mobility matrices do not require that one put much structure on the data, and they contain

an enormous amount of information. But, as already suggested, these benefits come at a cost.
For one thing, matrices are not a convenient framework for exploring the reasons for differences
in mobility patterns within and between demographic groups. For example, we found that the
impact of self-employment on mobility depended on one’s starting point in the earnings
distribution. To what extent is this due to the fact that education levels differ by quintiles? Or
how might differences in the age structures between the black and non-black populations explain
the differential impact of self-employment by race? Another problem with the mobility matrix
approach is that it ignores information on within-quintile movements in the distribution. Of

-12-

course, looking at deciles rather than quintiles would attenuate this problem, but not make it go
away, and would come at the cost of quadrupling the quantity of numbers to be examined. In this
section we develop and implement a complementary strategy based on multivariate regressions.

3.1

Specification of the Model

Our approach is to use ordinary least squares regressions to summarize the relationship
between an individual’s percentile in the income distribution in some year and his percentile in
an earlier year, and to allow this relationship to depend on his self-employment experience.18 To
begin, let us consider the one-year mobility data, which were summarized in Table 1. The
clearest message from that table is that there is a strong relationship between a person’s
percentile in the earnings distribution in year t+1, Pt+1, and his percentile in period t, Pt. To fix
ideas, we begin by positing a simple linear relationship between Pt+1 and Pt:
(3.1)
where "0 and "1 are parameters. An important benchmark is the case of "0=0 and "1=1. If so,
Pt+1= Pt, and there is no mobility. However, if "0>0 and 0<"1<1, this specification implies that
the long-run location in the earnings distribution (P*) differs from the current location:
(3.2)

Further, in the short-run there is “regression toward the mean”: if Pt > P* then Pt+1 < Pt and vice
versa.
While linear models have expositional virtues, there is no reason to impose linearity on
the relationship between past and present positions in the earnings distribution. We assume a
quadratic specification:

-13-

(3.3)
The quadratic term permits the degree of regression to the mean to differ between high and low
percentiles; i.e., the poor may rise faster than the rich fall and vice versa.19
Equation (3.2) reveals a major flaw in a model that makes one’s present place in the
earnings distribution depend only on the past value: it leads to the counterfactual prediction that
everyone ends up in the same place in the earnings distribution. In practice, individuals’
positions in the earnings distribution differ due to attributes such as education (EDUC) and labor
market experience (EXP).20
Indeed, these variables may affect not only the intercept of equation (3.3), but also the
entire dynamics of the process.21 That is, it may be appropriate to interact education and
experience with Pt and

as well as to enter them in levels. The general labor market situation

confronting individuals may also affect their mobility—mobility patterns may be different in
tight and loose labor markets. We therefore enter into the equation the national civilian
unemployment rate (URt), both by itself and interacted with Pt and
Defining

.

this leads to the following specification:

(3.4)
Our next task is to build into the model the individual’s record with entrepreneurship
during the transition period. Define SEt to be one if the individual was self-employed in period t,
and zero otherwise, and SEt+1 analogously. Then by augmenting equation (3.4) with SEt and
SEt+1 we can fully characterize the individual’s experience with entrepreneurship during the twoyear period, and estimate directly how it affects his or her position in the earnings distribution,

-14-

ceteris paribus. Further, we can interact the SE variables with

, and thus estimate

how self-employment affects the dynamics of the mobility process.
A final issue relates to the fact that a movement into or out of self-employment is
necessarily a job change, and it is well documented that job changes in themselves tend to lower
individuals’ earnings. (See, for example, Farber [1995].) We do not want to confound the
effects of changing jobs per se with the effects of changing self-employment status. Hence, we
augment the equation with the variable CHANGEt+1, which takes a value of one if the individual
changed jobs between years t and t+1, and zero otherwise.22 Further, we interact CHANGEt+1
with all the right hand side variables except those containing the SE variables. Thus, the
equation now appears as

(3.5)

where gt+1 is a random error term.23 Given the strong differences in the patterns among genders
and races evident from Table 1, we estimate the equation separately for males and females and
for blacks and non-blacks, as well as for the sample as a whole.24
An econometric issue arises because our left hand side variable is bounded between zero
and one. This can lead to heteroskedastic errors. We therefore estimate robust standard errors
using Huber’s method. A related issue is that it is possible for a linear model to generate
predictions that are greater than one or less than zero. However, in our application, this is of no

-15-

practical importance. For example, in our analysis of one-year transitions for the entire sample,
only three predictions out of 48,818 were outside the zero-one interval.
We estimate equation (3.5) using data on all the one-year transitions in our sample.
Summary statistics on the basic right hand side variables in equation (3.5) (but not the interaction
terms) are included in Table 3.25
Due to the presence of so many interactions, the equation is very messy and it is virtually
impossible to make sense of individual estimated coefficients. Luckily, the coefficients
themselves are of little interest to us. What we care about is using them to estimate how
experience with entrepreneurship affected individuals’ movements through the earnings
distribution. To be more specific, consider an individual at the 25th percentile of the earnings
distribution who had a known set of characteristics (education, experience). Suppose further that
the individual was a wage-earner in both periods, i.e., SEt and SEt+1 were both zero. Then we can
substitute into equation (3.5) to predict what his or her percentile would have been the next year.
Now we can repeat the exercise, but instead assume that the individual made a transition from
wage-earning to self-employment, i.e., SEt = 0 and SEt+1 = 1. By comparing this figure to that for
the individual who stayed a wage-earner, we obtain an estimate of how becoming self-employed
affected an individual’s one-year mobility. In the same way, we can learn how exiting from
entrepreneurship affected one’s position in the earnings distribution (SEt = 1 and SEt+1 = 0), and
how being an entrepreneur both periods affected one’s position (SEt = 1 and SEt+1 = 1).26 Our
main interest is in these computations—in effect, the analogues of the partial derivatives of
equation (3.5) with respect to self-employment experience—not the coefficients themselves.
The strategy for analyzing five-year mobility requires only minor modifications. In this
case, the left hand side variable in equation (3.5) becomes Pt+5 rather than Pt+1. The main serious

-16-

new issue is the treatment of self-employment experience during the transition period. In direct
analogy to equation (3.5), one could create six dichotomous variables, each indicating whether
the individual was self-employed or not during the initial year and each year of the transition
period. As before, this would allow us to characterize completely the individual’s selfemployment history during the transition period, including the possibility of several entries and
exits. However, this history would involve 26=64 possible cases. While we could report such
results in a tabular fashion, it would defeat our purpose, which is to create comprehensible
summaries of the data. Instead, we characterize self-employment experience during the
transition by including the variable %SE, defined as the proportion of the six-year period during
which the individual was self-employed. We include %SE and its square, as well as their
interactions with the other right hand side variables, in analogy to equation (3.5). Note that %SE
can take on only seven values: 0, 1/6, 1/3, 1/2, 2/3, 5/6, and 1.27 Table 4 shows the frequency
distribution of %SE for the various groups in our sample.
An analogous issue crops up in the context of job change, and we deal with it in a similar
way. Specifically, we define the variable %CHNG, the proportion of times that the individual
changed jobs during the transition period. Over the period, there were at most five opportunities
to change jobs, so the only possible values for %CHNG are 0, 1/5, 2/5, 3/5, 4/5, and 1.
Intuitively, one can think of this variable as a measure of the disruption in the individual’s work
history and the associated effects on his or her place in the earnings distribution. In analogy to
%SE, we enter %CHNG and its square, and interact it with the initial percentile in the earnings
distribution, education, experience (and its square), and the unemployment rate.
A final issue relating to our model is that it is essentially a “one-size-fits-all” approach.
The model is the same across gender and racial groups (although, of course, the parameters

-17-

differ). The advantage of this approach is that it permits us to make comparisons across gender
and racial groups in a common framework. On the other hand, there is some evidence that the
processes relating to entry into self-employment may differ across groups. For example, Devine
[1994] and Bruce [1999] find that married, self-employed women are much more likely to have a
self-employed husband than married, wage-and-salary women. Thus, a woman’s mobility may
depend upon her husband’s. The problem then becomes the possible endogeneity of the
husband’s self-employment status and how to deal with it. Especially in light of such
complications, we feel the virtue of a common framework outweighs the advantages of tailoring
the model to the particular circumstances of each group.
3.2 Results
As already noted, the regression coefficients themselves are of limited interest, and they
are reported in the Appendix. Our main focus in this section is on the implications of the
coefficients for the mobility process. Before turning to the self-employment results, we note
briefly some findings from the Appendix. First, Pt and

are jointly statistically significant.

Evaluated at the means, the effect of Pt is positive, and that for

is negative. As noted earlier,

this means that those in lower percentiles rise faster than those at the upper end of the
distribution fall. Second, the partial derivative of Pt with respect to years of education is positive
and statistically significant. While it is not shocking that education improves ones place in the
earnings distribution, it is important to remember that this is an effect conditional on the
individual’s previous position in the distribution. The coefficients on potential experience and its
square are also jointly significant.
One-year mobility.

We turn now to our main concern, the effect of self-employment on

income mobility. In Table 5 we show for the entire sample, and by gender and race, the effects

-18-

of experience with entrepreneurship on one-year mobility. The effects are given separately for
individuals in the 10th, 25th, 50th, and 75th, and 90th percentiles.28 The table has four columns.
The first column gives percentile predictions for individuals who were wage-earners both years
of the transition period. In terms of our notation, SEt and SEt+1 are both zero. Column (2) is for
individuals who were initially self-employed and then exited self-employment; SEt = 1 and
Set+1 = 0. The third column provides predictions for individuals who entered self-employment;
SEt = 0 and SEt+1 = 1. Finally, column (4) shows predicted percentiles for those who were selfemployed both years; Set = 1 and SEt+1 = 1.
To fix ideas, consider the first cell in the second row of the table. It gives us the predicted
percentile in year t + 1 of an individual who began in the 25th percentile, had the mean
characteristics of the group, and was a wage-earner both years. According to the table, he or she
would have been in the 28th percentile one year later. Moving rightward in the table, we learn
that an individual with the same characteristics but who was self-employed the first year and then
exited self-employment, would have been in the 32nd percentile the second year. From
column 3, if the individual entered self-employment, he or she would have been in the 28th
percentile the second year, and from column 4, a person who was self-employed both years
would have been in the 32nd percentile.
One finding certainly stands out from Table 5. For all demographic groups, and
regardless of experience with self-employment, there is “regression toward the mean.” On
average, individuals in the 10th percentile were in a higher percentile one year later, and
individuals in the 90th percentile were in a lower percentile one year later. Now, if all individuals
in the 10th percentile moved up in the earnings distribution (on average), it is not very
informative to say that individuals toward the bottom who entered self-employment also

-19-

advanced. We want to know whether a transition to self-employment moved an individual up
relative to someone who was a wage-earner the entire period. The same consideration applies to
the decreases in position of those toward the top. To find the relative effect of entering selfemployment, we simply subtract the number in the first column from the number in the third
column. For example, according to the first row of Table 5, entering self-employment did
nothing to aid the relative position of an individual who started out in the 10th percentile
(0.150 - 0.150 = 0). The same is true at the 25th percentile. More generally, to find the relative
effect of each pattern of self-employment, we take the associated figure and subtract from it the
figure in column (1).
For easy reference, the results of a series of such calculations for the sample as a whole
are graphed in Figure 1, and in Figures 2 through 5 for the various sub-groups. Because the
patterns for the 10th and 90th percentiles are essentially the same as those for the 25th and 75th
percentiles, respectively, we omit the former two categories in the interest of readability. The
calculations suggest that during the year an individual entered self-employment, there was
virtually no change in his or her position in the earnings distribution. This absence of any
substantial movement was present in each of the subgroups, except for blacks. For blacks
starting in the 25th percentile, entry into self-employment was associated with a 2.3 point decline
(relative to those who remained wage earners), while those who started at the 75th percentile
experienced a relative 7.9 point gain.29
We turn next to the impact of exiting from self-employment. For the sample as a whole,
for individuals who started in the 25th and 50th percentiles, departure from self-employment was
associated with relative movements upward in the earnings distribution (4.2 and 1.9 points,
respectively). On the other hand, for those who began at the top of the distribution, exit from

-20-

self-employment was associated with a 2.8 point relative decline.30 This 2.8 point figure masks
considerable differences across subgroups—the comparable number for women was 8.1 points,
and for blacks 13.8 points.31
We next consider the impact on one-year mobility of being self-employed both years of
the transition period. For the sample as a whole, the gains to being self-employed varied
inversely with the individual’s starting position. In the 25th percentile, an individual who was
self-employed both years gained 4.2 points in the earnings distribution relative to a similar
individual who was a wage earner in both periods. On the other hand, for two individuals
starting in the 75th percentile, the one who was self-employed both periods ended up 2.6 points
below a comparable wage earner. The same pattern repeats itself in each of our demographic
groups—the lower the initial percentile, the greater the gain (or the lower the loss) from having
been self-employed. Interestingly, for blacks and women, self-employment did not lead to a
relative improvement in any percentile.
Five-year mobility.

As already stressed, two year bits of time are not really long enough

to assess the consequences of self-employment. Table 6 turns to the analysis of mobility over
five-year periods. The setup is basically the same as that in Table 5. Each figure is the predicted
percentile in year (t+5), conditional on the percentile in year t as well as the other variables on the
right hand side of equation (2.5). (The estimated coefficients are in the Appendix.)32 Recall that
in these equations, we characterize the individual’s self-employment experience with the variable
%SE, the percentage of the six year period during which the individual was self-employed.33
Table 6 shows the predicted percentile for each value of %SE.
Echoing the results from the mobility tables, there is a lot more movement reflected in the
five-year transitions of Table 6 than the one-year transitions of Table 5. For example, for the

-21-

sample as a whole, a wage earner who started out in the 10th percentile was, on average, in the
26th percentile five years later. The comparable percentile in Table 5 was only 15. Let us now
consider the effects of self-employment on mobility, relative to having remained a wage-earner.
As before, these are summarized graphically for the entire sample and for each demographic
group. For the entire sample (Figure 6), individuals who started in the 25th percentile and were
engaged in self-employment over the entire five-year period (%SE = 1) experienced substantial
gains in mobility—about 6.1 points relative to those who were wage-earners during the entire
period. For those who started in the 50th percentile and had %SE =1, there were also relative
gains, but they were quite small—1.9 points. However, individuals in the 75th percentile who
experienced six years of self-employment ended up 4.0 points below their wage-earning
counterparts.34 As before, the patterns in the 10th percentile are quite similar to those in the 25th
percentile, and those in the 90th are close to those in the 75th percentile. Again, in the interest of
readability we omit the 10th and 90th percentiles from the figures.
A glance at figures (7) through (10) reveals that the qualitative story is quite similar for
each of the subgroups. The largest relative losses associated with being self-employed throughout
the period were incurred by individuals who started in the 75th percentile. For blacks and
women, the relative advantage to being self-employed during the entire period was slightly larger
for those who started in the 50th than the 25th percentiles. For men and non-blacks, on the other
hand, those who started at the 25th percentile benefitted substantially more than those who
started in the 50th percentile. From a quantitative standpoint, the most dramatic aspects of the
figures are the large gains for blacks who started out in the 50th percentile (7.2 points), and the
large losses for women who started out in the 75th percentile (6.4 points).

-22-

Return now to Figure 6, and consider the impact upon five-year mobility of participation
in self-employment for less than the entire period. For the sample as a whole, there was not a
great deal of impact one way or the other. There were both small pluses and small minuses,
depending on the extent of experience with self-employment and starting point in the earnings
distribution. There were, however, some differences across the various groups. Figure 9, for
example, suggests that partial involvement almost never hurt the relative position of blacks,
while Figure 10 indicates that this was not the case for non-blacks.
Summary.

In the sample as a whole, for individuals who began toward the bottom of

the earnings distribution, continuous experience with self-employment was a successful strategy
for moving ahead (relative to wage-earners), both in the short- and long-term. The result is just
the opposite for those who started out toward the top—continuous experience with selfemployment led to a fall in their relative positions. With respect to individuals who took a stab
at self-employment and then went back to the salaried sector, we find that in the short run their
relative positions in the earnings distribution fell. But over a longer period, these negative effects
more or less evaporated—the effects of partial experience with self-employment upon five-year
mobility were small.
For women, the main message that seems to come through is that entrepreneurship has
not been a very successful strategy for moving ahead in the earnings distribution. In both the
short- and long-term, experience with self-employment sometimes led to small gains, but often to
substantial losses. The losses were particularly large for those who started out toward the high
end of the earnings distribution. With respect to blacks, the most striking phenomenon is the
difference between the short-term and long-term effects of experience with self-employment. In
the short-term, the effects were often negative, and dramatically so for those who began in the

-23-

middle of the earnings distribution and exited from self-employment. However, when we look at
longer term effects of experience with self-employment, the impact was generally positive and
sometimes substantially so. Importantly, continuous experience with self-employment led to
very large improvements for blacks who started toward the bottom of the earning distribution.35

4.

CONCLUSION
Do entrepreneurs get ahead in life, as suggested by the Horatio Alger myth? We have

analyzed panel data from the last several decades to determine whether entrepreneurs moved
ahead in the earnings distribution relative to their wage-earning peers. An examination of
mobility tables suggests that making a transition to entrepreneurship increased the likelihood that
an individual left his or her current quintile in the earnings distribution. In general, new
entrepreneurs were more likely to end up in a higher quintile than their wage-earning
counterparts. But they were also more likely to end up in lower quintiles. This result echoes a
theme found in earlier research—entrepreneurship is a risky business.
We supplemented the mobility tables with a regression-based strategy to allow us to take
into account variables such as experience and education when analyzing the effects of
entrepreneurship on mobility. For individuals who started at the low end of the earnings
distribution, the Horatio Alger myth is alive and well—provided that they were able to stick it
out as entrepreneurs for several years. But those who started out near the top of the earnings
distribution lost ground relative to their counterparts who remained wage-earners.
A striking result is that, on average, entrepreneurship was a more successful long-term
strategy for blacks than for non-blacks, ceteris paribus. If potential black entrepreneurs observe
that this strategy has worked for others who have tried it, one might imagine that they would try

-24-

it for themselves. Thus, this finding would seem to complicate even further the task of
explaining why there are so few black entrepreneurs (Meyer [1990]). The answer may perhaps
be found in the fact that experience with entrepreneurship had a substantial negative impact on
blacks in the short-term. It may be the case that blacks lack the financial resources to sustain
their enterprises through initial hard times. This is just a conjecture. Further research is needed
on how the financing patterns of small businesses differ among racial and ethnic groups.

-25-

Endnotes
1.

Sarachek [1978] examines the life histories of a number of successful entrepreneurs to
determine whether they have backgrounds similar to those of Horatio Alger’s heroes.
Aficionados of nineteenth century American culture will know that despite their close
identification with entrepreneurship in the population imagination, Horatio Alger’s heroes
get ahead in a variety of ways, including marrying the boss’s daughter.

2.

See Atkinson, Bourguignon and Morrison [1992, pp. 23-29] for a careful discussion of
the normative aspects of income mobility.

3.

See, for example, Aaberge et al. [1996], Palme [1995], Burkhauser, Holtz-Eakin and
Rhody [1998], and Buchinsky and Hunt [1996]. Gottschalk and Smeeding [1997] survey
the empirical literature on inequality. Atkinson, Bourguignon, and Morrisson [1992] and
McMurrer and Sawhill [1996] provide useful surveys.

4.

Quadrini [1996] provides a theoretical model of the evolution of entrepreneurs’ wealth
over time, how it compares with that of wage earners, and the implications for the wealth
mobility of entrepreneurs.

5.

See Hill [1992] for a complete discussion of these data.

6.

See, for example, Hamilton [1995], Quadrini [1996], Evans and Jovanovic [1989], Evans
and Leighton [1989], and Meyer [1990]. Self-employed workers as defined here meet the
Census’ criteria for business ownership.

7.

Using tax-based data, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen [1994] found that only 41
percent of sole proprietorships have any depreciable assets. Similarly, in examining data
from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Meyer [1990] found that 56
percent of individuals report no new business equity upon entering self-employment.
Meyer also noted that about 60 percent of new enterprises in the Characteristics of
Business Owners survey report zero equity capital. Yuengert [1996] computed that, in
the Survey of Consumer Finances, 43 percent of self-employed individuals have no
business equity.

8.

See, for example, Fuchs [1982], Evans and Leighton [1989], and Fairlie and Meyer
[1995].

9.

A final ambiguity in comparing wage/salary earnings with those from self-employment
revolves around the payroll tax. Ideally one would like to compare both figures gross of
the employer and employee share of the tax or both figures net of the total tax. Under one
interpretation reported self-employment earnings are gross of all taxes and thus
inappropriately high to compare to wage earnings that are (presumably) net of the
employer share. At the other extreme, reported earnings may be net of all payroll taxes,
making the comparison inappropriately small. Or, the reported value could be anywhere
in between. In the absence of any firm way to determine the appropriate adjustment, we

-26-

restrict ourselves to using the reported data.
10.

Note that we are not taking averages over exactly the same groups of people. Some
individuals join the sample over time (because they become 25 years old) and some leave
it (because they become 56). There is, of course, attrition in the panel for other reasons as
well.

11.

The transition rates are based on weighted data. To compute quintiles in the earnings
distribution, we weight the data; quintiles are thus the population quintiles and transitions
are population transition rates. In these computations, each sample data point represents
a different number of individuals in the population. The second number in each cell is
the unweighted number of sample data points used in each computation. An implication
of this is that one cannot use the sample figures to replicate the transition rates shown in
the matrices. Indeed, there is not even any reason for the number of sample points in
each quintile to be constant within a matrix. The quintile breaks (in 1991) are $8,900,
$17,182, $26,500, and $39,400.

12.

Thus, individuals who began the two-year period as entrepreneurs are excluded from both
tables.

13.

The diagonal elements are closely related to the “immobility ratio,” which is the
percentage of people staying in the same decile or entering the decile immediately above
or below. There are a number of ways in which to collapse the information in a mobility
matrix into a single number; see Atkinson, Bourguignon, and Morrisson [1992,
pp. 74-79], and Buchinsky and Hunt [1996]. Given that our reason for examining
mobility tables is to obtain a rough sense of what is in the data, we eschew here the use of
such measures. Moreover, as noted earlier, the approach followed in Section 3 serves to
condense the information regarding mobility; there is no need to do so here.

14.

Note that the comparison includes wage earners who both did and did not change jobs
during the period. To the extent that job changes per se are associated with greater
upward and downward mobility, then comparisons of the matrices may overstate the
impact of changing to self-employment. As we stressed before, such problems are
inherent to the mobility matrix methodology. We deal with them explicitly in our
multivariate analysis below.

15.

The PSID contains information that would allow one to make finer distinctions with
respect to race and ethnicity. However, within subgroups there are not enough selfemployed individuals to allow meaningful comparisons. See Fairlie and Meyer [1993],
and Borjas [1990, Chapter 10] on ethnic differences in self-employment.

16.

Over five-year periods, the mean percentage of women who are self-employed during the
entire period is 2.1 percent as opposed to 9.6 percent for men.

17.

On average, only 0.6 percent of the blacks in the sample were self-employed during the
entire period, while the figure for non-blacks was 6.4 percent.

-27-

18.

There are obvious correspondences to the analysis of wage dynamics. See Atkinson,
Bourguignon, and Morrison [1992, pp. 8-14].

19.

Formally, (3.3) is a nonlinear difference equation, which can be conveniently analyzed by
linearizing in the vicinity of the steady state, P*. Doing so indicates that the time, t,
required to close 50% of the gap between the initial location, P0, and P* is given by
ln(0.5)/ln(1+g) where
. Thus,
permits the speed of adjustment to
*
vary with P .

20.

Because the PSID does not report actual experience on a regular basis, we analyze
“potential experience” defined as age minus years of education minus six.

21.

For example, an empirical regularity is the earnings mobility falls with age. See
Atkinson, Bourguignon, and Morrisson [1992, p. 138].

22.

A job change is recorded if the months of tenure on the job reported at the date of the
interview is less than or equal to the months since the last interview. See Brown and
Light [1992] for a careful discussion of issues involved in measuring job changes in the
PSID. The incidence of job change in our sample is similar to that found in previous
studies; e.g., Jaeger and Stevens [1997].

23.

In some cases, transitions associated with the same individual will occur multiple times.
The error terms for a given individual across time may be correlated with each other.
This may lead to inefficient estimates but they are still consistent.

24.

The data strongly rejects the hypothesis that mobility processes are the same across races
and sexes. In each case, the joint hypothesis that all the coefficients are the same is
rejected at least at the 1 percent level.

25.

The sample used to estimate the equation for five-year transition is, of course, different.
However, the mean values of the various right-hand side variables do not differ
appreciably.

26.

Note that the mobility tables presented in the right hand side of Table 1 correspond to the
case SEt = 0 and SEt+1 = 1. The formulation in equation (3.5) allows us to explore a richer
set of possibilities.

27.

In addition, given our particular interest in the effects of entry into self-employment, we
include a dichotomous variable that is one if the individual was self-employed the first
year of the period, and zero otherwise. We experimented with an alternative specification
that allows for the transition to self-employment per se to have an independent effect. In
this experiment, we created a dichotomous variable that took a value of 1 whenever
%SE = 1/6, and of zero otherwise. When we entered this variable and its interactions
with the other right-hand-side variables, we found that it was statistically significant but
had only a minuscule effect on the mobility probabilities.

28.

The estimates at the 10th and 90th percentiles allow us to address the poverty-alleviation
effects of entrepreneurship and its impact on the very well-to-do, respectively. We thank

-28-

a referee for this suggestion.
29.

For purposes of reference, around the 25th percentile, a 5 percentile movement
corresponds roughly to a $2,450 change in earnings (in 1990 dollars); around the 50th
percentile, $2,320; and around the 75th percentile, $3,850.

30.

Our results are consistent with Hamilton’s [1995] finding that, at the median,
entrepreneurs returning to paid wage employment earn a higher wage than employees
with the same characteristics.

31.

But remember from Table 1 that there were very few blacks and women who were selfemployed and in the 75th percentile. This should be taken into account in interpreting
these results.

32.

For the sample as a whole, the R2 is 0.80 for the one-year transitions and 0.64 for the five
year transitions. This is no surprise given the results from the mobility tables—initial
position does a worse job of predicting one’s position over a short horizon than a long
horizon.

33.

Recall that the equation contains a dichotomous variable for whether the individual was
self-employed during the initial period. We view the simulations as telling us about the
impact of entering self-employment for various proportions of the five-year period.
Hence, in the simulations we set this dichotomous variable equal to zero. For example,
we compute the effects of two years of self-employment by setting the dichotomous
variable equal to zero and %SE equal to 2/6. When %SE equals 1.0, however,
definitionally the dichotomous variable must be equal to 1.0. Similarly, we view the
simulations as telling us the impact of becoming self-employed, above and beyond the
impact of a job change alone. Thus, in the simulations, we set the variable showing the
fraction of years in which there was a job change equal to zero.

34.

Taken at face value, this finding contradicts the common notion that self-employment is
riskier than wage-earning, and hence, requires greater mean returns. We emphasize,
however, two caveats. First, the riskiness of self-employment depends on the variability
of consumption streams, not income streams. Higher income people may be able to
insure their consumption despite income shocks; whether self-employment really is
riskier than wage earning remains an open question. Second, to the extent that nonmonetary aspects of self-employment are higher, utility may be higher in self-employment
even if mean returns are lower.

35.

To the extent that blacks face particularly severe liquidity constraints, we expect only the
most able blacks to enter and survive in self-employment. This may explain why the
mobility effects are greater for blacks than the rest of the population.

-29-

References
Aaberge, Rolf, Anders Bjorklund, Markus Jantti, Marten Palme, Peder J. Pedersen, Nina
Smith and Tom Wennemo, 1996, “Income Inequality and Income Mobility in the
Scandinavian Countries Compared to the United States”, Working Paper No. 98,
Stockholm School of Economics, February.
Atkinson, Anthony, B. Bourguignon, and C. Morrisson, 1992, Empirical Studies of
Earnings Mobility, Philadelphia: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Borjas, George J., 1990, Friends or Strangers: The Impact of Immigrants on the U.S.
Economy, New York: Basic Books, Inc..
Brown, James N. and Audrey Light, 1992, “Interpreting Panel Data on Job Tenure”,
Journal of Labor Economics 10, 219-257.
Bruce, Donald, 1999, “Do Husbands matter? Married Women Entering SelfEmployment”, Small Business Economics, 13(4), 317-329.
Buchinsky, Moshe and Jennifer Hunt, 1996, “Wage Mobility in the United States,”
NBER Paper #5455, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
February.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Douglas Holtz-Eakin, and Stephen Rhody, 1997, “Labor
Earnings Mobility and Inequality in the United States and Germany During the
Growth Years of the 1980s”, International Economic Review, November.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Douglas Holtz-Eakin, and Stephen Rhody, 1998, “Mobility and
Inequality in the 1980s: A Cross-National Comparison of the United States and
Germany”, in The Distribution of Welfare and Household Production:
International Perspectives, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
pp 111-175.
Devine, Theresa, 1994, “Characteristics of Self-Employed Women in the United States”,
Monthly Labor Review 117(3), March, 20-34.
Evans, David and Boyan Jovanovic, 1989, “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial
Choice under Liquidity Constraints”, Journal of Political Economy, August,
808-827.
Evans, David and Linda Leighton, 1989, “Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship”,
American Economic Review, June, 519-534.
Fairlie, Robert W. and Bruce D. Meyer, 1993, “The Ethnic and Racial Character of SelfEmployment”, Working Paper, Northwestern University.

-30-

Fairlie, Robert W. and Bruce D. Meyer, 1995, “Trends in Self-Employment Among
White and Black Men: 1910-1990”, Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Farber, Henry S., 1996, “The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States, 19811993”, Working Paper #360, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University,
March.
Fuchs, Victor, 1982, “Self-Employment and Labor-Force Participation of Older Males”,
Journal of Human Resources, Fall, 339-357.
Glazer, Nathan and Daniel P. Moynihan, 1970, Beyond the Melting Pot (second edition),
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gottschalk, Peter and Timothy Smeeding, 1997, “Cross National Comparisons of
Earnings and Income Inequality”, Journal of Economic Literature, XXXV, June,
633-687.
Hamilton, Barton Hughes, 1995, “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of
the Returns to Self-Employment”, Working Paper, McGill University, April.
Hill, Martha S., 1992, The Panel Study of Income Dynamics: A User’s Guide, Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994, “Sticking It Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints”, Journal of Political
Economy, February, 53-75.
Jaeger, David A. and Ann Huff Stevens, 1977, “Is Job Stability in the United States
Falling? Trends in the Current Population Survey and Panel Study of Income
Dynamics”, Working Paper, Rutgers University, April.
McMurrer, Daniel P. and Isabel V. Sawhill, 1996, “Economic Mobility in the United
States”, Working Paper, Washington, DC: The Urban Institute, December.
Meyer, Bruce, 1990, “Why Are There So Few Black Entrepreneurs?”, NBER Paper
#3537, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, December.
Phillips, Michael M., 1996, “Inequality May Grow for Lifetime Earnings”, Wall Street
Journal, December 23, 1996, p. A1.
Palme, Marten, 1995, “Earnings Mobility and Distribution: Comparing Statistical Models
on Swedish Data”, Labour Economics 2, 213-247.
Quadrini, Vincenzo, 1996, “Entrepreneurship, Saving and Social Mobility”, Working
Paper, University of Pennsylvania, July.

-31-

Raspberry, William, 1991, “Shifting the Focus from Jobs to Ownership”, The Washington
Post, May 4, p. A23.
Sarachek, Bernard, 1978, “American Entrepreneurs and the Horatio Alger Myth”, Journal
of Economic History XXXVIII, June, 439-456.
Yuengert, Andrew, 1996, “Left-Out Capital and the Return to Capital and Labor in SelfEmployment”, mimeo, Pepperdine University.

-32-

Table 1.

One-Year Mobility Tablesa

No Entry Into Self-Employment

Entry Into Self-Employment
Entire Sample

1
75.31
7,204
16.21
1,813
3.94
383
1.82
164
0.58
37

2
19.89
1,931
68.37
6,897
14.05
1,474
2.75
245
0.63
41

3
3.58
315
16.81
1,689
64.24
5,883
14.11
1,207
1.59
104

4
0.91
65
3.15
278
16.36
1,419
68.26
5,289
12.52
818

5
0.31
20
0.45
33
1.40
114
13.06
971
84.68
4,852

1
79.50
480
33.23
107
15.06
36
4.56
8
5.18
11

2
14.41
83
45.08
147
27.88
64
9.77
22
6.03
15

3
4.00
21
15.81
47
40.02
90
19.76
35
4.88
10

4
1.87
10
4.16
15
11.45
28
44.08
75
13.04
29

5
0.22
1
1.73
5
5.59
10
21.83
35
70.86
148

1
52.90
84
22.50
39
8.82
13
3.15
4
5.31
7

2
32.98
37
48.46
66
26.95
41
6.59
9
4.52
8

3
9.91
9
20.15
24
42.11
59
20.83
26
3.79
7

4
3.06
3
6.54
10
13.64
19
47.09
55
11.78
21

5
1.15
1
2.35
3
8.48
9
22.33
28
74.60
128

1
85.94
378
40.78
64
27.11
20
8.67
3
4.23
1

2
9.91
42
42.69
76
29.69
21
19.07
10
17.06
4

3
2.57
11
12.75
20
35.98
27
16.63
7
12.89
3

4
1.58
7
2.49
4
7.22
6
35.29
16
22.33
5

5
0.00
0
1.29
2
0.00
0
20.35
6
43.49
13

Males
1
58.50
1,244
13.19
525
3.78
171
1.45
97
0.52
29

2
27.76
506
57.26
2,025
13.89
645
2.70
156
0.49
27

3
9.23
138
22.12
701
60.46
2,472
13.50
745
1.51
85

4
3.12
35
6.22
166
19.53
759
66.74
3,353
11.75
653

5
1.41
16
1.21
28
2.34
86
15.60
735
85.74
4,180
Females

1
74.83
5,960
17.50
1,288
4.07
212
2.47
67
0.94
8

2
18.43
1,425
65.96
4,872
14.17
829
2.85
89
1.48
14

3
2.53
177
14.56
988
67.12
3,411
15.18
462
2.08
19

4
0.51
30
1.86
112
13.96
660
70.99
1,936
17.07
165

5
0.10
4
0.12
5
0.68
28
8.51
236
78.44
672

Table 1.

Continueda

No Entry Into Self-Employment

Entry Into Self-Employment
Blacks

1
75.76
3,448
18.48
924
3.80
168
3.02
62
1.59
10

2
20.30
931
64.37
3,433
17.93
678
3.82
84
1.03
8

3
3.05
138
14.86
741
64.52
2,152
19.72
392
1.05
17

4
0.84
22
1.90
100
13.32
452
66.24
1,314
16.39
161

5
0.06
4
0.39
9
0.43
27
7.19
185
79.94
569

1
87.09
158
45.50
31
20.67
14
1.91
1
0.00
0

2
9.66
24
47.45
46
26.36
19
23.25
8
8.27
3

3
1.71
8
4.98
9
43.25
24
9.68
5
0.00
0

4
1.54
3
1.79
4
9.72
7
56.64
9
32.07
3

5
0.00
0
0.29
1
0.00
0
8.53
5
59.66
12

2
14.78
59
44.89
101
28.03
45
9.20
14
5.95
12

3
4.18
13
16.67
38
39.70
66
20.19
30
5.04
10

4
1.89
7
4.35
11
11.62
21
43.55
66
12.40
26

5
0.24
1
1.84
4
6.13
10
22.40
30
71.24
136

Non-Blacks
1
75.21
3,756
15.71
889
3.97
215
1.71
102
0.54
27

2
19.80
1,000
63.15
3,464
13.43
796
2.65
161
0.62
33

3
3.69
177
17.24
948
64.20
3,731
13.58
815
1.61
87

4
0.93
43
3.43
178
16.86
967
68.45
3,975
12.38
657

5
0.36
16
0.46
24
1.55
87
13.60
786
84.85
4,283

1
78.91
322
32.25
76
14.51
22
4.67
7
5.36
11

a
The first figure in cell (i,j) shows the population-weighted proportion of individuals originally in quintile i who
in quintile j one year later. The second figure in the cell is the number of observations used in the computation of
transitions. Transition matrices on the left-hand side of the page are for individuals who were wage-earners during
the first year of the two-year period. Matrices on the right-hand side of the page are for individuals who were
wage-earners during the first year and self-employed during the second year.

Table 2.

Five-Year Mobility Tablesa

No Entry Into Self-Employment

Entry Into Self-Employment
Entire Sample

1
55.80
3,155
22.20
1,408
9.72
521
5.80
280
3.14
119

2
29.87
1,620
45.60
2,989
15.79
984
4.93
242
1.94
66

3
10.19
481
23.43
1,325
46.07
2,542
17.12
831
3.70
134

4
3.01
168
7.10
363
25.01
1,243
51.34
2,257
16.72
618

5
1.13
45
1.67
76
3.41
165
20.81
864
74.50
2,330

1
59.79
300
32.64
123
23.23
59
10.19
26
10.22
31

2
24.47
114
37.55
126
25.89
68
19.45
42
10.69
30

3
7.92
35
18.11
54
21.17
51
21.51
46
10.53
30

4
5.26
23
4.40
16
18.74
40
21.55
43
13.26
40

5
2.56
9
7.30
21
10.98
23
27.30
53
55.30
150

1
32.74
38
19.23
37
16.25
27
5.58
12
9.00
25

2
41.72
28
39.38
50
25.72
42
20.61
33
11.03
29

3
8.45
8
26.29
29
23.21
36
23.71
39
9.68
26

4
7.45
7
6.42
10
24.33
33
24.96
37
13.86
39

5
9.64
5
8.68
12
10.49
16
25.15
39
56.43
140

1
64.17
262
40.22
86
35.69
32
24.86
14
27.21
6

2
21.68
86
36.52
76
26.20
26
15.77
9
5.93
1

3
7.83
27
13.48
25
17.52
15
14.51
7
22.33
4

4
4.91
16
3.26
6
8.74
7
10.72
6
4.90
1

5
1.41
4
6.51
9
11.85
7
34.13
14
39.63
10

Males
1
37.39
411
15.92
333
6.07
165
4.36
153
2.43
90

2
32.71
294
39.96
756
15.68
409
4.64
158
1.71
54

3
16.95
124
27.49
446
45.54
1,042
16.91
549
3.62
119

4
7.49
63
12.59
164
27.15
586
50.84
1,461
16.66
534

5
5.46
30
4.04
49
5.57
105
23.25
626
75.58
2,075
Females

1
58.71
2,744
24.33
1,075
12.28
356
8.51
127
8.33
29

2
29.42
1,326
47.50
2,233
15.86
575
5.46
84
3.60
12

3
9.12
357
22.05
879
46.44
1,500
17.51
282
4.33
15

4
2.30
105
5.24
199
23.52
657
52.28
796
17.16
84

5
0.44
15
0.87
27
1.90
60
16.23
238
66.58
255

Table 2.

Continueda

No Entry Into Self-Employment

Entry Into Self-Employment
Blacks

1
60.92
1,485
23.26
688
8.63
198
8.33
81
4.37
29

2
30.38
732
52.53
1,582
22.37
474
6.62
83
3.88
9

3
6.85
161
19.66
567
51.06
979
22.16
263
6.42
20

4
1.65
72
4.24
117
16.85
345
51.17
548
18.80
119

5
0.20
9
0.32
15
1.10
37
11.73
153
66.53
237

1
67.70
90
43.67
45
20.46
15
48.79
7
7.29
4

2
23.47
29
45.61
36
37.70
18
23.34
4
10.89
1

3
3.41
7
3.78
5
33.59
14
14.59
3
19.36
2

4
5.42
5
3.29
6
6.47
5
3.91
2
8.29
4

5
0.00
0
3.65
5
1.77
1
9.37
2
54.18
8

2
24.54
85
37.01
90
25.42
50
19.38
38
10.69
29

3
8.20
28
19.07
49
20.68
37
21.62
43
10.22
28

4
5.25
18
4.48
10
19.22
35
21.85
41
13.43
36

5
2.72
9
7.54
16
11.34
22
27.61
51
55.34
142

Non-Blacks
1
54.81
1,670
21.96
720
9.90
323
5.55
199
3.09
90

2
29.77
888
44.03
1,407
14.71
510
4.76
159
1.87
57

3
10.83
320
24.28
758
45.25
1,563
16.62
568
3.60
114

4
3.27
96
7.75
246
26.35
898
51.36
1,709
16.64
499

5
1.31
36
1.98
61
3.79
128
21.70
711
74.79
2,093

1
59.30
210
31.90
78
23.33
44
9.54
19
10.32
27

a
The first figure in cell (i,j) shows the population-weighted proportion of individuals originally in quintile i who
in quintile j five years later. The second figure in the cell is the number of observations used in the computation of
transitions. Transition matrices on the left-hand side of the page are for individuals who were wage-earners during
the entire period. Matrices on the right-hand side of the page are for individuals who were wage-earners during the
first year and self-employed two or more of the next five years.

Table 3.

Summary Statistics: Variables in One-Year Mobility Equationsa

Entire Sample
(1)

Males
(2)

Females
(3)

Blacks
(4)

Non-Blacks
(5)

EDUCt (years of education)

13.2
(2.44)

13.3
(2.55)

13.0
(2.32)

12.3
(2.25)

13.3
(2.45)

EXPt (potential experience: age minus
education minus 6)

19.6
(8.99)

19.5
(8.91)

19.7
(9.07)

19.4
(9.08)

19.6
(8.98)

Pt (equals percentile in the earnings
distribution in initial year)

0.507
(0.287)

0.651
(0.254)

0.365
(0.244)

0.380
(0.239)

0.523
(0.289)

SEt (equals 1 if individual was selfemployed in initial year)

0.114
(0.318)

0.155
(0.362)

0.0726
(0.259)

0.0314
(0.174)

0.124
(0.330)

SEt+1 (equals 1 if individual was selfemployed in second year)

0.120
(0.325)

0.161
(0.367)

0.0800
(0.271)

0.0356
(0.185)

0.131
(0.337)

CHANGEt (equals 1 if individual
changed jobs during period)

0.262
(0.440)

0.192
(0.394)

0.331
(0.471)

0.311
(0.463)

0.256
(0.436)

NOBS

48,818

23,217

25,601

16,811

32,007

a

Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations of the means. Means are taken over the number of
transitions, not the number of individuals. In any given year, the value of URt (the national unemployment rate),
is essentially invariant across demographic groups. Its mean is 6.68 (s.d. = 7.04).

Table 4.

Entire Sample
(1)
0
0.167
0.333
0.50
0.667
0.833
1.0
a

77.1
7.4
3.2
2.3
1.9
2.3
5.9

Frequency Distribution of %SEa

Males
(2)

Females
(3)

Blacks
(4)

Non-Blacks
(5)

71.6
7.7
3.6
2.7
2.3
3.0
9.1

84.8
7.0
2.5
1.7
1.3
1.2
1.5

90.5
5.9
1.2
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.7

75.6
7.5
3.4
2.4
2.1
2.4
6.5

%SE is the proportion of each five-year period that the individual is self-employed, including the
initial year. This table provides, for each group, the overall frequency distributions of %SE, computed
using the PSID weights.

Table 5.

Percentile

Effects of Self-Employment on One-Year Mobilitya

No SE
(1)

SE in Year 1
SE in Year 2
(2)
(3)
Entire Sample

SE in Both Years
(4)

10th

0.150
(0.00257)

0.196
(0.00639)

0.150
(0.00608)

0.196
(0.00694)

25th

0.278
(0.00129)

0.320
(0.00603)

0.278
(0.00588)

0.320
(0.00506)

50th

0.501
(0.00101)

0.520
(0.00804)

0.501
(0.00791)

0.520
(0.00636)

75th

0.731
(0.000984)

0.703
(0.00859)

0.733
(0.00872)

0.705
(0.00553)

90th

0.876
(0.00138)

0.812
(0.0123)

0.880
(0.0126)

0.816
(0.00625)

Males
th

0.230
(0.00918)

0.305
(0.0166)

0.248
(0.0170)

0.322
(0.0156)

25th

0.323
(0.00468)

0.386
(0.0101)

0.332
(0.0102)

0.395
(0.00901)

50th

0.515
(0.00168)

0.545
(0.00978)

0.513
(0.00987)

0.543
(0.00734)

75th

0.733
(0.00128)

0.713
(0.00904)

0.727
(0.00935)

0.707
(0.00616)

90th

0.879
(0.00140)

0.825
(0.0122)

0.874
(0.0127)

0.820
(0.00606)

10

Females
10th

0.138
(0.00255)

0.163
(0.00630)

0.126
(0.00589)

0.152
(0.00640)

25th

0.269
(0.00125)

0.280
(0.00933)

0.254
(0.00885)

0.265
(0.00775)

50th

0.493
(0.00133)

0.466
(0.0138)

0.484
(0.0132)

0.457
(0.0118)

75th

0.722
(0.00262)

0.641
(0.0263)

0.732
(0.0241)

0.651
(0.0179)

90th

0.864
(0.00453)

0.748
(0.0424)

0.890
(0.0392)

0.773
(0.0268)

Table 5.

Percentile

No SE
(1)

Continued

SE in Year 1
(2)

SE in Year 2
(3)

SE in Both Years
(4)

Blacks
10th

0.148
(0.00585)

0.203
(0.0160)

0.103
(0.0122)

0.159
(0.0174)

25th

0.272
(0.00264)

0.296
(0.0177)

0.249
(0.0152)

0.273
(0.0148)

50th

0.485
(0.00272)

0.440
(0.0247)

0.504
(0.0218)

0.459
(0.0201)

75th

0.699
(0.00533)

0.561
(0.0358)

0.778
(0.0383)

0.640
(0.0232)

90th

0.835
(0.00840)

0.642
(0.0563)

0.948
(0.0599)

0.755
(0.0320)

Non-Blacks
10th

0.150
(0.00283)

0.194
(0.00677)

0.153
(0.00648)

0.197
(0.00724)

25th

0.280
(0.00150)

0.323
(0.00627)

0.280
(0.00617)

0.323
(0.00517)

50th

0.504
(0.00110)

0.525
(0.00826)

0.501
(0.00819)

0.523
(0.00625)

75th

0.735
(0.000967)

0.710
(0.00828)

0.734
(0.00840)

0.710
(0.00529)

90th

0.877
(0.00137)

0.815
(0.0122)

0.880
(0.0125)

0.818
(0.00616)

a

Each figure shows the predicted percentile in the distribution using the estimated coefficients from equation
(2.5). The equation is estimated separately for each demographic group. Predictions are for the second-year of
two-year periods, for individuals in the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles. Column (1) assumes SEt = SEt+1 = 0; i.e.,
the individual was never self-employed. In column (2), the individual was self-employed the first year, and then
exited self-employment, i.e., SEt = 1, SEt+1 = 0. In column (3), the individual was a wage earner the first period,
and made a transition to self-employment, i.e., SEt = 0, SEt+1 = 1. In column (4) the individual was self-employed
both years, SEt = SEt+1 = 1. Number in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of the
predictions.

Table 6.

Percentile

%SE = 0
(1)

%SE = 0.16
(2)

Effects of Self-Employment in Five-Year Mobilitya
%SE = 0.33
(3)

%SE = 0.5
(4)
Entire Sample

%SE = 0.67
(5)

%SE = 0.83
(6)

%SE = 1.0
(7)

10th

0.256
(0.00703)

0.231
(0.00900)

0.220
(0.0108)

0.224
(0.0112)

0.242
(0.0110)

0.275
(0.0128)

0.333
(0.0174)

25th

0.349
(0.00360)

0.343
(0.00566)

0.344
(0.00768)

0.349
(0.00856)

0.360
(0.00880)

0.377
(0.00984)

0.410
(0.00909)

50th

0.522
(0.00199)

0.533
(0.00574)

0.541
(0.00891)

0.544
(0.0103)

0.543
(0.0103)

0.538
(0.0105)

0.541
(0.0113)

75th

0.716
(0.00176)

0.724
(0.00581)

0.726
(0.00918)

0.720
(0.0106)

0.708
(0.0104)

0.690
(0.00997)

0.676
(0.00945)

90th

0.844
(0.00273)

0.840
(0.00865)

0.831
(0.0137)

0.818
(0.0155)

0.799
(0.0145)

0.776
(0.0122)

0.759
(0.0118)

Males
10th

0.387
(0.0205)

0.376
(0.0250)

0.370
(0.0288)

0.368
(0.0290)

0.371
(0.0257)

0.380
(0.0220)

0.413
(0.0246)

25th

0.430
(0.00396)

0.430
(0.0145)

0.431
(0.0174)

0.432
(0.0181)

0.433
(0.0168)

0.435
(0.0154)

0.458
(0.0156)

50th

0.547
(0.00360)

0.554
(0.00814)

0.558
(0.0124)

0.558
(0.0143)

0.554
(0.0141)

0.546
(0.0135)

0.555
(0.0124)

75th

0.718
(0.00236)

0.719
(0.00672)

0.716
(0.0105)

0.708
(0.0123)

0.696
(0.0123)

0.679
(0.0119)

0.679
(0.00984)

90th

0.848
(0.00269)

0.839
(0.00848)

0.826
(0.0134)

0.811
(0.0153)

0.792
(0.0147)

0.770
(0.0132)

0.766
(0.0116)

Table 6.

Percentile

%SE = 0
(1)

%SE = 0.16
(2)

%SE = 0.33
(3)

Continued
%SE = 0.5
(4)
Females

%SE = 0.67
(5)

%SE = 0.83
(6)

%SE = 1.0
(7)

10th

0.234
(0.00776)

0.217
(0.00965)

0.207
(0.0114)

0.203
(0.0120)

0.205
(0.0125)

0.214
(0.0153)

0.214
(0.0204)

25th

0.335
(0.00358)

0.320
(0.00679)

0.315
(0.00981)

0.318
(0.0112)

0.330
(0.0121)

0.350
(0.0146)

0.365
(0.0179)

50th

0.511
(0.00276)

0.508
(0.00867)

0.509
(0.0133)

0.515
(0.0153)

0.525
(0.0163)

0.540
(0.0197)

0.545
(0.0261)

75th

0.699
(0.00509)

0.715
(0.0176)

0.721
(0.0273)

0.718
(0.0304)

0.704
(0.0284)

0.682
(0.0265)

0.635
(0.0344)

90th

0.816
(0.0105)

0.848
(0.0309)

0.857
(0.0475)

0.843
(0.0525)

0.805
(0.0479)

0.744
(0.0427)

0.647
(0.0510)

Blacks
10th

0.224
(0.0110)

0.220
(0.0157)

0.218
(0.0199)

0.218
(0.0239)

0.221
(0.0555)

0.225
(0.0522)

0.245
(0.0751)

25th

0.317
(0.00488)

0.316
(0.0109)

0.319
(0.0160)

0.326
(0.0196)

0.337
(0.0251)

0.352
(0.0364)

0.383
(0.0483)

50th

0.489
(0.00438)

0.494
(0.0135)

0.501
(0.0208)

0.510
(0.0243)

0.521
(0.0270)

0.534
(0.0345)

0.561
(0.0456)

75th

0.685
(0.00605)

0.694
(0.0185)

0.698
(0.0291)

0.697
(0.0333)

0.690
(0.0328)

0.678
(0.0333)

0.673
(0.0392)

90th

0.813
(0.0107)

0.825
(0.0319)

0.824
(0.0497)

0.811
(0.0558)

0.785
(0.0519)

0.747
(0.0453)

0.708
(0.0526)

Table 6.

Percentile

%SE = 0
(1)

%SE = 0.16
(2)

%SE = 0.33
(3)

Continued
%SE = 0.5
(4)
Non-Blacks

%SE = 0.67
(5)

%SE = 0.83
(6)

%SE = 1.0
(7)

10th

0.261
(0.00794)

0.234
(0.0100)

0.222
(0.0118)

0.224
(0.0122)

0.243
(0.0120)

0.276
(0.0131)

0.334
(0.0176)

25th

0.355
(0.00412)

0.347
(0.00623)

0.345
(0.00831)

0.350
(0.00918)

0.360
(0.00930)

0.377
(0.0102)

0.411
(0.0116)

50th

0.526
(0.00218)

0.536
(0.00607)

0.542
(0.00939)

0.544
(0.0108)

0.542
(0.0108)

0.537
(0.0108)

0.541
(0.0114)

75th

0.719
(0.00180)

0.726
(0.00593)

0.726
(0.00934)

0.720
(0.0108)

0.708
(0.0106)

0.689
(0.0102)

0.676
(0.00946)

90th

0.844
(0.00276)

0.840
(0.00860)

0.831
(0.0136)

0.818
(0.0154)

0.799
(0.0145)

0.776
(0.0123)

0.760
(0.0117)

a

Each figure shows the predicted percentile in the earnings distribution conditional on percentile in the earnings distribution five years earlier, inter alia.
Estimates are based on a variant of equation (2.5) in which the left hand side variable is Pt+5, and the experience with self-employment is a quadratic in %SE,
the proportion of the five-year period in which the individual was self-employed. Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of
the predictions.

Figure 1*

1-Year Mobility: Effect of Self-Employment
0.1000

0.0500

0.0000
Enter S.E.

Exit S.E.

All S.E.
25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0500

-0.1000

-0.1500
*Based on Table 5. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in both
years; e.g., "Exit S.E." equals difference between a self-employed individual who exited in year 2 and a wageearner in both periods.

Figure 2*

1-Year Mobility: Effect of Self-Employment for Men
0.1000

0.0500

0.0000
Enter S.E.

Exit S.E.

All S.E.
25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0500

-0.1000

-0.1500

*

Based on Table 5. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in both years; e.g., "Exit S.E." equals difference
between a self-employed individual who exited in year 2 and a wage-earner in both periods.

Figure 3*

1-Year Mobility: Effect of Self-Employment for Women
0.1000

0.0500

0.0000
Enter S.E.

Exit S.E.

All S.E.

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0500

-0.1000

-0.1500

*Based on Table 5. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in both years; e.g., "Exit S.E." equals difference
between a self-employed individual who exited in year 2 and a wage-earner in both periods.

Figure 4*

1-Year Mobility: Effect of Self-Employment for Blacks
0.1000

0.0500

0.0000
Enter S.E.

Exit S.E.

All S.E.

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0500

-0.1000

-0.1500

*Based on Table 5. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in both years; e.g., "Exit S.E." equals difference
between a self-employed individual who exited in year 2 and a wage-earner in both periods.

Figure 5*

1-Year Mobility: Effect of Self-Employment for Non-Blacks
0.1000

0.0500

0.0000
Enter S.E.

Exit S.E.

All S.E.

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0500

-0.1000

-0.1500

*Based on Table 5. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in both years; e.g., "Exit S.E." equals difference
between a self-employed individual who exited in year 2 and a wage-earner in both periods.

Figure 6*

5-Year Mobility: Effect of Additional Self-Employment
0.1000

0.0800

0.0600

0.0400

0.0200

0.0000
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0200

-0.0400

-0.0600

-0.0800

-0.1000

*Based on Table 6. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in all years; e.g., "3 Years" equals difference
between self-employed for 3 years and a wage-earner in all years.

Figure 7*

5-Year Mobility: Effect of Additional Self-Employment for Men
0.1000

0.0800

0.0600

0.0400

0.0200

0.0000
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0200

-0.0400

-0.0600

-0.0800

-0.1000

*Based on Table 6. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in all years; e.g., "3 Years" equals difference
between self-employed for 3 years and a wage-earner in all years.

Figure 8*

5-Year Mobility: Effect of Additional Self-Employment for Women
0.1000

0.0800

0.0600

0.0400

0.0200

0.0000
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0200

-0.0400

-0.0600

-0.0800

-0.1000

*Based on Table 6. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in all years; e.g., "3 Years" equals difference
between self-employed for 3 years and a wage-earner in all years.

Figure 9*

5-Year Mobility: Effect of Additional Self-Employment for Blacks
0.1000

0.0800

0.0600

0.0400

0.0200

0.0000
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0200

-0.0400

-0.0600

-0.0800

-0.1000

*Based on Table 6. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in all years; e.g., "3 Years" equals difference
between self-employed for 3 years and a wage-earner in all years.

Figure 10*

5-Year Mobility: Effects of Additional Self-Employment for Non-Blacks
0.1000

0.0800

0.0600

0.0400

0.0200

0.0000
1 Year

2 Years

3 Years

4 Years

5 Years

6 Years

25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile

-0.0200

-0.0400

-0.0600

-0.0800

-0.1000

*Based on Table 6. Bars are difference between percentile of a group member and that of a wage-earner in all years; e.g., "3 Years" equals difference
between self-employed for 3 years and a wage-earner in all years.

APPENDIX
The results summarized in Tables 5 and 6 and the associated figures are based on
the estimated parameters of the regression model developed in Section 3.1. This
appendix contains the parameter estimates. Appendix Table 1 defines the right-hand-side
variables. Appendix Table 2 exhibits the one-year mobility results for both the entire
sample and the various sub-groups. Appendix Table 3 provides the same information for
the analysis of five-year mobility.
As noted in the text, because of the many interactions among the right-hand-side
variables, the coefficients are very hard to interpret. Therefore, to help assess the
implications of the coefficients, we report in Appendix Table 4 the partial derivatives of
the dependent variables (Pt+1 or Pt+5, depending on whether we are examining one-year or
five-year mobility) with respect to potential experience, the unemployment rate,
education, and initial position (i.e., Pt). This table shows the impact of each variable for
the sample as a whole and for each demographic group.

Appendix Table 1.
Variable
EXP
EXP2
EDUC
UR
Pt
JC
SEt
SEt+1
%SE
%SE2
%CHNG
%CHNG2

Variable Definitions

Definitions
Years of potential experience
Years of potential experience, squared
Years of education
Unemployment rate
Percentile in initial year
Percentile in initial year, squared
= 1 if changed jobs (1-year regressions only)
= 1 if self-employed in initial year
= 1 if self-employed in terminal year (1-year regressions only)
= fraction of transition period spent in self-employment (5-year regressions only)
= fraction of transition period spent in self-employment, squared (5-year regressions only)
= fraction of years in transition period with a job change (5-year regressions only)
= fraction of years in transition period with a job change, squared (5-year regressions only)

Appendix Table 2.

1-Year Mobility Regressiona

All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

EXP

0.0020399
(0.0013012)

-0.0080875
(0.0033379)

0.0010453
(0.0014534)

0.0035027
(0.0027395)

-0.0027389
(0.0014487)

EXP2

0.00005
(0.000028)

0.0002192
(0.000071)

-0.00003
(0.000032)

-0.00006
(0.000057)

0.000066
(0.000032)

EDUC

0.0073685
(0.0011775)

0.0235488
(0.0030146)

0.001316
(0.0013966)

0.0085604
(0.0027585)

0.0074294
(0.0012916)

UR

0.0016485
(0.0016783)

0.0013244
(0.0046004)

0.0020744
(0.0018977)

0.0038291
(0.0043784)

0.001203
(0.0018466)

Pt

1.0398
(0.0983838)

1.039626
(0.2148776)

0.8368162
(0.1406247)

1.54838
(0.2766358)

1.048316
(0.1086846)

-0.1243531
(0.0896961)

-0.0076926
(0.1707608)

0.0007875
(0.1567415)

-0.9893203
(0.3109384)

-0.1334765
(0.0980936)

SEt

0.0422039
(0.0100954)

0.0781343
(0.0237375)

0.0313761
(0.0125226)

0.0672441
(0.0263667)

0.0399112
(0.0106448)

SEt+1

0.0022443
(0.0091072)

0.0271074
(0.0231803)

-0.0056276
(0.0106508)

-0.0471269
(0.0195906)

0.0067026
(0.0096019)

JC

0.0295087
(0.0049477)

0.0091469
(0.0143087)

0.0335809
(0.0056019)

0.0299582
(0.0111363)

0.0298055
(0.0054422)

Pt x EXP

0.0071223
(0.0053543)

0.0254118
(0.0114283)

-0.000724
(0.0072746)

-0.0183206
(0.014015)

0.0088724
(0.0058445)

Pt x EXP2

-0.000217
(0.0001183)

-0.000685
(0.0002475)

7.92e-06
(0.000162)

0.0002057
(0.0002962)

-0.000262
(0.0001293)

Pt x EDUC

-0.0124122
(0.0046664)

-0.048901
(0.0097535)

0.0130897
(0.0066839)

-0.0227719
(0.0119271)

-0.0138173
(0.0050832)

Pt x UR

-0.010238
(0.0067635)

0.0023916
(0.015042)

-0.0174928
(0.0092054)

-0.0245012
(0.0199241)

-0.009111
(0.0073472)

-0.0052244
(0.0049311)

0.0192398
(0.0092472)

0.0026955
(0.0083071)

0.0267917
(0.0156196)

-0.0064104
(0.0053163)

0.0001829
(0.0001095)

0.000513
(0.0002021)

-0.00002
(0.0001869)

-0.000268
(0.0003265)

0.0002113
(0.0001183)

0.0104209
(0.0041622)

0.0308745
(0.0076222)

-0.0117628
(0.0072117)

0.0328819
(0.0123488)

0.0115638
(0.0045111)

0.0096807
(0.0060257)

-0.0055659
(0.0117119)

0.0204831
(0.0099387)

0.0303714
(0.0203213)

0.0089331
(0.0064945)

SEt x Pt

0.0720512
(0.3568211)

0.3229562
(0.4538401)

-0.2634639
(0.6951141)

-1.564425
(1.040795)

0.1689735
(0.371365)

SEt x Pt x EXP

-0.0072965
(0.018677)

0.0037949
(0.0231601)

-0.0302082
(0.0332285)

0.0137349
(0.0519422)

-0.0055894
(0.019352)

Appendix Table 2.

Continued

All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

0.0001584
(0.0004326)

-0.000219
(0.0005344)

0.0009934
(0.0007815)

0.0002225
(0.0011152)

0.000092
(0.0004491)

SEt x Pt x EDUC

0.0083382
(0.0157024)

-0.0038595
(0.0186506)

0.0235472
(0.0316869)

0.0651915
(0.0448638)

0.003637
(0.0163799)

SEt x Pt x UR

-0.0085183
(0.0233005)

-0.0386934
(0.030546)

0.0062305
(0.0384742)

0.0431162
(0.0619183)

-0.0127055
(0.0245596)

-0.5514046
(0.431421)

-0.759051
(0.5230715)

-0.743169
(1.081026)

0.2767879
(1.408068)

-0.6384936
(0.4467787)

0.0221399
(0.0240391)

0.0022686
(0.0288266)

0.0857955
(0.0506216)

-0.0142439
(0.0802395)

0.0205356
(0.0248019)

-0.000528
(0.0005661)

0.000078
(0.0006693)

-0.0025348
(0.0012376)

-0.000353
(0.0016746)

-0.00046
(0.000585)

-0.000214
(0.019283)

0.0133067
(0.0219317)

-0.0126433
(0.0491065)

-0.0115084
(0.0586859)

0.0038486
(0.0199989)

0.0250863
(0.0288443)

0.0523638
(0.0362622)

0.0389904
(0.0643288)

0.0125562
(0.0870201)

0.0290442
(0.0301213)

0.183348
(0.3339471)

0.0518277
(0.4391549)

-0.1744686
(0.5786651)

2.071849
(0.9379211)

0.0579783
(0.3481789)

-0.0087968
(0.0171287)

-0.0131264
(0.0223902)

0.0158232
(0.0271425)

-0.0659211
(0.0478374)

-0.008291
(0.0178293)

0.0002075
(0.0003947)

0.0003334
(0.0005144)

-0.000417
(0.0006303)

0.0010645
(0.0010523)

0.0002216
(0.0004116)

-0.0222273
(0.0149122)

-0.0242751
(0.0181817)

-0.0239572
(0.0281644)

-0.0937183
(0.0430254)

-0.0178234
(0.0156293)

0.0226769
(0.0221592)

0.0383182
(0.0299499)

0.0425407
(0.0339368)

-0.0174198
(0.0581358)

0.027761
(0.0234097)

-0.1421683
(0.4059606)

-0.1181431
(0.5071675)

0.799162
(0.8794594)

-1.241156
(1.305059)

-0.0282639
(0.4209672)

0.0035752
(0.0221671)

0.0148524
(0.0280747)

-0.0566844
(0.0412185)

0.0673939
(0.0741656)

0.0026796
(0.0229497)

-0.00004
(0.0005201)

-0.000334
(0.0006494)

0.0015161
(0.001008)

-0.0010532
(0.0015562)

-0.00004
(0.0005394)

0.0258965
(0.0183707)

0.0271013
(0.021473)

0.0235451
(0.0436074)

0.0604495
(0.0560732)

0.0221973
(0.0191236)

-0.0312997
(0.0277628)

-0.0428904
(0.0357403)

-0.0831254
(0.055962)

-0.0198501
(0.0808413)

-0.0363606
(0.0290279)

-0.1367153
(0.1727687)

0.2503747
(0.2651504)

0.9860995
(0.2687993)

-0.3491241
(0.5482177)

-0.0868476
(0.1870952)

SEt x Pt x EXP

2

Appendix Table 2.

a

Continued

All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

-0.0072535
(0.0086654)

0.0013309
(0.012663)

0.0013564
(0.013358)

-0.022995
(0.024417)

-0.0030667
(0.009348)

0.000107
(0.0002048)

-0.000192
(0.0002976)

0.00005
(0.0003094)

0.0004613
(0.0005183)

1.59e-06
(0.0002226)

0.0031524
(0.0083012)

-0.0160041
(0.0118509)

0.0413227
(0.0131673)

0.0071502
(0.0239103)

0.0005762
(0.0089198)

-0.001289
(0.0118017)

-0.0081582
(0.0174539)

0.0221005
(0.0173907)

0.0358482
(0.0389026)

-0.006082
(0.0125869)

-0.4786928
(0.2501266)

-0.9829794
(0.3451502)

0.9730991
(0.4998402)

-0.1351609
(1.175181)

-0.5276152
(0.2652244)

0.0255507
(0.0133798)

0.0145032
(0.0177729)

0.0080371
(0.0252383)

-0.0016224
(0.0514193)

0.0216285
(0.0140683)

-0.000689
(0.0003228)

-0.000323
(0.0004267)

-0.000467
(0.0005968)

-0.00003
(0.0011536)

-0.000594
(0.0003402)

0.0155369
(0.0119733)

0.0435317
(0.015865)

-0.0450696
(0.0241904)

0.0430718
(0.0489755)

0.0171228
(0.0125681)

0.0129901
(0.0172123)

0.0248297
(0.0229918)

-0.0516113
(0.0335096)

-0.0777778
(0.0832947)

0.0198031
(0.0178198)

-0.0263419
(0.0236442)

-0.0965346
(0.0641196)

0.0120609
(0.0280145)

-0.1100051
(0.057818)

-0.0195272
(0.0265045)

Variables defined in Appendix Table 1. Dependent variable is percentile one year after the initial period.
Numbers in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

Appendix Table 3. 5-Year Mobility Regressionsa
All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

SEt

0.0112189
(0.0077483)

0.0207397
(0.0104909)

-0.0141478
(0.0106211)

0.0120344
(0.0223085)

0.0119315
(0.008044)

EXP

-0.0036229
(0.0025131)

-0.0107682
(0.0052862)

-0.0028892
(0.0028061)

0.013226
(0.0043394)

-0.0053222
(0.0027606)

EXP2

0.000034
(0.000054)

0.0002411
(0.0001119)

-1.04e-06
(0.000061)

-0.000339
(0.00009)

0.000073
(0.00006)

EDUC

0.0146056
(0.0021845)

0.0339745
(0.0046395)

0.0033085
(0.0025058)

0.0089092
(0.004669)

0.0142277
(0.002374)

UR

-0.000575
(0.004041)

-0.0130491
(0.0094865)

0.0059094
(0.0051012)

0.0027824
(0.0066545)

0.00004
(0.0044202)

Pt

1.088863
(0.2041863)

0.934942
(0.3810792)

0.6123376
(0.2999818)

1.902309
(0.4286446)

1.037855
(0.2228078)

-0.3938976
(0.1892811)

-0.2607169
(0.3132375)

-0.0789044
(0.3376207)

-1.558986
(0.4604987)

-0.350341
(0.2051495)

%SE

-0.3205812
(0.0589491)

-0.1519319
(0.1292916)

-0.1043782
(0.0724413)

-0.0388127
(0.1323163)

-0.3353874
(0.0623254)

%SE2

0.3938554
(0.0731295)

0.1506608
(0.1472422)

0.0453589
(0.0927936)

-0.000746
(0.2070447)

0.4069726
(0.0766409)

%CHNG

0.4515125
(0.0445169)

0.4881647
(0.1152787)

0.4446944
(0.0525527)

0.2487811
(0.0757283)

0.4577269
(0.0494534)

%CHNG2

-0.480529
(0.0403541)

-0.664042
(0.1044293)

-0.4542408
(0.0476704)

-0.2611984
(0.0699956)

-0.4915015
(0.0445613)

Pt x EXP

-0.015001
(0.0101137)

-0.0022032
(0.0177503)

-0.0204617
(0.0141396)

-0.0983425
(0.0202166)

-0.0078658
(0.010983)

Pt x EXP2

0.0003182
(0.0002203)

-0.000124
(0.0003821)

0.0005608
(0.0003106)

0.0021861
(0.0004245)

0.0001305
(0.0002394)

Pt x EDUC

-0.0164979
(0.0084959)

-0.0721331
(0.0153613)

0.0466569
(0.0119063)

0.014829
(0.0188294)

-0.0201117
(0.0091914)

Pt x UR

-0.021217
(0.016062)

0.0325487
(0.0307625)

-0.054943
(0.0238747)

-0.0802454
(0.0323975)

-0.0146615
(0.0173591)

0.022001
(0.0094884)

0.0150433
(0.0146643)

0.041254
(0.016939)

0.1175104
(0.0219544)

0.0153128
(0.0102366)

-0.00045
(0.0002075)

-0.000187
(0.0003188)

-0.000966
(0.0003737)

-0.0024846
(0.0004573)

-0.000271
(0.0002239)

0.0091445
(0.007662)

0.0473099
(0.0124703)

-0.0530191
(0.013262)

-0.0122125
(0.0181458)

0.0137153
(0.0082711)

0.028854
(0.0146461)

-0.0167023
(0.0245852)

0.0624354
(0.0258584)

0.0962811
(0.0344752)

0.020389
(0.0157546)

Appendix Table 3.

Continued

All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

%SE x Pt

2.721188
(1.850904)

1.323822
(2.574317)

3.653802
(3.026939)

7.262658
(4.566119)

2.179764
(1.954818)

%SE x Pt x EXP

0.1099135
(0.0845839)

0.1145325
(0.1129932)

0.1455209
(0.1289939)

0.0238018
(0.2067518)

0.0969259
(0.0898061)

%SE x Pt x EXP2

-0.001804
(0.0019029)

-0.0018687
(0.0025819)

-0.0031088
(0.0028127)

-0.00154
(0.0042428)

-0.0013376
(0.0020325)

%SE x Pt x EDUC

-0.1348114
(0.0766581)

-0.0530729
(0.1011599)

-0.176111
(0.1270095)

-0.2868787
(0.1821954)

-0.1194132
(0.0807481)

%SE x Pt UR

-0.1113864
(0.1451619)

-0.1503506
(0.201471)

-0.372833
(0.2268544)

-0.4356739
(0.4020147)

-0.0641073
(0.1528113)

-3.262933
(2.338552)

-1.610188
(3.060818)

-8.421054
(5.207363)

-6.389625
(6.826567)

-2.718007
(2.452808)

-0.1010835
(0.1106473)

-0.1423579
(0.1410714)

-0.0019107
(0.2086973)

0.0270313
(0.3115932)

-0.0817588
(0.1163736)

0.0019354
(0.0025451)

0.0026246
(0.0032867)

0.0023383
(0.0047223)

0.0008468
(0.0064962)

0.0013039
(0.0026892)

0.1916965
(0.0985041)

0.0974086
(0.1235361)

0.2534014
(0.2155328)

0.2904367
(0.2554683)

0.1757725
(0.102992)

0.0854965
(0.1837264)

0.1417747
(0.2428892)

0.5962876
(0.3975648)

0.2581864
(0.5806998)

0.0342253
(0.1921044)

-2.659282
(2.063873)

-0.4197283
(2.771452)

-5.120821
(3.745717)

-8.52194
(5.953978)

-2.085305
(2.165935)

-0.1166958
(0.0957084)

-0.096391
(0.1223549)

-0.1262137
(0.1735268)

-0.0934999
(0.270963)

-0.1034074
(0.1007923)

0.0017084
(0.0021316)

0.0011091
(0.0027798)

0.0028153
(0.0037141)

0.0024573
(0.0055037)

0.0012521
(0.0022581)

0.10074
(0.0860719)

-0.0226522
(0.1101144)

0.2292181
(0.152812)

0.154438
(0.223856)

0.0900587
(0.0901866)

0.1745366
(0.1610708)

0.174531
(0.2156583)

0.5179122
(0.271138)

0.9834376
(0.5175119)

0.1122631
(0.1685813)

2.688066
(2.559234)

0.2396741
(3.273332)

10.0396
(6.096955)

7.111215
(8.413096)

2.097437
(2.672796)

0.1066891
(0.1223779)

0.1208649
(0.1513728)

-0.057686
(0.27138)

-0.0172791
(0.3718441)

0.0877103
(0.128092)

-0.0017633
(0.0027842)

-0.0017327
(0.0035023)

-0.001479
(0.005993)7

-0.000128
(0.0076798)

-0.0011551
(0.0029283)

-0.1387698
(0.107771)

-0.0018513
(0.1327035)

-0.2885136
(0.2465638)

-0.0814696
(0.2998624)

-0.1281401
(0.1123213)

Appendix Table 3.

Continued

All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

-0.142212
(0.199749)

-0.1569095
(0.2577172)

-0.7472232
(0.439834)

-0.8245746
(0.7288753)

-0.0740192
(0.2079996)

-5.701077
(1.118274)

-4.953951
(1.783747)

-9.712347
(1.685492)

-4.334656
(2.35767)

-5.390136
(1.219352)

0.0230879
(0.0479427)

-0.0474334
(0.0700862)

0.1796109
(0.0685064)

-0.001963
(0.1029901)

0.0321954
(0.0521245)

-0.00096
(0.0010698)

0.0005705
(0.0015531)

-0.0036548
(0.0015318)

-0.000687
(0.0021357)

-0.0011833
(0.0011655)

0.1688682
(0.0452573)

0.1891991
(0.0661124)

0.2956099
(0.0691521)

0.1196872
(0.0989601)

0.1724703
(0.0491692)

0.2030713
(0.0882523)

0.1753703
(0.1374759)

0.2688727
(0.1351812)

0.3393763
(0.1768314)

0.1451573
(0.0955868)

6.153473
(1.605444)

5.057864
(2.2829)

11.09696
(3.20768)

1.274954
(4.48067)

5.988168
(1.713834)

-0.020551
(0.0690133)

0.0510551
(0.092805)

-0.1308874
(0.1233317)

-0.1671477
(0.207865)

-0.0272687
(0.0735234)

-0.000247
(0.0015854)

-0.0016245
(0.0021126)

0.000096
(0.0028982)

0.0046128
(0.0043596)

-0.000138
(0.0016873)

-0.1881359
(0.0663828)

-0.2071656
(0.087928)

-0.3403269
(0.1285716)

0.0877973
(0.1786305)

-0.2040348
(0.0708148)

-0.2851911
(0.1267836)

-0.2303164
(0.1786393)

-0.4472045
(0.2651917)

-0.3832629
(0.3169519)

-0.2193263
(0.134976)

5.22701
(1.263119)

4.761809
(2.040201)

9.063991
(1.822575)

4.812853
(2.554967)

4.802852
(1.388528)

0.0293508
(0.0543477)

0.0588773
(0.0831812)

-0.0855975
(0.0730153)

-0.0907847
(0.1161464)

0.0385537
(0.059023)

-0.00002
(0.0011981)

-0.00073
(0.00183)

0.0017134
(0.0016275)

0.0028657
(0.0024353)

-0.00017
(0.0013019)

-0.240862
(0.0534418)

-0.2383198
(0.0814156)

-0.3476068
(0.0749173)

-0.1756908
(0.1096365)

-0.2366938
(0.0587107)

-0.1870377
(0.1012928)

-0.088975
(0.163935)

-0.321645
(0.1496763)

-0.3134147
(0.185762)

-0.1456421
(0.1102407)

-6.381609
(1.928538)

-5.428427
(2.701065)

-2.55232
(5.32691)

-6.083505
(2.067713)

-0.0270778
(0.0846965)

-0.0612718
(0.1144244)

0.3149808
(0.2706629)

-0.0425006
(0.0899401)

-10.93502
(3.822034)
-0.0071898
(0.1404171)

Appendix Table 3.

a

Continued

All

Men

Women

Black

Non-Black

0.0007942
(0.0019182)

0.0013898
(0.0025925)

0.0026972
(0.0032956)

-0.0088942
(0.0057535)

0.0011419
(0.0020362)

0.2723899
(0.0847167)

0.3034177
(0.1115052)

0.3525213
(0.1464238)

-0.1139235
(0.2190014)

0.2797083
(0.0911562)

0.3077261
(0.155781)

0.1301446
(0.2195385)

0.6257926
(0.3273971)

0.5161521
(0.3618774)

0.2628174
(0.1660345)

0.0662473
(0.0504796)

0.1188741
(0.113587)

0.1363099
(0.0616629)

-0.0618753
(0.0927228)

0.0851298
(0.0557559)

Variables defined in Appendix Table 1. Dependent variable is percentile five years after the initial period.
Numbers in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

Appendix Table 4.
Variable
Potential Experience

Effects of Covariates on Mobilitya

1-Year

5-Year

All

-0.000304
[-0.00281]

-0.00224
[-0.00809]

All

-0.000399
[-0.00369]

-0.00346
[-0.0125]

Men

-0.000101
[-0.000461]

-0.00292
[-0.00662]

Men

0.00151
[0.00689]

-0.00116
[-0.00263]

Women

0.000173
[0.00171]

-0.000382
[-0.00144]

Women

-0.000578
[-0.00572]

-0.00536
[-0.0202]

Black

0.000151
[0.00106]

-0.00153
[-0.00580]

Black

-0.000540
[-0.00378]

-0.0134
[-0.0508]

-0.000381
[-0.00353]

-0.00237
[-0.00837]

Non-Black

-0.000380
[-0.00352]

-0.00156
[-0.00551]

Non-Black
Education

Variable
Unemployment Rate

1-Year

5-Year

Initial Position

All

0.00368
[0.0341]

0.00765
[0.0276]

All

0.892

0.723

Men

0.00617
[0.0282]

0.00772
[0.0175]

Men

0.781

0.559

Women

0.00506
[0.0501]

0.0135
[0.0508]

Women

0.899

0.734

Black

0.00520
[0.0364]

0.0119
[0.0451]

Black

0.857

0.736

Non-Black

0.00332
[0.0307]

0.00678
[0.0240]

Non-Black

0.892

0.717

a

Entries show partial derivative of mobility equation with respect to each variable, evaluated at the sample
means. Figures in brackets show “long-run” effect computed by dividing the entry by (1- ), where is the partial
derivative with respect to initial position.

