                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP OF BANKS


                                            Rafael La Porta
                                      Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                            Andrei Shleifer


                                          Working Paper 7620
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7620

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




We are grateful to Thorsten Beck, Simeon Djankov, Edward Glaeser, Simon Johnson, Ross Levine, and Dani
Rodrik for helpful comments, to Karine Del Paso, Magdalena Lopez-Morton, Dmitry Rozhkov and Ekaterina
Trizlova for research assistance, and to the National Science Foundation and the Dean’s Research Fund at
the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University for financial support of this research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2000 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Ownership of Banks
Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 7620
March 2000
JEL No.G21, L32, O4

                                            ABSTRACT

       In this paper, we investigate a neglected aspect of financial systems of many countries around
the world: government ownership of banks. We assemble data which establish four findings. First,
government ownership of banks is large and pervasive around the world. Second, such ownership
is particularly significant in countries with low levels of per capita income, underdeveloped financial
systems, interventionist and inefficient governments, and poor protection of property rights. Third,
government ownership of banks is associated with slower subsequent financial development. Finally,
government ownership of banks is associated with lower subsequent growth of per capita income,
and in particular with lower growth of productivity rather than slower factor accumulation. This
evidence is inconsistent with the optimistic “development” theories of government ownership of
banks common in the 1960s, but supports the more recent “political” theories of the effects of
government ownership of firms.


Rafael La Porta                                                Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Department of Economics                                        Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University                                             Harvard University
Littauer M7                                                    79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                       and NBER
rafael_laporta@harvard.edu                                     f_lopezdesilanes@harvard.edu

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Littauer M9
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction.

        This paper discusses a neglected aspect of financial systems of many countries:

government ownership of banks. It shows that such ownership is pervasive around the world,

especially in countries with poor institutions, and that it has significant consequences for resource

allocation and economic development.

        There are two broad views of the government’s participation in financial markets. The

first, basically optimistic, “development” view is associated with Alexander Gerschenkron (1962),

who focuses on the necessity of financial development for economic growth. Gerschenkron

argues that privately owned commercial banks have been the crucial vehicle of channeling savings

to industry in several industrializing countries in the second half of the 19th century, especially

Germany. However, in some countries -- most conspicuously Russia -- economic institutions

were not sufficiently developed for private banks to play the crucial development role. “The

scarcity of capital in Russia was such that no banking system could conceivably succeed in

attracting sufficient funds to finance a large scale industrialization; the standards of honesty in

business were so disastrously low, the general distrust of the public so great, that no bank could

have hoped to attract even such small capital funds as were available, and no bank could have

successfully engaged in long term credit policies in an economy where fraudulent bankruptcy had

been almost elevated to the rank of a general business practice” (p. 19). In such countries, the

government could step in and through its financial institutions jump start both financial and

economic development. Thus in Russia in the 1890s, “it was the government that generally

fulfilled the function of industrial banks” (p.22), with salutary effects.

        Gerschenkron’s view was part of a broader sentiment in development economics which


                                                    3
advocated government ownership of firms in the strategic economic sectors (see Shleifer 1998 for

a summary). W. Arthur Lewis (1950), for example, explicitly advocates government ownership

of banks, as part of the “commanding heights” approach whereby the government would develop

certain strategic industries through both direct ownership and control over finance. Myrdal

(1968) is sympathetic toward government ownership of banks in India and other Asian countries.

A few days before the October Revolution, Lenin laid out his own perspective on banking:

“Without big banks, socialism would be impossible. The big banks are the ‘state apparatus’ which

we need to bring about socialism, and which we take ready-made from capitalism...” (Lenin 1917,

quoted in Garvy 1977, p. 21). These ideas were widely adopted around the world, particularly in

the 1960s and the 1970s, with governments nationalizing the existing commercial banks and

starting new ones in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.

       In contrast, a more recent “political” view of government ownership holds that

government control of finance, through its banks or otherwise, politicizes resource allocation for

the sake of getting votes or bribes for office holders, softens budget constraints, and lowers

economic efficiency (see, e.g., Kornai 1979, Shleifer and Vishny 1994). This view is buttressed

by considerable evidence documenting the inefficiency of government enterprises, the political

motives behind public provision of services, and the benefits of privatization (e.g, Megginson et

al. 1994, Barberis et al. 1996, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny 1997, Frydman et al. 1999,

La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes 1999). Gerschenkron has some sympathy for this view: “There is

no doubt that the government as an agens movens of industrialization discharged its role in a far

less than perfectly efficient manner. Incompetence and corruption of bureaucracy were great.

The amount of waste that accompanied the process were formidable.” (p. 20). Still,


                                                  4
Gerschenkron considers government financing of industrialization in Russia a great success.

        The government can participate in the financing of firms in a variety of ways: it can

provide subsidies directly, it can encourage private banks through regulation and suasion to lend

to politically desirable projects, or it can own financial institutions -- completely or partially --

itself. The advantage of owning banks -- as opposed to regulating banks or owning all projects

outright -- is that bank ownership gives the government extensive control over the choice of

projects being financed while leaving the implementation of these projects to the private sector.

Ownership of banks thus promotes the government’s goals in both the “development” and the

“political” theories. In the development theories, ownership of banks enables the government

both to collect savings and to direct them toward strategic long term projects. Through such

project finance, the government overcomes institutional failures undermining private capital

markets, and generates aggregate demand and other beneficial externalities fostering growth. In

the political theories, ownership of banks enables the government to finance the inefficient but

politically desirable projects. In both theories, the government finances projects that would not

get privately financed. In the development theories, these projects are socially desirable. In the

political theories, they are not.

        Using data on government ownership of banks from 92 countries around the world, we

address four related questions. First, how significant is government ownership of banks in

different countries? Second, what types of countries have more government ownership of banks?

Third, does government ownership of banks promote subsequent financial development? Fourth,

does government ownership of banks promote subsequent economic growth and, relatedly, how

does it effect factor accumulation, savings, and growth of productivity?


                                                    5
       Both the development and the political view imply that government ownership of banks

should be more prevalent in poorer countries, countries with less developed financial markets, and

more generally, countries with less well functioning institutions. The development theories also

imply that, other things equal, government ownership of banks should benefit subsequent financial

and economic development, factor accumulation, and especially productivity growth. The

political theories, in contrast, imply that, other things equal, government ownership of banks

should displace (crowd out) the growth of private financing. Moreover, while government

financing through its banks can encourage savings and capital accumulation, the projects the

government finances are likely to be inefficient and have an adverse effect on productivity growth.

By looking at financial development and productivity growth, we can thus attempt to distinguish

the two theories of government ownership of banks.

       Although our results support some elements of the development view, they are overall

more favorable to the political view. We show, first, that government ownership of banks is

common around the world: in an average country, 42 percent of equity of the 10 largest banks

was still owned by the government in 1995. We also show that government ownership of banks

is especially common in poor countries, as well as in countries with poorly defined property

rights, heavy government intervention in the economy, and underdeveloped financial systems.

The latter findings are consistent with Gerschenkron’s idea of where governments are likely to

own banks. However, our results on the effects of government ownership of banks on financial

and economic development do not support Gerschenkron’s optimism. We find that higher

government ownership of banks is associated with slower subsequent development of the financial

system, lower economic growth, and in particular lower growth of productivity. These results --


                                                 6
and particularly the finding of low productivity growth in countries with high government

ownership of banks -- are broadly supportive of the political view on the effects of government

interference in markets.

       This research relates to a number of strands in the recent literature of financial

development and economic growth. King and Levine (1993), Levine and Zervos (1998), Rajan

and Zingales (1998), Beck, Levine, Loayza (2000), Levine (1999), and Wurgler (2000) all

document the benefits of financial development for economic growth. Young (1995) shows that

in several East Asian countries growth has taken the form of factor accumulation rather than

productivity growth. Since the allocation of financial resources in East Asian economies is

heavily politicized, our results suggest that the same problems that have influenced productivity

growth in East Asia may be pervasive when the government controls the flow of capital.

       Two recent papers consider government ownership of banks. Sapienza (1999) finds that

Italian state-owned banks pursue political objectives in their lending policies, consistent with the

political view. Barth, Caprio and Levine (1999) present a comprehensive data base on

government regulation of banks around the world. Like our paper, they find that government

ownership of banks is higher in countries with less developed financial systems. This result is

consistent with both the political and the development views.

       The next four sections deal with the four questions raised above: the pervasiveness of

government ownership of banks, the characteristics of countries that have it, its effect on financial

development, and its effect on the growth of output, factor accumulation, and growth of

productivity. Section VI concludes.




                                                  7
II. How common is government ownership of banks?

Variable Definitions

       All the variables used in this paper are summarized in Table 1. We describe them at the

time we introduce them into the analysis.

       We analyze government ownership of large banks in 92 countries. We use Polk World

Banking Profiles and the Thomson Bank Directory for 1996 to determine the number of countries

with sufficient data on banks. For each country in the sample, we identify the 10 largest

commercial or development banks (in terms of assets) that lend money to firms, regardless of their

ownership structure and of whether or not they take deposits. We include development banks

because their function is precisely to provide long term finance to development projects where

private finance may fail (Myrdal 1968), and hence they constitute one prominent form of

government entry into bank lending. Below we discuss the role of development banks at some

length. We do not include Central Banks, Postal Banks (which generally do not lend money to

firms and are described as non-banking institutions), investment banks, other specialized financial

intermediaries (trust companies, home loan banks) or world-wide development banks such as the

World Bank. If a country has fewer than 10 banks in Polk and Thomson, we add information

where we can from Europa Yearbook and Euromoney Bank Register 1996.

       We identify ownership structures of banks in this sample using company reports as well as

national and international sources (Appendix A lists the sources for each country). Identifying

state versus private ownership is usually straightforward, but there are a few judgment calls.

First, we classify ownership by foreign governments as private rather than state ownership. This

reduces estimates of state ownership, but makes analytical sense since foreign governments are


                                                 8
less likely to support money-losing firms abroad. Second, we keep subsidiaries of foreign banks

in the sample as long as they make loans and extend credit locally. Third, some development

banks in the sample are regional, and owned by the governments of several countries. Some of

these banks also have private owners, as well as ownership by multilateral agencies such as the

World Bank. We take the equity ownership in a regional bank by a country’s government as the

estimate of the proportion of the bank’s assets that are in that country. These steps give us

estimates of government ownership of the 10 largest banks in each country.

        Using these data, we compute five measures of government ownership of banks, each

calculated to emphasize a somewhat different aspect of ownership. In all these calculations, we

address the issue of indirect ownership by the government, i.e., governments owning shares in

holding or other companies which in turn own shares in sample banks. The first measure, GB

(government banking), is defined as follows. For each of the 10 largest commercial and

development banks in a country, we first calculate the percentage of government ownership by

multiplying the share of each shareholder in that bank by the share the government owns in that

shareholder, and then summing the resulting shares:


                                                       J
                                      GB ik =      ∑s
                                                    j =1
                                                           ji   s gj


where k = 1....92 indexes the countries in our sample, i = 1....10 indexes the ten largest banks in a

country, j = 1....J indexes shareholders of a given bank, GBik stands for the government’s share in

bank i in country k, sji is the share of bank i owned by shareholder j, and sgj is the share of equity

the government owns in j (sgj = 0 if j is a private individual). For example, the government of

                                                   9
Israel owns 86.2% of the shares in Bank Leumi. In this case, J = 1, s1i = .862 and sgi = 1 for this

bank.

        GB for a country k is computed by multiplying GBik of every sampled bank i by its total

assets, summing the resulting numbers and dividing the sum by total assets of the top 10 banks:



                                               10

                                               ∑GB a       ik ik
                                       GBk =   i=1
                                                     10

                                                 ∑a  i=1
                                                           ik




where GBk is the first measure of government bank ownership for country k, and aik are the total

assets of bank i. GB is the simplest measure we use: it captures the share of the assets of the top

10 banks in a given country that is “owned” as opposed to “controlled” by the government.

        GB reflects government ownership of banks in the mid 1990s, well after privatization of

banks in many countries had gotten underway. Since we are ultimately interested in the effect of

government ownership of banks on economic development, we need to estimate the percentage of

banking assets owned by the government in the 1960s and 1970s, before privatizations. We could

not determine fully the history of ownership of each bank back to 1960, but did come up with

estimates of government ownership in our sample banks in 1985, roughly at the peak of

government ownership around the world and before bank privatization had started in any country

but Chile. Since we know which of the banks in our sample had been privatized after 1985, we

can determine government ownership in these banks before privatization. This variable, GBBP --

government banking before privatization, is constructed like GB, except that if a bank was

                                                          10
privatized after 1985, we set GBBPik equal to the percentage of that bank actually owned by the

government before privatization. In the countries where we know that the entire banking system

was owned by the government in 1985, including Sri Lanka, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Mexico and

12 socialist countries, we set GBBP = 1. A possible problem with GBBP is that the top 10 list is

taken in 1995, so we may underestimate government ownership in 1985 if large state owned

banks circa 1985 were no longer the largest by 1995. We use GBBP in the regressions. Since the

correlation between GB and GBBP is .78, it does not matter which variable we use.

       GB does not take into account the possibility that the extent of government control of a

bank, particularly when the government is a large shareholder, may exceed its equity ownership.

The next 3 variables, all based on government ownership in the mid-1990s, classify banks as

“government-owned” when the government’s equity ownership exceeds certain thresholds. We

use these variables to make sure that our two basic variables do not produce a misleading answer.

       To construct the next variable, GB20, we start with government ownership measures for

each of the 10 largest banks. We then classify a bank as government-owned if GBik > .2 and the

government is the largest known shareholder or if GBik >.5 (in case we do not know the

percentage ownership by the largest shareholder). GB20 is the sum of assets of all government-

owned banks using this definition (among the 10 largest) divided by the total assets of 10 largest

banks in the country. This approach is in line with our earlier work which suggests that 20%

ownership is typically sufficient for control (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer 1999).

Along similar lines, we construct GB50 as a ratio of the assets of the banks in which the

government holds over 50% of equity to the total assets of the 10 largest banks; and GB90 as a

corresponding measure for banks where government equity ownership exceeds 90%. Before


                                                 11
presenting the results, we note that these measures of government ownership of banks are highly

correlated with each other: the correlation between GB and GB20 is .95; the correlation between

GB and GB50 is .97, and the correlation between GB and GB90 is .92. The correlations between

these variables and GBBP are in the .7-.8 range.



Findings

       Table 2 presents our basic findings on the extent of government ownership of banks. We

divide countries into groups by the origin of their commercial laws (common law, French civil

law, German civil law, Scandinavian law and socialist law). Our previous research shows that the

nature of both financial markets and government involvement in economic life differs significantly

across legal origins (La Porta et al., or LLSV, 1997, 1998, 1999).

       Government ownership of banks is large and pervasive around the world. Even looking at

the 1995 data, after bank privatization had been completed in many countries, the world mean of

government ownership is 41.7 percent, and a somewhat lower 38.7 percent if we exclude the

former socialist countries. The corresponding number for pre-privatization ownership is an even

higher 55 percent (and 48.3 percent if we exclude the former socialist countries). The magnitude

of the post-privatization number suggests that, while privatization has made a dent in government

ownership of banks, it has not reduced it to negligible levels.

       Our adjustments for government control relative to cash flow ownership also increase the

world average compared to the basic variable. Using GB20 to measure government control, the

world average share of banking assets controlled by the government is 48 percent (43.9 percent

without former socialist countries). As we illustrate below, these magnitudes are considerably


                                                  12
higher than the measures of government participation in more general economic activity such as

production or investment. These findings establish our first proposition: government ownership

of banks is very large -- even after the wave of privatizations.

       It is also pervasive across continents and legal origins of commercial laws. Outside of the

few rich common law countries and Japan (at the time we took the measurement), governments

nearly everywhere own a respectable share of bank equity. The common law average is a high

28.5 percent (37.2 percent before privatization), though still statistically significantly lower than

the French civil law origin average of 45.5 percent (56.3 percent before privatization). As is often

in these comparisons of financial structures, the German and the Scandinavian averages are

between the English and French ones, and close to each other. The former socialist countries still

have the highest average share of equity of the largest banks owned by the government (61.8

percent), although this share is down sharply from 100 percent 10 years ago. The corrections for

government control change these numbers somewhat, but do not alter the general picture of high

and pervasive government ownership of banks, occurring nearly everywhere but especially in

French civil law and socialist law countries.

       Table 2B examines the importance of development banks in our sample. Its first column

shows, by legal origin, how much of the government ownership of top 10 banks is accounted for

by government ownership of development banks. On average, about 5.3 percent out of 41.7

percent overall level of government ownership is accounted for by development banks.

Development banks are particularly prevalent in French legal origin countries (largely in Latin

America), and utterly uncommon in German, Scandinavian, and socialist origin countries.

       The second column of Table 2B reproduces the averages of GB from Table 2, and the


                                                  13
third column shows how these averages change when we take development banks out of the

sample (i.e., both the numerator and the denominator in the definition of GB). The corrected

variable, government ownership of commercial banks or GBC, has a worldwide average of 38.4

percent (compared to 41.7 percent for GB). The difference between French and English origins

remains large, though not longer statistically significant.

       Conceptually, we believe it is appropriate to include development banks in the sample,

since in some countries these are precisely the banks allegedly addressing the Gerschenkron-

Myrdal development problems. We therefore keep these banks in the results we present. To be

safe, we have redone every regression excluding them. The statistical significance of some results

falls a notch, but the important results presented below remain statistically significant.

       The results on the differences in government ownership of banks among legal origins are

in principle consistent with both the development and the political view. Earlier research (LLSV

1997, 1998) shows that countries with French legal origin laws have less investor protection and

less developed private financial markets than do common law countries, which on the

development view would increase the demand for government provision of finance. Other

research (LLSV 1999) shows that French legal origin countries in general intervene more in

economic life. Consistent with the political view, then, government ownership of banks may be a

reflection of the greater politicization of economic activity in French legal origin (and socialist)

countries than in common law countries. In the subsequent sections, we present further evidence

that attempts to distinguish the two theories. Importantly, all the results presented below have

been rerun excluding socialist countries, and none of the conclusions we draw depend on them.




                                                  14
III. Which countries have high government ownership of banks?

        In this section, we ask which characteristics of countries predict high government

ownership of banks. We do so by first considering the correlations between various country

characteristics and our first two measures of government ownership of banks (after and before

privatization). Because these correlations may be influenced by the fact that poorer countries

generally have higher GB and GBBP, we also present the coefficients from regressions of

government ownership of banks on country characteristics, a constant, and the log of 1960 per

capita GDP. These results crudely correct for the differences in per capita incomes.

       Table 1 describes all the data used in this paper, including the country characteristics we

examine. An important point should be noted. Due to data availability, most of the country

characteristics we examine come either from the 1990s, or alternatively are averages of the data

from 1975 to 1995, i.e., either at the same time as GB or later than GBBP. We cannot therefore

argue that these country characteristics in some ways cause high government ownership of banks.

Rather, we are only looking at correlations, without structural interpretations. For one important

set of measures, namely those of the level of private financial development, we have data starting

in 1960 and in 1970, and hence can ask more dynamic questions.

       We begin the analysis with the 1960 level of per capita income, simply to point out that

poorer countries indeed have more government ownership of banks. We then examine a number

of indicators of the quality of government, some of which we have studied in an earlier paper

(LLSV 1999). These include measures of government intervention in economic life (such as

regulation, price controls, black market premium, political rights, and government spending),

measures of the efficiency of government (such as tax compliance, corruption and bureaucratic


                                                15
quality), measures of the security of property rights, rule of law, and investor protection,

measures of the importance of state-owned firms in the overall economy as opposed to just in

banking, measures of initial levels of financial development, and finally, measures of the incidence

of political and financial crises in the economy.

       Table 3 focuses on post-privatization government ownership of banks. Panel A

establishes that such ownership is higher in countries that were poorer in 1960. In the subsequent

panels, in addition to correlations, we present the coefficients from regressions controlling for (the

logarithm of)1960 per capita income. Panel B shows that countries with more interventionist

governments also have higher government ownership of banks. Heavier regulation, higher

frequency of price controls, heavier banking regulation, and higher black market exchange rate

premiums are all associated with greater government ownership of banks, even controlling for

initial per capita income. These correlations are high and statistically significant. At the same

time, there is no relationship between the size of government, as measured by government

consumption or government transfers and subsidies relative to GDP, and government bank

ownership. This may be partly due to the fact that these measures of government spending are

high in developed market economies, which generally have both big and good government (LLSV

1999). Finally, the evidence shows that government ownership of banks is lower in countries that

have wider political rights or are more democratic. Social as well as economic interventionism is

associated with higher government ownership of banks.

       Panel C considers government efficiency, which is related to interventionism but is not

necessarily the same thing. Countries with less efficient governments have greater government

ownership of banks. Higher tax compliance, higher bureaucratic quality, and lower corruption are


                                                    16
all associated with lower government ownership of banks. The corruption index is not statistically

significant in a regression controlling for income, but other variables are.

         Panel D focuses on the security of property rights. The first three variables -- the property

rights index, rule of law, and the likelihood of government repudiation of contracts -- all show

that countries with greater security of property rights have lower GB. This result is consistent

with Gerschenkron’s emphasis on poor protection of property rights in Russia as the reason why

government participation in financial markets was necessary. There is also weak evidence that

countries with higher LLSV (1998) indices of shareholder and creditor rights have lower

government ownership of banks.

         Panel E examines the relationship between government ownership of banks and measures

of the importance of state owned enterprises (SOEs) in the economy, including an index of their

prevalence as well as measures of relative output, investment, and employment of SOEs. Not

surprisingly, countries with greater roles of SOEs in the economy also have higher government

ownership of banks. Perhaps a more interesting question is how the government ownership of

large banks compares to the measures of the importance of SOEs. Figures 1 and 2 present the

relevant plots. On average, government ownership of banks is higher than the measures of the

relative size of the SOEs in the economy. The numbers presented here are not, however, directly

comparable, since we do not consider the smaller banks, where government ownership may be

lower.

         Panel F examines the relationship between government ownership of banks and measures

of financial, particularly banking, development. Our preferred measures of banking development

follow Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000). These authors choose and defend theoretically three


                                                  17
variables: credit by financial intermediaries to the private sector relative to GDP, liquid liabilities

of the financial system relative to GDP, and a ratio of commercial bank domestic assets to

commercial plus central bank domestic assets. We also agree with Beck et al. that the first of

these measures is theoretically the most satisfactory. For the period starting in 1970, we have

further measures of financial development: the ratio of quasi-liquid liabilities to GDP, the ratio of

domestic credit to the banking sector to GDP, and the ratio of claims on the private sector to

GDP. The data on the first three variables in Panel F are for 1960, and on the second three for

1970 (in which case we control for 1970 log per capita GDP in the regressions.)

        The data in Panel F show negative correlations between these measures of financial

development and government ownership of banks, though the results are only occasionally

significant. This evidence is consistent with both the development view that the government steps

in to help in the underdeveloped financial systems, and the political view that the government

displaces private financial institutions when it politicizes resource allocation.

        Finally, in Panel G we examine the question of whether government ownership of banks is

associated with economic and political instability, as measured by inflation, the incidence of

political crises and coups, as well as the incidence and depth of banking crises. The data on

banking crises pertain to the period 1970-1990. Here causality is a particularly thorny issue, since

government ownership may be a cause of instability because of politicized lending, but may also

be a response to instability through nationalizations. Ironically, except for some weak evidence

that countries with higher inflation have higher government ownership of banks, the association

between such ownership and the available measures of instability is weak. This may be because of

the timing problems in the data. Alternatively, such factors as the general interventionist stance of


                                                   18
the government, its efficiency, and the security of property rights may be more important

correlates of government bank ownership than are the assorted crises.

       We have redone this analysis using the pre- rather than post-privatization measure of

government ownership of banks. The results are extremely similar both in terms of the

coefficients and in terms of the patterns of statistical significance. In our growth analyses in the

following sections, we use GBBP, since it stands a better chance of being predetermined relative

to the growth experiences we study. Recall that the correlation between GB and GBBP is .78.

       The evidence in this section is consistent with both the development and the political

views of government ownership of banks. Countries with high government ownership of banks

are indeed more backward and more statist: they are poorer, have more interventionist and less

efficient governments, as well as less secure property rights. There is weak evidence that

countries with less developed financial systems have higher government ownership of banks.

Are these interventionist and inefficient governments able to step in and, through their ownership

of banks, jump start the financial system and accelerate development, consistent with the

development view? Alternatively, do such governments simply politicize resource allocation

without much benefit to growth, consistent with the political view? In the next two sections, we

attempt to address these questions.



IV. Does government ownership of banks speed up financial development?

       Gerschenkron suggests that the government, by participating in the financial sector, can

encourage the subsequent development of private lending, as it evidently did in Russia at the end

of the 19th century. The government may help to develop the institutions of lending such as


                                                  19
standardized contracts or specialized courts, show by example that long term lending is possible

and profitable, or simply subsidize private banks. In this section, we consider the growth of the

measures of financial development introduced in Panel F of Table 3 as a function of initial levels

of financial development and per capita income as well as of our measure of pre-privatization

government ownership of banks.

       The results are presented in Table 4. The first panel considers the growth in Beck, Levine

and Loayza’s (2000) measures of financial development between 1960 and 1995 as a function of

1960 initial conditions and GBBP; note that we have extended their sample to cover 89

countries. The second panel considers the growth in all six measures of financial development

between 1970 and 1995 as a function of 1970 conditions and GBBP. Two results stand out in

this Table. First, the initial level of financial development is negatively correlated with its own

subsequent growth. This may be a statistical artefact, or simply reflect some convergence in

financial development. Second, government ownership of banks ceteris paribus reduces

subsequent financial development. Using growth since 1960, this effect is only statistically

significant at the 10 percent level for our preferred variable -- the growth in the ratio of private

credit to GDP. However, for the post-1970 period, this effect has some statistical significance for

4 out of 6 measures of financial development.

       These results are inconsistent with the development view of government ownership of

banks. They are, however, consistent with the political view.



V. Does Government Ownership of Banks Speed Up Economic Growth?

       In this section, we examine the effects of government ownership of banks on capital


                                                  20
accumulation, savings, and productivity growth.

       Table 5 presents growth regressions for the periods 1960-1995 and 1970-1995, where the

dependent variable is the growth in per capita income. In Panel A, we include only the initial per

capita income and GBBP. The results confirm the standard “convergence” finding, namely that

initially poorer countries grow faster (Barro 1991). In addition, for both time periods, higher

GBBP is associated with statistically significantly slower economic growth. A parameter estimate

of around -2.5 suggests that, as ownership rises by 10 percentage points, growth falls by .25

percent per annum -- by no means a small effect. Although this result requires a number of

qualifications and robustness checks, taken up below, on its face it does not support the

development view that government participation in finance promotes economic development.

       In Panel B, we control for average years of schooling, as is standard in growth

regressions. The coefficient on GBBP falls by about 20%, but remains statistically significant. In

Panel C, we add alternatively the three measures of initial financial development from Beck,

Levine and Loayza (2000). For two out of three measures, including the initial private credit

relative to GDP, the initial level of financial development exerts a positive influence on future

growth, consistent with the work of Levine and his co-authors. Yet holding initial financial and

economic development as well as schooling constant, GBBP continues to exert a large and

statistically significant negative effect on subsequent growth. The coefficient remains between -

1.5 and -2.   Controlling for the traditional variables in the growth regressions, government

ownership of banks has a negative impact on subsequent economic growth.

       One concern with these specifications is that GBBP may simply proxy for some alternative

measure of distortionary economic policies or poorly protected property rights. These policies,


                                                  21
rather than government ownership of banks per se, may retard economic growth (Knack and

Keefer 1995). After all, we have already shown that government ownership of banks is more

prevalent in countries with interventionist and inefficient governments, as well as poorly protected

property rights. In Table 6, we include some of the standard measures of government

intervention, using to the extent possible the earliest data available so that we can interpret these

variables as having a possible causal effect on growth. The inclusion of some of these variables

may spuriously reduce the effect of GBBP. In all these regressions, we include initial private

credit relative to GDP, initial economic development, average years of schooling, as well as a

number of geographic controls to address the spurious correlation issue.

       Measures of government distortions do not eliminate the statistical significance of the

effect of GBBP on subsequent growth. The coefficient stays at around -1.5 indicating a large

effect on growth. In contrast, the distortions we measure do not themselves have statistically

significant effects on future growth when included in the regression with GBBP.

       Following Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000), we next consider specific channels through

which government ownership of banks can influence economic growth. Panel A of Table 7

focuses on savings and capital accumulation. There is some evidence that initial per capita income

exerts a negative influence on capital accumulation, and a positive influence on savings. There is

also evidence that higher years of schooling are associated with higher capital accumulation.

Finally, there is some unsurprising evidence that greater initial financial development is associated

with faster subsequent capital accumulation, consistent with Beck et al.(2000). However, there

does not appear to be much evidence that government ownership of banks has a significant

influence on either capital accumulation or savings. The tiny positive (but insignificant) effect of


                                                  22
government ownership of banks on savings provides mild support for the development view,

although the increased savings -- to the extent that there are any -- do not seem to go into capital

formation.

        Panel B of Table 7 focuses on the growth in productivity. Following Beck, Levine and

Loayza (2000), we consider three measures of productivity growth (see Table 1 for exact

definitions). The first measure derives productivity growth as output growth adjusted for capital

accumulation. The second and third measures also adjust output growth estimates by the growth

of human capital. We have been able to expand the Beck et al. sample from 61 to 77 countries

for their first two measures of productivity growth, but not for the third one, since the data

needed for the last productivity measure were not available for the extra countries. As in the

various specifications, we also use the controls introduced earlier.

        The results on productivity growth are striking. GBBP exerts a negative and, in most

specifications, statistically significant effect on future productivity growth, even controlling for

initial financial development and schooling. The coefficients, depending on the specification, are

between -1 and -2, indicating that a 10 percentage point higher measure of government ownership

is associated with .1 to .2 percent per annum lower rate of productivity growth. The bottom line

of these results is that productivity is the place where government ownership of banks negatively

impacts growth.

        This evidence is broadly consistent with the political view according to which government

ownership creates resource misallocations that are detrimental to productivity growth and

ultimately economic growth itself. The evidence on resource misallocation is also consistent with

Sapienza’s (1999) findings for Italian banks, as well as with a large literature on state firms.


                                                  23
Finally, the data support Young’s (1995) interpretation of Asian growth. The evidence is not,

however, consistent with the development view of the beneficial effects of government ownership

of banks on productivity growth.

       Table 8 presents some additional tests of the political theory, by asking what effects

government ownership of banks has on two rough proxies of the efficiency of resource

allocation. First, does the share of private credit that goes to firms outside the top 20 depend on

government ownership of banks? If that share is lower when GBBP is higher, it may suggest that

when a government controls banks it allocates a lion share of the credit to the largest firms,

thereby depriving the smaller firms of credit. Second, is the spread between the lending and the

deposit rate increasing with government ownership of banks? If it is, government ownership may

reduce the efficiency of the banking sector itself.

       Table 8 shows that countries with higher GBBP allocate a lower share of private credit to

firms outside the top 20. Countries with a higher GBBP also have higher markups in the banking

sector. This evidence is consistent with the view that government ownership of banks is

associated with a misallocation of resources in the economy.

       One possible concern about our growth analysis is the endogeneity of government

ownership of banks. We have presented in Table 3 some evidence indicating that financial and

economic crises do not appear to be good predictors of government ownership. But there

remains a concern that some deeper structural factors both cause government ownership of banks

and slow down the growth of productivity and output. Although there is no perfect way to

address this concern, we can try to address it in part by using instrumental variables to predict

government ownership of banks. As instruments, we use the variables that have been introduced


                                                  24
in our earlier work (LLSV 1997, 1998, 1999), and have been previously used in a similar context

by Beck, Levine and Loayza, namely legal origins and religious compositions of the populations in

different countries. These variables have the advantage of being historically predetermined,

correlated with government ownership of banks (see Table 2), and possibly uncorrelated with the

residual.

        Table 9 presents the results of these instrumental variable regressions for the growth of

income, growth of capital, savings rates, and productivity growth, using various control variables.

In most specifications, the instrumental variable results are similar to the OLS results, although

the magnitude of the coefficients on GBBP in some instances increases sharply. The predicted

component of GBBP exerts a sharp negative effect on both the growth in income and the growth

in productivity, although not on capital accumulation and savings. In some productivity

specifications, the coefficient rises by a factor of 3 from its OLS levels, implying very large effects

on productivity growth. The last column in Table 9 presents the results of Lagrange Multiplier

tests of the null hypothesis that our instruments are uncorrelated with the residuals. The tests do

not reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are appropriate at the 5 percent or the 1 percent

significance levels. The instrumental variable results corroborate our earlier findings and support

the political view of government ownership of banks as detrimental rather than helpful to

economic development. There always remains a possibility, however, that some omitted factor

both increases the desirable level of government ownership of banks and reduces economic

growth.

        Finally, Table 10 presents a somewhat different perspective on the development thesis. In

principle, it could be argued that the benefits of government ownership of banks appear only in


                                                  25
backward countries with extremely poorly developed economic, financial, and property rights

regimes. By grouping all countries into a regression, we may have failed to test this theory

correctly. In Table 10, we reproduce some of our analyses by dividing the sample into the

relatively rich and relatively poor countries as of 1960, relatively financially developed and

relatively financially underdeveloped countries as of 1960, and countries with good and poor

protection of property rights, for which an assessment is only available for the 1990s. The results

do not support the development thesis: GBBP has a particularly adverse effect on the growth of

income in the more backward countries, namely those with lower initial income, lower initial

financial development, and weaker property rights protection. In the more advanced countries,

the effect of GBBP on growth is still negative but often statistically insignificant. Perhaps the

richer countries can get around the distortions associated with heavy government involvement in

the financial sphere, whereas the more backward countries cannot, and pay with a sharply lower

rate of growth of output and productivity.



VI. Conclusion.

       In this paper, we investigated a neglected aspect of financial systems of many countries

around the world: government ownership of banks. The data shed light on four issues. First,

government ownership of banks is large and pervasive around the world. Second, such ownership

is larger in countries with low levels of per capita income, underdeveloped financial systems,

interventionist and inefficient governments, and poor protection of property rights. Third,

government ownership of banks is associated with slower subsequent financial development.

Finally, government ownership of banks is associated with lower subsequent growth of per capita


                                                  26
income, and in particular with lower productivity growth rather than slower factor accumulation.

These retarding effects of government ownership of banks appear to be especially significant in

the less developed countries.

       Some aspects of the empirical story are consistent with the 1960s development economics

view that government ownership of banks may arise as a response to institutional and financial

underdevelopment. However, the results reject the optimistic assessment inherent in this view of

the beneficial consequences of such ownership for subsequent development, advanced by

Gerschenkron (1962), Myrdal (1968) and others. In contrast, the results are consistent with the

political view of government ownership of firms, including banks, according to which such

ownership politicizes the resource allocation process and reduces efficiency. Ultimately, and in

line with the latter theories, government ownership of banks retards financial and economic

development, especially in poor countries.




                                                27
                                         References.

Barberis, Nicholas, Maxim Boycko, Andrei Shleifer, and Natalia Tsukanova (1996), “How Does

       Privatization Work? Evidence from the Russian Shops,” Journal of Political Economy

       104, 764-790.

Barro, Robert (1991), “Economic Growth in a Cross-section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 56, 407-443.

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1996), “International Measures of Schooling Years and

       Schooling Quality,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 86, 218-223.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine (1999), “Banking Systems Around the Globe:

       Do Regulation and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” World Bank Mimeo.

Beck, Thorsten, Levine, Ross and Norman Loayza (2000), “Finance and the Sources of Growth,”

       Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Caprio, Gerald Jr. and Danieal Klingebiel (1996), “Banking Insolvencies: Cross Country

       Experience,” Manuscript, World Bank.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine (1997), “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic

       Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.

Frydman, Roman, Cheryl Gray, Mark Hessel, and Andrzej Rapaczynski (1999), “Private

       Ownership and Corporate Performance: Evidence from the Transition Economies,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1153-1192.

Garvy, George (1977), Money, Financial Flows, and Credit in the Soviet Union, Cambridge,

       MA: Ballinger Publishing Company for the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962), Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Cambridge,


                                              28
       MA, Harvard University Press.

Hall, Robert and Charles Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce so Much More Output

       per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83-116.

King, Robert, and Ross Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717-738.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1995), “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-

       country Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics 7, 207-

       227.

Kornai, Janos (1979), “Resource-constrained vs. Demand-constrained Systems,” Econometrica

       47, 801-819.

La Porta, Rafael and Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes (1999), “The Benefits of Privatization: Evidence

       from Mexico,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1193-1242.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer (1999), “Corporate Ownership

       around the World,” Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1997),

       “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1998),

       “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1999),

       “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15, 222-

       279.

Levine, Ross (1999), “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth,” Journal of Financial


                                               29
       Intermediation, forthcoming.

Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos (1998), “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American

       Economic Review 88, 537-558.

Lewis, W. Arthur (1950), The Principles of Economic Planning, London: G. Allen & Unwin.

Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1997), “Privatization in the

       United States,” Rand Journal of Economics 28, 447-471.

Megginson, William L., Robert C. Nash and Mathias van Randenborgh (1994), “The Financial

       and Operating Performance of Newly Privatized Firms: an International Empirical

       Analysis,” Journal of Finance 49, 403-452.

Myrdal, Gunnar (1968), Asian Drama, New York: Pantheon.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American

       Economic Review 88, 559-586.

Sapienza, Paola (1999), “What do State-Owned Firms Maximize? Evidence from the Italian

       Banks,” Northwestern University Mimeo.

Shleifer, Andrei (1998), “State vs. Private Ownership,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12,

       133-150.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1994), “Politicians and Firms,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 109, 995-1025.

Wurgler, Jeffrey (2000), “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial

       Economics, forthcoming.

Young, Alwyn (1995), “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of East

       Asian Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 641-680.


                                               30
                                                                              Table 1
                                                                    Description of the variables

                                                                                                                                                                  Number of
     Variable name                                                              Description and source
                                                                                                                                                                 observations

                                                                           Government banking

Government ownership of      Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country owned by the government of that country in 1995. The percentage
banks                        of the assets owned by the government in a given bank is calculated by multiplying the share of each shareholder in that bank
[GB]                         by the share the government owns in that shareholder, and then summing the resulting shares. Source: Authors calculations               92
                             based on various sources described in Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country owned by the government of that country in 1985. Used as a proxy
banks before privatization   for the percentage of banking assets owned by the government before the privatizations in the 1960s and 1970s. The
                                                                                                                                                                     92
[GBBP]                       percentage of assets owned by the government in a given bank is calculated following the same methodology outlined for
                             GB. Source: Authors calculations based on various sources described in the Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Share of assets of the top 10 banks in a given country controlled by the government at the 20 percent level in 1995. A bank
banks at 20%                 is controlled by the government if GB is larger than 20 percent and the state is the largest shareholder. Source: Authors               92
[GB20]                       calculations based on various sources described in the Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country controlled by the government at the 50 percent level in 1995.
banks at 50%                 Government ownership at the 50 percent level is defined as the government having at least 50 percent ownership. The
                                                                                                                                                                     92
[GB50]                       percentage of assets owned by the government in a given bank is calculated following the same methodology outlined for
                             GB. Source: Authors calculations based on various sources described in the Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country controlled by the government at the 90 percent level in 1995.
banks at 90%                 Government ownership at the 90 percent level is defined as the government having at least 90 percent ownership. The
                                                                                                                                                                     92
[GB90]                       percentage of assets owned by the government in a given bank is calculated following the same methodology outlined for
                             GB. Source: Authors calculations based on various sources described in the Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Share of the assets of the top 10 banks in a given country owned by the government and reported to be development banks
                                                                                                                                                                     92
development banks            in 1995. The percentage of assets owned by the government is calculated following the same methodology outlined for GB.
[GBD]                         Source: Authors calculations based on various sources described in the Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Same definition as GB except that it excludes development banks from the calculation of both government ownership and
                                                                                                                                                                     92
Commercial banks [GBC]       total assets of the top 10 banks in a given country. Source: Authors calculations based on various sources described in
                             the Appendix A.

Government ownership of      Same definition as GBBP except that it excludes development banks from the calculation of both government ownership and
commercial banks before      total assets of the top 10 banks in a given country. Source: Authors calculations based on various sources described in                 92
privatization                the Appendix A.
[GBBPC]

                                                                        Initial level of development

Log of GDP per capita        Logarithm of GDP per capita expressed in current US dollars in 1960 and in 1970. Source: International Financial                     91 (1960)
                             Statistics and World Bank Indicators.                                                                                                92 (1970)

                                                                         Government intervention

Business regulation index    An index of regulation policies related to opening a business and keeping open a business (on a scale from 1 to 5). A high
                             score indicates that regulations are straight-forward and applied uniformly to all businesses and that regulations are less of          87
                             a burden to business. The score refers to the index in 1997. Source: 1997 Index of Economic Freedom.

Frequency of price           An index of frequency of price controls imposed by the government that interfere with the freedom of buyers and sellers to
controls index               undertake exchanges even though the terms of trade are mutually agreeable. Indicates the extent to which companies can
                                                                                                                                                                     74
                             set prices freely: 0=not at all, 10=very much so. Average of indices for 1989 and 1994, which are the only available.
                             Source: Economic Freedom of the World 1975-1995.

Government intervention      An index of the degree of openness of a country’s banking system. Specifically, the index accounts for the following: how
in the banking sector        difficult it is to open domestic banks; how heavily regulated the banking system is; the degree of government influence over
index                        the allocation of credit; whether banks are free to provide customers with insurance, sell real estate, and invest in securities;
                             and whether foreign banks are able to operate freely. The scale is from 1 to 5. A high score means that: there are very few             87
                             restrictions on banks, that they can engage in all types of financial services, that governments controls few commercial banks
                             and that there is no government deposit insurance. The score refers to the index in 1997. Source: 1997 Index of Economic
                             Freedom.

Black market premium         Natural logarithm of 1 plus the average exchange rate black market premium meausred for the 1960s and the 1980s                      90 (1960s)
                             Source: Easterly and Levine (1997) and own calculations.                                                                             75 (1980s)




                                                                                     31
                                                                                                                                                               Number of
     Variable name                                                            Description and source
                                                                                                                                                              observations

Government consumption      Government consumption expenditures as a percentage of GDP (scale from 0 to 100). Average for the years 1971-1995.
/ GDP                       Government consumption expenditures “include all spending on goods and services purchased by the government -things
                            like national defense, road maintenance, wages and salaries, office space, and government owned vehicles. Since it is
                                                                                                                                                                  87
                            obtained from the national income accounts, it includes all levels of government spending. It does not include direct transfers
                            and subsidies since these do not enter into the national income accounts”. Source: Economic Freedom of the World, 1975-
                            1995 (with data from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund).

Transfers and subsidies /   Total government transfers and subsidies as a percentage of GDP (scale from 0 to 100). Average for the years 1974-1994.
                                                                                                                                                                  70
GDP                         Source: Economic Freedom of the World, 1975-1995 (with data from the World Bank and the International Monetary
                            Fund).

Top marginal tax rate       The top marginal tax rate imposed by the government on high income levels. Average of the 1975-1995 period.
                                                                                                                                                                  54
                            Source: Economic Freedom of the World, 1975-1995.

Index of government         A composite index constructed from all the government intervention measures in Economic Freedom of the World:
intervention in the         government consumption to GDP, SOE in the economy index, frequency of price controls index, entry regulation index,
economy 1975                legal system (equality of citizens under the law and access to non-discriminatory judiciary), government intervention and             52
                            regulation causing negative interest rates. Scale ranging from 0 to 10, 10 indicating minimal or no government intervention.
                              Source: Economic Freedom of the World, 1975-1995.

Index of Liberty 1980s      Index calculated following principal component techniques for a set of 15 liberty indicators including: foreign exchange
                            regime, military draft freedom, freedom of property, freedom of movement, freedom of information, civil rights freedom,               82
                            economic systems, freedom of print media, freedom of broadcast media, freedom to travel domestically, freedom to travel
                            abroad, freedom to peaceful assembly, no permit required to work, public search without warrant, and arbitrary seizure of
                            property. Different years for the different indicators, all of them for the 1980s. Source: Rating Global Economic
                            Freedom, 1992.

Political rights index      Index of political rights. Higher ratings indicate countries that come closer “ to the ideals suggested by the checklist
                            questions of: (1) free and fair elections; (2) those elected rule; (3) there are competitive parties or other competitive
                            political groupings; (4) the opposition has an important role and power; and (5) the entities have self determination or a            91
                            very high degree of autonomy”. Source: Freedom House, 1996.

Democracy index             Average of democracy score for the period 1970-1994. Scale from 0 to 10, with lower values indicating a less democratic
                                                                                                                                                                  90
                            environment. Source: Polity III: Regime Type and Political Authority, 1800-1994.

                                                                         Government efficiency

Tax compliance index        An index of the assessment of the level of tax compliance. Scale from 0 to 6 , where higher scores indicate higher compliance.
                                                                                                                                                                  47
                            The score refers to the index in 1995. Source: The Global Competitiveness Report 1996.

Bureaucratic quality        High scores indicate “autonomy from political pressure” and “strength and expertise to govern without drastic changes in
index                       policy or interruption in government services”. Scale from 0 to 10, with higher score indicating greater efficiency. Average
                                                                                                                                                                  86
                            of the month of April and October of the monthly index between 1982 and 1995. Source: International Country Risk
                            Guide, 1996.

Corruption index            An index of corruption in government. Scale from 0 to 10. Low ratings indicate “high government officials are likely to
                            demand special payments” and “illegal payments are generally expected throughout lower levels of government” in the form
                            of “bribes connected with import and export licenses, exchange controls, tax assessment, policy protection, or loans.”                86
                            Average of the months of April and October of the monthly index between 1982 and 1995. Source: International Country
                            Risk Guide, 1996.

                                                                             Property rights

Property rights index       An index of property rights in each country (on a scale from 1 to 5). The more protection private property receives, the
                            higher the score. The score is based, broadly, on the degree of legal protection of private property, the extent to which the
                                                                                                                                                                  90
                            government protects and enforces laws that protect private property, the probability that the government will expropriate
                            private property, and the country’s legal protection to private property. Source: Freedom House, 1996.

Rule of law index           Assessment of the law and order tradition in the country produced by the country-risk rating agency International Country
                            Risk Guide. Average of the month of April and October of the monthly index between 1982 and 1995. Scale from 0 to                     86
                            6. Lower scores indicate less tradition for law and order . Source: International Country Risk Guide, 1996.

Government repudiation      An index of ICRG’s assessment of the “risk of a modification in a contract taking the form of a repudiation, postponement,
of contracts index          or scaling down” due to “budget cutbacks, indigenization pressure, a change in government, or a change in government
                                                                                                                                                                  86
                            economic and social priorities.” Average of the months of April and October of the monthly index between 1982 and 1995.
                            Scale from 0 to 10, with lower scores indicating higher risks. Source: International Country Risk Guide, 1996.




                                                                                   32
                                                                                                                                                                   Number of
     Variable name                                                               Description and source
                                                                                                                                                                  observations

Anti-directors rights index   An index aggregating the shareholder rights. The index is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the country allows shareholders to
                              mail their proxy vote to the firm; (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their shares prior to the General Shareholders’
                              Meeting; (3) cumulative voting or proportional representation of minorities in the board of directors is allowed; (4) an
                              oppressed minorities mechanism is in place; (5) the minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call             49
                              for an Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting is less than or equal to 10 percent (the sample median); or (6) shareholders have
                              preemptive rights that can only be waved by a shareholders’ vote. The index ranges from 0 to 6. Source: La Porta, Lopez-
                              de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998).

Creditor rights index         An index aggregating different creditor rights. The index is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the country imposes restrictions,
                              such as creditors’ consent or minimum dividends to file for reorganization; (2) secured creditors are able to gain possession
                              of their security once the reorganization petition has been approved (no automatic stay); (3) secured creditors are ranked first
                                                                                                                                                                      47
                              in the distribution of the proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets of a bankrupt firm; and (4) the debtor does
                              not retain the administration of its property pending the resolution of the reorganization. The index ranges from 0 to 4.
                              Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998).

                                                                           State owned enterprises

SOEs in the economy           An index of the prevalence of State-owned enterprises as a share of the economy (scale from 0 to 10). Higher scores given
index                         to countries with less government-owned enterprises which are estimated to produce less of the country’s output. As the
                                                                                                                                                                      76
                              estimated size and breadth of the SOE sector increases, countries are assigned lower ratings. Computed both for 1975 and
                              as the average of 1975-1995. Source: Economic Freedom of the World, 1975-1995.

SOE output / GDP              SOE value added of all non-financial SOEs as percentage of total GDP of the economy at market prices. SOE value added
                              is estimated as the sales revenue minus the cost of intermediate inputs, or as the sum of operating surplus (balance) and wage          49
                              payments Average for the period 1978-1981. Source: Bureaucrats in Business, The World Bank (1995).

SOE investment / gross        Investment (fixed capital formation) by all non-financial SOEs as a percentage of total gross domestic investment of the
                                                                                                                                                                      55
domestic investment           economy. Average for the period 1978-1991. Source: Bureaucrats in Business, The World Bank (1995).

Public sector employment      Average of the ratio of public sector employment in general government to total employment for the period 1976-1996.
/ total employment            General government employment includes employment in “all government department offices, organizations and other bodies
                              which are agencies or instruments of the central or local authorities whether accounted for or financed in, ordinary or
                                                                                                                                                                      39
                              extraordinary budgets or extra-budgetary funds. They are not solely engaged in administration but also in defense and public
                              order, in the promotion of economic growth and in the provision of education, health, cultural and social services.” Source:
                              Schiavio-Campo, de Tommaso and Mukherjee (1997).

                                                                           Financial development

Private credit / GDP          Value of credits by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to the private sector divided by GDP. It excludes
                              credit issues by the central bank, credit to the public sector and cross-claims of one of the group of intermediaries to another.
                              The variable is constructed following the methodology of Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000) based on data from the
                                                                                                                                                                      90
                              International Financial Statistics. Private credit is calculated using lines 22d and 42d, GDP uses line 99b, and CPI comes
                              from line 64 and the monthly statistics from the IFS database. For most countries, the data is available for the period 1960-
                              1995. Source: International Financial Statistics database and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).

Liquid liabilities / GDP      Liquid liabilities of the financial system (currency plus demand and interest-bearing liabilities of the banks and non-banks
                              financial intermediaries) divided by GDP. The variable is constructed following the methodology of Beck, Levine and
                              Loayza (2000) based on data from the International Financial Statistics. Liquid liabilities is calculated using line 55l (liquid
                              liabilities) or line 35l (money plus quasi money), if liquid liabilities is not available. If none of these two numbers are             89
                              available, we use line 25 (time and saving deposits). Data for GDP uses line 99b, and data for CPI comes from line64 and
                              the monthly statistics from the IFS database. For most countries, the data is available for the period 1960-1995. Source:
                              International Financial Statistics database and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).

Commercial bank assets /      It is the ratio of commercial bank domestic assets divided by commercial banks domestic assets plus central bank domestic
total bank assets             assets. The variable is constructed following the methodology of Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000). Based on data from
                              the International Financial Statistics using lines 22a-d for the assets of deposit money banks, and lines 12a-d for the assets          90
                              of the central bank. For most countries, the data is available for the period 1960-1995. Source: International Financial
                              Statistics database and Beck, Levine Loayza (2000).

Claims on the private         Claims on the private sector as a percentage of GDP. Claims on the private sector refers to financial resources provided to
sector / GDP                  the private sector --such as through loans, purchases of nonequity securities, and trade credits and other accounts receivable–
                              that establish a claim for repayment. For a few countries these claims include credit to public enterprises when it is not
                              available separately. Claims on the private sector include gross credit from the financial system to individuals, enterprises,          89
                              nonfinancial public entities not included under net domestic credit, and financial institutions not included elsewhere. The
                              data comes from line 32d of the International Financial Statistics. For most countries, the data is available for the period
                              1970-1995. Source: World Development Indicators based on data from the International Financial Statistics.

Quasi-liquid liabilities /    Quasi-liquid liabilities as a percentage of GDP. Quasi-liquid liabilities are the sum of currency deposits in the central bank
GDP                           (M0), plus time and saving deposits, foreign currency transferable deposits, certificates of deposit, and securities repurchase
                              agreements, plus travelers checks, foreign currency time deposits, commercial paper, and shares of mutual funds or market
                              funds held by residents. They equal the M3 money supply less transferable deposit and electronic currency (M1). For most                87
                              countries, the data is available for the period 1970-1995. Source: World Development Indicators based on data from the
                              International Financial Statistics.




                                                                                      33
                                                                                                                                                                  Number of
     Variable name                                                              Description and source
                                                                                                                                                                 observations

Domestic credit provided      Domestic credit provided by the banking sector as a percentage of GDP. Domestic credit provided by the banking sector
by banking sector / GDP       includes all credit to various sectors on a gross basis, with the exception of credit to the central government, which is net.
                              The banking sector includes monetary authorities and deposit money banks, as well as other banking institutions where data
                              are available (including institutions that do not accept transferable deposits but do incur such liabilities as time and savings
                                                                                                                                                                     90
                              deposits). Examples of other banking institutions are savings and mortgage loan institutions and building and loan
                              associations. Data for domestic credit comes from lines 32an, 32b, 32c, 32d, 32f and 32g of the International Financial
                              Statistics. For most countries, the data is available for the period 1970-1995. Source: World Development Indicators based
                              on data from the International Financial Statistics.

Interest rate spread          Interest rate charged by banks on loans to prime customers minus the interest rate paid by commercial or similar banks for
                              demand, time or saving deposits. For most countries, the data is available for the period 1970-1995. Source: World                     59
                              Development Indicators.

Private claims-claims of      Total private claims in the country minus the claims of the top 20 firms in each country as a proportion of GNP in the period
                                                                                                                                                                     32
top 20 / GDP                  1992-1994. Source: World Scope Database (1996) and International Financial Statistics.

                                                                            Crisis and instability

Log of inflation              Logarithm of the geometric average annual growth rate of the implicit price deflator for the time period 1970-1993.
                                                                                                                                                                     68
                              Source: World Development Report 1995.

Major government crisis       Any rapidly developing situation that threatens to bring the downfall of the present regime - excluding situations of
                                                                                                                                                                     75
                              revolt aimed at such overthrow. The data covers the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. Source: Easterly and Levine (1997).

Coups d’etat                  The number of extraconstitutional or forced changes in the top government elite and/or its effective control of the nation's
                              power structure in a given year. Unsuccessful coups are not counted. The data covers the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.                      75
                              Source: Easterly and Levine (1997).

Banking crisis dummy          Dummy variable equal to 1 if the country had a banking crisis in the period between 1970 and 1995. Source: data
                                                                                                                                                                     92
                              constructed by the authors based on Caprio and Klingeliel (1996).

Bank assets affected by       Percentage of financial or banking system assets affected by the crisis. The variable is set equal to 0 if the country did not
crises                        have a banking crisis in the period between 1970 and 1995. Source: data constructed by the authors based on Caprio                     70
                              and Klingeliel (1996).

Bank nationalizations in      Dummy variable equal to 1 if as a result of the banking crisis in the period between 1970 and 1995 the government
                                                                                                                                                                     64
crisis                        nationalized any commercial banks. Source: data constructed by the authors based on Caprio and Klingeliel (1996).

Bank liquidation in crisis    Dummy variable equal to 1 if as a result of the banking crisis in the period between 1970 and 1995 the government
                              liquidated some state owned banks or if some banks of the private sector were liquidated. Source: data constructed by the              63
                              authors based on Caprio and Klingeliel (1996).

                                                                                   Growth

GDP per capita growth,        The annual rate of GDP per capita growth for the period 1960-1995. Because of the short period for which there is data
1960-1995                     available, the variable is not constructed for those countries in our sample which emerged as a result of a breakup of another
                                                                                                                                                                     86
                              country (i.e. Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Croatia, Slovenia, Russia and Kazakhstan). Source: International Financial
                              Statistics database and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).

GNP per capita growth,        The annual rate of GNP per capita growth for the period 1970- 1995. Because of the short period for which there is data
1970-1995                     available, the variable is not constructed for those countries in our sample which emerged as a result of a breakup of another
                                                                                                                                                                     85
                              country (i.e. Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Croatia, Slovenia, Russia and Kazakhstan). Source: World Bank Indicators
                              (1997).

Physical capital per capita   The annual rate of physical capital per capita growth for the period 1960-1995 and the period 1970-1995. Because of the
growth                        short period for which there is data available, the variable is not constructed for those countries in our sample which emerged
                              as a result of a breakup of another country (i.e. Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Croatia, Slovenia, Russia and                       71
                              Kazakhstan). The variable is constructed following Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000). Source: International Financial
                              Statistics and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).

Savings / GDP                 Index of total gross domestic savings as a percentage of GDP for the period 1960-1992. Gross domestic savings are
                                                                                                                                                                     76
                              calculated as the difference between GDP and total consumption.                  Source: World Tables 1995.

Productivity growth 1         The annual rate of total factor productivity per capita growth. Because of the short period for which there is data available,
                              the variable is not constructed for those countries in our sample which emerged as a result of a breakup of another country
                              (i.e. Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Croatia, Slovenia, Russia and Kazakhstan). The variable is constructed following
                                                                                                                                                                     71
                              Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000). Productivity per capita growth equals the growth of GDP per capita minus 0.3 times
                              the growth of physical capital per capita. Source: International Financial Statistics database and Beck, Levine and
                              Loayza (2000).




                                                                                      34
                                                                                                                                                         Number of
     Variable name                                                       Description and source
                                                                                                                                                        observations

Productivity growth 2   The annual rate of productivity of per capita growth considering human capital accumulation as proposed by Mankiw
                        (1995). Because of the short period for which there is data available, the variable is not constructed for those countries in
                        our sample which emerged as a result of a breakup of another country (i.e. Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Croatia,
                        Slovenia, Russia and Kazakhstan). The variable is constructed following the methodology suggested in Beck, Levine and               63
                        Loayza ( 2000). Productivity per capita growth equals the growth of GDP per capita minus 0.3 times the growth of physical
                        capital per capita, minus 0.5 times the average growth rate in years of schooling. Source: International Financial Statistics
                        database and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).

Productivity growth 3   The annual rate of productivity of per capita growth considering human capital accumulation as proposed by Hall and Jones
                        (1998). Because of the short period for which there is data available, the variable is not constructed for those countries in
                        our sample which emerged as a result of a breakup of another country (i.e. Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Croatia,
                        Slovenia, Russia and Kazakhstan). The variable is constructed following Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000). Productivity
                        per capita growth equals the growth of GDP per capita minus 0.3 times the growth of physical capital per capita, minus 0.7          61
                        times the product of the average number of years of schooling and the return to schooling estimated in a Mincerian wage
                        regression (Mince 1974) all divided by 0.7. Formally, productivity growth 3 = [GDP per capita growth - 0.3*Physical
                        capital per capita growth - 0.7*(Years of Schooling*the return to schooling)]/0.7. Source: International Financial Statistics
                        and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).

Average years of        Average of years of schooling for the total population aged 15 and over for the period 1960-1990 and 1970-1990. Source:
                                                                                                                                                            89
schooling               Barro and Lee (1996).

                                                                        Other variables

Legal origin            Identifies the legal origin of the Company Law or Commercial Code of each country. There are five possible origins: (1)
                        English Common Law; (2) French Commercial Code; (3) German Commercial Code; (4) Scandinavian Commercial                             92
                        Code; (5) Socialist/Communist Laws. Source: La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and (1999).

High inflation dummy    Equals 1 if the average rate of inflation during the period 1970-1995exceeds 20% and 0 otherwise. Source: World
                                                                                                                                                            92
                        Bank Indicators 1997.

Latitude                The absolute value of the latitude of the country, scaled to take values between 0 and 1. Source: CIA Factbook.                     92




                                                                              35
                                                               Table 2

                                    The prevalence of government ownership of banks


Panel A of the table shows the data of government ownership of banks for all the 92 countries in the sample. The countries are

classified according to the legal origin of their commercial laws. Panel B of the table shows the results of tests of means across

legal origins.




                                                                     Panel A: Means by legal origin

                                               Share of the assets of the top 10 banks owned or controlled by the government
 Country                                GB                  GBBP                   GB20                   GB50                 GB90


 Australia                             12.33                22.97                   20.99                 20.99
 Bahrain                                7.34                  7.34                   3.40                  3.40                 3.40
 Bangladesh                            95.00                95.00                  100.00                100.00                89.79
 Canada                                 0.00                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 Cyprus                                 0.00                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 Hong Kong                              0.00                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 India                                 84.94                96.60                  100.00                 94.61                59.61
 Ireland                                4.48                  4.48                   4.50                  4.50                 4.50
 Israel                                64.64                64.64                   79.81                 82.25                 0.00
 Kenya                                 29.94                66.32                   48.74                 22.30                 8.57
 Malaysia                               9.93                14.46                    9.93                  9.93                 9.94
 New Zealand                            0.00                23.45                    0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 Nigeria                                9.91                 94.49                  13.05                  7.82                 7.82
 Pakistan                              85.96                 97.75                  97.75                 80.10                80.10
 Saudi Arabia                          29.10                 29.10                  43.30                 22.14                22.14
 Singapore                             22.40                 22.41                  37.72                 14.62                10.20
 South Africa                           0.00                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 Sri Lanka                             71.39                100.00                  76.29                 68.64                68.64
 Tanzania                              94.95                 99.72                  95.22                 95.23                93.94
 Thailand                              17.09                 17.09                  21.78                 21.78                 0.00
 Trinidad and Tobago                    1.54                  1.54                   1.54                  1.54                 1.54
 United Arab Emirates                  41.93                 41.93                  37.08                 59.11                 9.81
 United Kingdom                         0.00                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 United States                          0.00                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
 Zimbabwe                              30.04                 30.04                  49.69                 29.75                 7.05
 English origin average                28.52                 37.17                  33.63                 29.55                19.22

 Afghanistan                          100.00                100.00                 100.00                100.00                100.00
 Algeria                               99.96                 99.96                  99.96                 99.96                 99.96
 Argentina                             60.50                 60.50                  60.50                 60.50                 60.50
 Belgium                               27.59                 27.59                  22.29                 22.29                 16.64
 Bolivia                               18.48                 68.48                  17.70                 17.70                 17.70
 Brazil                                31.70                 53.93                  56.89                 23.22                 14.23
 Chile                                 19.72                 25.53                  19.72                 19.73                 19.73
 Colombia                              53.92                 75.15                  52.47                 52.47                 52.47
 Costa Rica                            90.92                 90.92                  90.92                 90.92                 90.92
 Cote d’Ivoire                         20.60                 20.60                  20.46                 15.96                 13.56
 Dominican Republic                    38.93                 38.93                  38.93                 38.93                 38.93
 Ecuador                               40.61                 33.78                  40.61                 40.61                 40.61
 El Salvador                           26.43                100.00                  39.03                 39.03                 13.90
 Egypt                                 88.62                 90.89                  96.02                 86.32                 80.87
 France                                17.26                 75.09                  26.18                 22.42                  4.91
 Greece                                77.82                 77.82                  85.47                 84.09                 68.65
 Guatemala                             22.20                 22.20                  22.20                 22.19                 22.19
 Honduras                              29.90                 29.90                  29.90                 29.90                 29.90
 Indonesia                             42.90                 42.90                  42.90                 42.90                 42.90
 Iran                                 100.00                100.00                 100.00                100.00                100.00
 Iraq                                  93.77                 93.77                  93.77                 93.77                 93.77
 Italy                                 35.95                 65.44                  27.81                 27.81                 16.61
 Jordan                               26.03                  26.03                  28.96                 28.96                 21.61
 Kuwait                               32.84                  32.84                  46.19                 31.67                 18.43
 Lebanon                                7.18                  7.18                   7.40                  7.40                  7.40
 Lybia                                95.12                  95.12                 100.00                100.00                 73.11


                                                                   36
                                                    Share of the assets of the top 10 banks owned or controlled by the government
Country                                    GB                     GBBP                     GB20                    GB50             GB90
Mexico                                   35.62                    100.00                   35.62                    35.62            35.62
Morocco                                  37.90                     62.99                   50.89                    42.23            24.03
Netherlands                               9.20                      9.20                   10.30                    10.30             6.67
Nicaragua                                63.36                    100.00                   63.36                    63.36            63.36
Oman                                     25.84                     25.84                   27.27                    27.27            24.16
Panama                                   17.08                     17.08                   17.08                    17.08            17.08
Paraguay                                 48.02                     48.02                   48.02                    48.02            48.02
Peru                                     26.46                     42.66                   23.87                    23.87            23.87
Philippines                              27.23                     34.41                   34.41                    34.42            17.69
Portugal                                 25.66                     90.38                   23.73                    23.73            23.73
Qatar                                    33.74                     33.74                   58.87                     8.61             8.61
Senegal                                  27.98                     27.98                   36.68                    21.86            19.73
Spain                                     1.98                      1.98                     6.83                    0.00             0.00
Syria                                    100.00                   100.00                   100.00                  100.00           100.00
Tunisia                                  37.42                     40.82                    82.12                   36.67             2.54
Turkey                                   56.46                    56.46                     55.90                   55.90            55.90
Uruguay                                  68.79                    68.79                     68.79                   68.79            68.79
Venezuela                                57.98                    63.36                     63.36                   53.41            53.41
French origin average                    45.45                    56.32                     49.40                   44.77            39.83

Austria                                   50.36                   63.66                     70.17                   70.17             0.00
Germany                                   36.36                   36.36                     37.47                   37.47            29.86
Japan                                      0.00                    0.00                      0.00                    0.00             0.00
South Korea                               25.41                   44.70                     41.56                   21.64            13.16
Switzerland                               13.35                   13.35                     14.92                   14.92            10.37
Taiwan                                    76.51                   80.87                    100.00                  100.00            47.84
German origin average                     33.67                   39.82                     44.02                   40.70            16.87

Denmark                                    8.87                   17.37                     10.60                    8.87             8.87
Finland                                   30.65                   30.65                     30.65                   30.65            30.65
Iceland                                   71.34                   71.34                     71.34                   71.34            71.33
Norway                                    50.45                   67.99                     88.25                   65.67            15.80
Sweden                                    23.20                   27.89                     29.61                   29.61            12.07
Scandinavian origin average               36.90                   43.05                     46.09                   41.23            27.74

Bulgaria                                  85.68                   100.00                    92.31                   92.31            72.61
China                                     99.45                   100.00                   100.00                   99.07            99.07
Croatia                                    1.04                   100.00                     1.29                    0.00             0.00
Czech Republic                            52.00                   100.00                   75.44                    50.45             9.58
Hungary                                   36.56                   100.00                   82.50                    14.64             0.03
Kazakhstan                                56.13                   100.00                   80.72                    44.76            44.76
Poland                                    84.29                   100.00                   94.16                    83.19            76.13
Romania                                   62.68                   100.00                   87.77                    87.77            24.61
Russia                                    32.98                   100.00                   49.90                    49.90            13.18
Slovakia                                  73.93                   100.00                   89.57                    82.77            57.52
Slovenia                                  57.29                   100.00                   57.29                    57.29            57.29
Vietnam                                   99.06                   100.00                   99.06                    99.06            99.06
Socialist origin average                  61.76                   100.00                   75.83                    63.43            46.15

Average with socialist                    41.74                   55.01                    48.03                    42.61            32.90
Average without socialist                 38.74                   48.27                    43.86                    39.49            30.92

                                                                           Panel B: Test of means (t-statistics)

English vs. French                        -2.20 b                 -2.24 b                  -1.94 c                 -1.89 c           -2.65 a
English vs. German                        -0.34                   -0.15                     -0.61                  -0.67              0.17
English vs. Scandinav.                    -0.52                   -0.32                     -0.69                  -0.68            -0.57
English vs. Socialist                     -2.92 a                 -8.05 a                  -3.47 a                 -2.76 a          -2.32 b
French vs. German                          0.94                    1.22                      0.40                   0.30              1.76
French vs. Scandinav.                      0.63                    0.92                      0.23                   0.25              0.83
French vs. Socialist                      -1.73 c                 -9.35 a                  -2.79 a                 -1.87 c          -0.60
German vs. Scandinav.                     -0.20                   -0.19                     -0.09                  -0.02            -0.81
German vs. Socialist                      -1.96 c                 -4.87 a                  - 2.05 c                -1.32            -1.83 c
Scandinav. vs. Socialist                  -1.67                   -5.12 a                   -1.90 c                -1.33            -1.01


a=Significant at 1% level; b= Significant at 5% level ; c=Significant at 10% level




                                                                          37
                                                                       Table 2B


                        Development banks and the prevalence of government ownership of banks


 Panel A of the table shows the average of government ownership of banks by legal origin. Panel B of the table shows the results

 of tests of means across legal origins.




                                                                            Panel A: Means by legal origin

                                                      Share of assets of the top banks owned or controlled by the government
                                         GBD                    GB                       GBC                      GBBP               GBBPC

                                  Development banks                                Commercial banks                          Commercial banks owned
 Country
                                     owned by the                              owned by the government                       by the government before

                                      government                                   after privatization                             privatization


 English origin average                  4.36                  28.52                     27.04                    37.17               36.76
 French origin average                   7.45                  45.45                     39.91                    56.33               50.38
 German origin average                   2.19                  33.67                     31.78                    39.82               38.43
 Scandinavian origin
                                         1.11                  36.90                     36.36                    43.05               42.52
 average
 Socialist origin average                2.87                  61.76                     60.80                    100.00             100.00

 Average with socialist                  5.33                  41.74                     38.44                     55.01              51.95
 Average without socialist
                                         5.70                  38.74                     35.06                     48.27              44.74

                                                                          Panel B: Test of means (t-statistics)

 English vs. French                      -1.36                  -2.20 b                  -1.56                    -2.24 b             -1.48
 English vs. German                      -0.73                 -0.34                     -0.32                    -0.16               -0.10
 English vs. Scandinav.                   1.06                  -0.53                    -0.59                    -0.32               -0.32
 English vs. Socialist                   -0.65                  -2.93 a                  -2.98                     -8.06 a            -5.54 a
 French vs. German                        1.25                   0.94                     0.58                     1.23                0.79
 French vs. Scandinav.                    1.39                   0.63                     0.23                     0.92                0.48
 French vs. Socialist                     1.50                 -1.73 c                   -2.02 b                  -9.36 a             -4.82 a
 German vs. Scandinav.                   -0.43                 -0.21                     -0.29                    -0.19               -0.25
 German vs. Socialist                    -0.23                 -1.97 c                    1.99 c                  -7.12 a              7.30 a
 Scandinav. vs. Socialist                 0.63                  1.67                      1.63                    -5.12 a              8.45 a

a=Significant at 1% level; b= Significant at 5% level ; c=Significant at 10% level




                                                                            38
                                                                    Table 3
                                      Which countries have more government ownership of commercial banks?

The first column shows the correlation between each variable and the extent of government ownership of commercial banks in 1995. The second column shows
the coefficients and their significance resulting from ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries. The independent variables are classified
into five different groups: (i) initial level of development; (ii) government intervention; (iii)government efficiency; (iv) property rights; (v) state owned enterprises;
(vi) initial level of financial development; (vii) crisis and instability . Each regression controls for the log of GDP per capita in 1960. Robust standard errors
are shown in parentheses.



                                                                                        Dependent variable: GB

                                                                                                                                  Number of
                                Independent variables                          Raw correlations        Regression coefficients
                                                                                                                                 observations

                                                                      Panel A: Initial level of development
                                                                                                              -0.1119 a
                                Log of GDP per capita in 1960                      -0.3525 a                                         91
                                                                                                              (0.0302)

                                                                       Panel B: Government intervention

                                                                                                              -0.1279 a
                                Business regulation index                          -0.4448 a                                         87
                                                                                                              (0.0376)
                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                              -0.0563
                                Frequency of price controls index                  -0.5019 a                                         74
                                                                                                              (0.0162)
                                Government intervention in the banking                                        -0.1558 a
                                                                                   -0.5148 a                                         87
                                sector                                                                        (0.0273)
                                                                                                              0.2910 a
                                Black market premium 1980s                         0.5205 a                                          75
                                                                                                              (0.0835)
                                                                                                               -0.2232
                                Government consumption/GDP                          0.1023                                           87
                                                                                                              (1.2317)
                                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                              0.0111
                                Transfers and subsidies/GDP                        -0.0550                                           70
                                                                                                              (0.0053)
                                                                                                              -0.0339 c
                                Political rights index                             -0.3404 b                                         90
                                                                                                              (0.0170)
                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                              -0.0183
                                Democracy score                                    -0.3566 b                                         90
                                                                                                              (0.0087)

                                                                         Panel C: Government efficiency

                                                                                                              -0.1161 a
                                Tax compliance                                     -0.4880 a                                         47
                                                                                                              (0.0358)
                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                              -0.0444
                                Bureaucratic quality index                         -0.4441 a                                         85
                                                                                                              (0.0138)
                                                                                                              -0.0172
                                Corruption index                                   -0.2934 c                                         85
                                                                                                              (0.0176)

                                                                            Panel D: Property rights

                                                                                                              -0.1397 a
                                Property rights index                              -0.5283 a                                         89
                                                                                                              (0.0301)
                                                                                                               -0.0338
                                Rule of law index                                  -0.3136 c                                         85
                                                                                                              (0.0261)
                                                                                                                      a
                                Government repudiation of contracts                                           -0.0574
                                                                                   -0.4315 a                                         85
                                index                                                                         (0.0180)
                                                                                                              -0.0481 c
                                Antidirectors rights index                         -0.2570                                           49
                                                                                                              (0.0258)
                                                                                                              -0.0062
                                Creditors rights index                             -0.1220                                           47
                                                                                                              (0.0255)

                                                                       Panel E: State owned enterprises

                                                                                                              -0.0557 a
                                SOEs in the economy index                          -0.4612 a                                         76
                                                                                                              (0.0123)
                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                              0.0083
                                SOE output/GDP                                      0.3511                                           49
                                                                                                              (0.0027)
                                SOE investment/gross domestic                                                 0.0118 a
                                                                                   0.5491a                                           55
                                investment                                                                    (0.0022)




                                                                                      39
                                                                           Dependent variable: GB

                                                                                                                     Number of
                  Independent variables                           Raw correlations        Regression coefficients
                                                                                                                    observations
                                                                                                  1.0363 c
                  SOE employment/employment                            0.2548                                           40
                                                                                                 (0.6080)

                                                    Panel F: Initial level of financial development

                                                                                                  -0.1751
                  Private credit/GDP in 1960                          -0.2330                                           89
                                                                                                 (0.1520)
                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                -0.1891
                  Liquid liabilities/ GDP in 1960                     -0.2468                                           88
                                                                                                (0.1093)
                  Commercial bank assets/total bank                                              -0.2154
                                                                      -0.2679                                           89
                  assets in 1960                                                                 (0.1726)
                                                                                                -0.0041 a
                  Quasi-liquid liabilities/GDP in 1970                -0.3757 a                                         87
                                                                                                (0.0012)
                  Domestic credit by the banking sector                                          -0.0007
                                                                      -0.1474                                           90
                  /GDP in 1970                                                                   (0.0012)
                  Claims on the private sector /GDP in                                          -0.5438 c
                                                                      -0.0969                                           89
                  1970                                                                          [0.3193]

                                                           Panel G: Crisis and instability

                                                                                                 0.4536 c
                  Log of inflation                                     0.2196                                           68
                                                                                                 (0.2708)
                                                                                                  -0.0560
                  Major government crises                             -0.1262                                           75
                                                                                                 (0.0493)
                                                                                                  -0.0082
                  Number of coups d’etat                               0.0648                                           75
                                                                                                 (0.2875)
                                                                                                  -0.0409
                  Banking crisis dummy                                 0.0533                                           91
                                                                                                 (0.0629)
                                                                                                  0.2216
                  Bank assets affected by crises                       0.2031                                           69
                                                                                                 (0.1400)
                                                                                                  -0.0514
                  Bank nationalizations in crisis dummy               -0.0345                                           63
                                                                                                 (0.0999)
                                                                                                  -0.1299
                  Bank liquidations during crisis dummy               -0.0801                                           62
                                                                                                 (0.0988)
a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.




                                                                         40
                                                                   Table 4
                                                  Government banking and financial development

Ordinary least square (OLS) regressions for the cross-section of countries. The dependent variables are the growth of various financial
development measures. All variables are defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis.

                                                                                                 Dependent variables

                                                 Growth of            Growth of            Growth of           Growth of       Growth of         Growth of
                                               private credit /    liquid liabilities   commercial bank         claims on      quasi-liquid    domestic credit
  Independent variables
                                                    GDP                 / GDP           assets /total bank    private sector    liabilities/       /GDP
                                                                                              assets              /GDP             GDP

                                                               Panel A: Annual growth rates 1960-1995
                                                           c
                                                  -0.0939              -0.0136              -0.0099
  GBBP
                                                  (0.0475)             (0.0197)             (0.0075)
                                                  -0.0583 c
  Private credit / GDP in 1960
                                                  (0.0345)
                                                                      -0.0895 c
  Liquid liabilities/GDP in 1960
                                                                      (0.0451)
  Commercial bank assets / total bank                                                       -0.0721a
  assets in 1960                                                                            (0.0173)
                                                   0.0203               0.0039               0.0024
  Log GDP per capita in 1960
                                                  (0.0182)             (0.0093)             (0.0026)
                                                  -0.0522               0.0402              0.0518 b
  Intercept
                                                  (0.1096)             (0.0551)             (0.0218)
  Number of observations                             89                   88                   89
              2
  Adjusted R                                        0.07                 0.07                 0.37

                                                               Panel B: Annual growth rates 1970-1995
                                                           b
                                                  -0.0545              -0.0067              -0.0065             -0.0766 b       -0.0180 c         -0.0680 b
  GBBP
                                                  (0.0268)             (0.0175)             (0.0076)            (0.0303)        (0.0103)          (0.0297)
                                                  -0.0386
  Private credit / GDP in 1970
                                                  (0.0232)
                                                                      -0.0826 c
  Liquid liabilities/GDP in 1970
                                                                       (0.0418)
  Commercial bank assets / total bank                                                       -0.0490 c
  assets in 1970                                                                            (0.0259)
  Claims on the private sector / GDP in                                                                         -0.0007 b
  1970                                                                                                          (0.0303)
                                                                                                                                -0.0007 a
  Quasi liabilities / GDP in 1970
                                                                                                                                (0.0001)
                                                                                                                                                  -0.0009 a
  Domestic credit / GDP in 1970
                                                                                                                                                  (0.0003)
                                                   0.0149               0.0076               0.0023              -0.0082        -0.0062 b          0.0045
  Log GDP per capita in 1970
                                                  (0.0128)             (0.0065)             (0.0019)             (0.0077)        (0.0026)         (0.0065)
                                                  -0.0626               0.0161               0.0289               0.1377        0.1041 a           0.0586
  Intercept
                                                  (0.1013)             (0.0489)             (0.0197)             (0.0543)       (0.0220)          (0.0536)
  Number of observations                             90                   89                   89                  89               87               90
  Adjusted R2                                       0.07                 0.19                 0.11                0.14             0.29             0.24
 a= Significant at 1% level; b= Significant at 5% level; c= Significant at 10% level.




                                                                                   41
                                                                                           Table 5
                                                                            Simple growth regressions

Ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of the cross-section of countries. The dependent variables are: (1) The average annual growth rate of GDP per capita
for 1960-1995; and (2) the average annual growth rate of GNP per capita for 1970-1995. The independent variables are described in Table 1. Robust standard
errors are shown in parenthesis.

                                                                                           Independent variables

                               GBBP            Initial log of GDP        Initial private        Initial liquid-     Initial commercial      Average years of   Intercept   Adj. R2
 Dependent                                          per capita            credit/GDP           liabilities/GDP     bank assets/total bank      schooling                    [N]
 variables                                                                                                                  assets


                                                                    Panel A: Controls for initial development levels
                                      a                      b
 GDP per capita               -2.4864               -0.6924                                                                                                    7.0599 a    0.1370
 growth 1960-95               (0.7630)              (0.3107)                                                                                                   (1.9992)     [85]

 GNP per capita               -2.5366 a             -0.6836 a                                                                                                  7.8414 a    0.1475
 growth 1970-95               (0.8400)              (0.2080)                                                                                                   (1.9001)     [85]


                                                   Panel B: Controls for initial development levels and average years of schooling

 GDP per capita               -2.2161 a             -1.5215 a                                                                                  0.5525 a        8.9747 a    0.3289
 growth 1960-95               (0.6715)              (0.3283)                                                                                   (0.1267)        (1.6568)     [85]

 GNP per capita               -2.0236 a             -1.0340 a                                                                                  0.4233 a        8.0036 a    0.2645
 growth 1970-95               (0.6835)              (0.2244)                                                                                   (0.1154)        (1.6265)     [84]


                                     Panel C: Controls for initial development and initial financial development and average levels of schooling

 GDP per capita               -1.8537 a             -1.7011 a              3.2812 a                                                            0.5045 a        9.2660 a    0.4161
 growth 1960-95               (0.6744)              (0.2890)               (1.0478)                                                            (0.1170)        (1.5235)     [83]

 GNP per capita               -1.5099 b             -1.1934 a              3.7304 a                                                            0.3543 a        8.1922 a    0.3718
 growth 1970-95               (0.6700)              (0.2046)               (0.8608)                                                            (0.1048)        (1.4779)     [83]

 GDP per capita               -1.7912 b             -1.5913 a                                      2.1111 a                                    0.5127 a        8.6833 a    0.3772
 growth 1960-95               (0.7090)              (0.3122)                                       (0.7992)                                    (0.1268)        (1.6452)     [83]

 GNP per capita               -1.7121 b             -1.1418 a                                      3.4698 a                                    0.3206 a        7.9364 a    0.3604
 growth 1970-95               (0.6699)              (0.2154)                                       (1.0179)                                    (0.1096)        (1.5934)     [83]

 GDP per capita               -2.0317 a             -1.5312 a                                                             0.3750               0.5604 a        8.5987 a    0.3097
                              (
 growth 1960-95                 0.7560)             (0.3684)                                                             (1.2289)              (0.1358)        (1.7732)     [83]

 GNP per capita              -1.5459 b              -1.1397 a                                                             2.0754               0.4463 a        6.7457 a    0.2684
 growth 1970-95               (0.7398)              (0.2581)                                                             (1.5696)              (0.1240)        (1.6271)     [82]
a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.




                                                                                              42
                                                                   Table 6
                                            Growth results with different combination of controls

Ordinary Least Square regressions of the cross-section of countries. The dependent variable is the average growth rate of GDP per
capita for the period from 1960 to 1995. The independent variables are defined in Table 1. The regional dummies are for Africa,
North America, South America, Europe, Oceania, Middle East and the rest of Asia. Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis.

         Independent variables:                                   Dependent variable: Growth rate of GDP per capita 1960-1995


                                          -1.7455 b     -2.0481 a        -1.2338     -1.6296 b    -1.7976 c    -1.3277 c        -1.5225 a   -1.3281 b
         GBBP
                                          (0.7393)      (0.7562)        (1.0179)     (0.7960)     (1.0016)     (0.6830)         (0.5487)    (0.6185)

         High inflation dummy 1970-        -0.7923
         1995                             (0.6129)

                                                         -0.3102
         Black market premium 1960s
                                                        (0.5575)

         Index of government
                                                                        -0.1973
         intervention in the economy
                                                                        (0.2136)
         1975

                                                                                      0.0205
         Top marginal tax rate 1975
                                                                                     (0.0194)

         Transfers and subsidies /GDP                                                              -0.0654
         1975                                                                                     (0.1459)

         SOE in the economy index                                                                                0.0298
         1975                                                                                                   (0.1025)

                                                                                                                                 0.0412
         SOE output / GDP 1978-91
                                                                                                                                (0.0275)

                                                                                                                                            -0.0195 b
         Index of Liberty 1980s
                                                                                                                                            (0.0088)

                                           -0.7293       -0.4757         -0.6414      -0.7564      -1.0889       0.4568          1.2722      0.1754
         Latitude
                                          (1.9165)      (1.9844)        (2.1916)     (2.3257)     (2.7995)      (1.7836)        (1.8387)    (1.9102)

                                          -1.6217 a     -1.5173 a       -0.6192      -0.9503 c    -0.9439       -0.6374         -1.3635 a   -1.7058 a
         Log of GDP per capita in 1960
                                          (0.4041)      (0.5070)        (0.5400)     (0.4910)     (0.6659)      (0.4412)        (0.4887)    (0.4315)

                                          2.2747 b      2.1311 c         1.9111      1.7097 c      1.5986        1.1409         3.2083 b    1.9837 c
         Private credit/GDP in 1960
                                          (1.0467)      (1.1331)        (1.2526)     (1.0190)     (1.0547)      (0.9616)        (1.5475)    (1.1582)

                                          0.4204a       0.3320 b         0.1563         0.2122     0.1514        0.2030          0.2018     0.3465 b
         Average schooling
                                          (0.1531)      (0.1525)        (0.1632)        (0.1528   (0.1692)      (0.1359)        (0.1247)    (0.1527)

                                          10.6535 a    10.6179 a        8.1367 b      7.5708a     9.1128 b      6.4360 a        8.9837 a    12.4030 a
         Intercept
                                          (1.9631)      (2.4802)        (3.3687)     (2.2157)     (3.9865)      (2.0940)        (2.0698)    (2.3616)


         Regional dummies                   Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes

         Number of observations              83            82             52              54         52           73               49          81
                     2
         Adjusted R                        0.5190        0.4764         0.5475          0.5875     0.5620       0.4450           0.5462      0.5418
 a= Significant at 1% level; b= Significant at 5% level; c= Significant at 10% level.




                                                                                43
                                                      Table 7
                   Capital accumulation, productivity growth and government ownership of banks

Ordinary least square (OLS) regressions for the cross-section of countries. The dependent variables are: (1) the annual growth rate
of physical capital per capita for the period 1960-1992; (2) the average of the savings to GDP ratio for the period 1960-1993; (3)
the annual productivity per capita growth rate for the period 1960-1995 (Productivity growth 1); (4) the annual productivity per
capita growth rate considering human capital accumulation, following Mankiw (1995) for the period 1960-1995 (Productivity
growth 2); and (5) the annual productivity per capital growth rate considering human capital accumulation, following Hall and Jones
(1998), for the period 1960-1995 (Productivity growth 3). The independent variables are defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors
are shown in parenthesis.

                                                                         Independent variables
                                     GBBP            Log of GDP per        Private credit /      Average years of   Intercept   Adj. R2
  Dependent variables
                                                      capita in 1960       GDP in 1960             schooling,                    [N]

                                                  Panel A: Capital accumulation and savings rate

  Physical capital per capita        -0.5262             -0.3814                                                    5.6024 b    0.0173
  growth 0.5260                     (0.9277)            (0.3454)                                                    (2.4188)     [77]

                                     0.0360             0.0383 a                                                     0.0011     0.1895
  Savings / GDP
                                    (0.0278)            (0.0130)                                                    (0.0831)     [76]

  Physical capital per capita        0.1223             -1.3036 a              3.0902 b             0.3920 b        7.9165 a    0.1561
  growth                            (0.9169)            (0.4211)               (1.1795)             (0.1569)        (2.2806)     [77]

                                     0.0303             0.0449 c                0.0383               -0.0069         -0.0103    0.2122
  Savings / GDP
                                    (0.0286)            (0.0231)               (0.0612)             (0.0062)        (0.1074)     [75]

                                                            Panel B: Productivity growth

                                    -1.4555 b            -0.2745                                                    3.3554 b    0.0994
  Productivity growth 1
                                    (0.5785)            (0.2118)                                                    (1.3801)     [77]

                                    -1.8944 a            -0.1292                                                     1.7094     0.1155
  Productivity growth 2
                                    (0.6990)            (0.3282)                                                    (2.0459)     [77]

                                    -1.7174 c            -0.2450                                                    3.2708 b    0.0792
  Productivity growth 3
                                    (0.9335)            (0.2224)                                                    (1.5862)     [61]

                                    -0.9827 b           -0.9600 a              2.1721 a             0.2979 a        5.0781 a    0.3345
  Productivity growth 1
                                    (0.4615)            (0.1993)               (0.7305)             (0.0784)        (0.9980)      [77]

                                   -1.25791 b           -1.1744 a              2.1538 b             0.5150 a        4.3608 a    0.4565
  Productivity growth 2
                                    (0.4978)            (0.3067)               (0.8421)             (0.0981)        (1.4231)     [77]

                                    -1.1047             -1.1912 a              2.7327 a             0.3421 a        5.9653 a    0.2637
  Productivity growth 3
                                    (0.7857)            (0.3018)               (0.9651)             (0.1271)        (1.4725)     [61]
  a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.




                                                                          44
                                                                         Table 8
                                                                  Evidence of distortions

Ordinary least squares regressions for the cross-section of countries. The exact definitions of all variables can be found in Table 1. The dependent variables
are measured for 1995 or the most recent period for which information is available. Robust standard errors are shown in parenthesis.



                                                                              Independent variables


   Dependent variables:                              GBBP               Log GDP per           Private credit/GDP          Intercept        Adjusted R2
                                                                       capita in 1960              in 1960                                     [N]
   Private claims-claims of top 20 /                -0.3445 b              -0.0181                 0.6189 c               0.6091c             0.3734
   GDP                                               (0.1553)             (0.0583)                 (0.2938)               (0.3413)             [32]

                                                    24.3407a               4.2412                 -27.8036 c              -8.8076             0.1716
   Interest rate spread
                                                    (8.3999)              (4.1960)                (14.6115)              (22.6723)             [58]

 a= Significant at 1% level; b= Significant at 5% level; c= Significant at 10% level.




                                                                             45
                                                              Table 9
                         Instrumental variables: growth, capital accumulation and productivity growth

   Instrumental variables (IV) regressions for the cross-section of countries in the sample. The first stage dependent variable
   is “Government ownership in banks before privatization (GBBP).” This variable is instrumented by dummy variables that
   reflect the legal origin of the country (Common law, French civil law, German civil law, Scandinavian civil law, and
   Socialist legal origin) and by variables that capture the percentage of the population in each country that belong to the
   largest religions in the world (protestant, catholic, muslim and the remaining religions grouped together). The second stage
   dependent variables are: (1) GDP per capita growth rate for 1960-1995; (2) GNP per capita growth rate for 1970-1995;
   (3) Physical capital per capita growth rate 1960-1995; (4) savings to GDP ratio for 1960-1992; (5) Productivity per capita
   growth rate 1 for 1960-1995; (6) Productivity per capita growth rate 2 for 1960-1995; and (7) Productivity per capita
   growth rate 3 for 1960-1995. Standard errors are shown in parenthesis. The last column shows the P2 results for a
   Hausman (1978) Lagrange Multiplier test. The null hypothesis is that the instruments used are not correlated with the
   residuals. Critical values of P2 for the L-M test (8 d.f.) are: 5 % = 15.5073; 1 % = 20.0902.

                                                            Independent variables

Dependent variables               GBBP        Log GDP per         Initial private   Average years   Intercept   N     LM-test P2
                                                 capita            credit/GDP        of schooling

                                             Panel A: Economic growth

GDP per capita growth           -4.7767 c       -1.3253 a           3.5597 a                        11.0117 a   83       1.03
1960-95                         (2.7001)         (0.4263)           (1.2955)                         (3.7746)

GDP per capita growth             -2.6679       -1.7822 a           3.1362 a          0.4912 a      10.2591 a   83       0.13
1960-95                          (2.3210)        (0.3614)           (1.0822)          (0.1197)       (3.1266)

GNP per capita growth           -3.5565 b       -1.0726 a           4.0194 a                        10.1195 a   84       1.74
1970-95                          (1.5208)        (0.2355)           (1.2164)                         (2.3326)

GNP per capita growth           -2.3190 c       -1.2506 a           3.5137 a          0.3520 a      9.0508 a    83       0.52
1970-95                         (1.3195)         (0.2231)           (1.0708)          (0.1084)      (1.9431)

                                            Panel B: Capital accumulation

Physical capital per capita       -2.7635       -0.9615 b            2.7123                         9.4219 a    77       1.37
growth                           (2.4158)        (0.4374)           (1.6630)                        (3.4730)

Physical capital per capita       -1.5536       -1.4265 a           2.6641 c          0.3582 b      9.7417 a    77       0.55
growth                           (2.2312)        (0.4580)           (1.5513)          (0.1686)      (3.1503)

                                  0.0386        0.0357 a             0.0273                         0.0072 c    75       0.02
Savings/GDP
                                 (0.0560)       (0.0121)            (0.0539)                        (0.0874)

                                  0.0445        0.0464 a             0.0391            -0.0068       -0.0269    75       0.09
Savings/GDP
                                 (0.0548)       (0.0135)            (0.0540)          (0.0047)      (0.0867)

                                            Panel C: Productivity growth

                                -4.6758 b       -0.8601 b            1.4714                         8.0041 a    77       2.54
Productivity growth 1
                                 (2.2642)        (0.3331)           (1.1690)                        (2.9738)

                                -3.1972 c       -1.1224 a           1.6091 a          0.2533 b      7.4898 a    77       1.21
Productivity growth 1
                                (1.9477)         (0.2803)           (0.9528)          (0.0997)      (2.4036)
                                -6.6686 b       -0.8981 b            1.2107                         8.2628 b    77       2.99
Productivity growth 2            (2.9877)        (0.4395)           (1.5425)                        (3.9243)

                                -3.8673 c       -1.3658 a            1.4903           0.4623 a      7.2026 c    77       1.48
Productivity growth 2           (2.1795)         (0.3137)           (1.0662)          (0.1115)      (2.6896)

                                -7.2304 b       -1.2660 b            1.6534                         11.3520     61       3.40
Productivity growth 3
                                 (3.2640)        (0.5576)           (1.6648)                        (4.5287)

                                -5.3889 c        -1.4139             1.9375            0.1923       10.2637 a   61       2.23
Productivity growth 3
                                (3.0233)        (0.4938)            (1.4154)          (0.1992)       (3.7038)


   a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.




                                                                  46
                                                                     Table 10
                                                        Growth by groups of countries

Ordinary least square regressions (OLS) of different groups of countries classified according to country characteristics. The dependent
variable in all regressions shown is the average annual growth of GDP per capita for the period 1960-1995. The independent variables are
described in Table 1. The table has three panels corresponding to different classifications of the countries in the sample. Panel A divides
the sample in those countries with initial GDP per capita in 1960 below the median and those above the median. Panel B divides the sample
in those countries with initial level of financial development below and those above the median as measured by private credit as a proportion
of GDP in 1960. Panel C divides the sample in those countries with property rights in the 1990s below the median and those above the
median value for the sample.

                                                                                Independent variables:

 Dependent variable:                                GBBP              Log GDP per          Initial private      Average years   Intercept   Adj. R2
 growth rate of GDP per capita 1960-95                                 capita 1960          credit/GDP           of schooling                [N]

                                          Panel A: Countries ranked by initial level of economic development

 Countries with Log GDP per capita in             -2.2328 c             -2.5290 a            3.5590 c             0.6290 c      13.0490 a   0.4399
 1960 < median                                    (1.2553)               (0.8146)            (1.7563)             (0.3039)       (4.5905)    [42]

 Countries with Log GDP per capita in             -1.2970 c             -1.8264 a            3.0321 c             0.2933 b      11.5750     0.4884
 1960 > median                                    (0.7140)               (0.4485)            (1.4800)             (0.1201)         a         [41]


                                          Panel B: Countries ranked by initial level of financial development

 Countries with private credit/GDP per            -3.4856a              -2.0369 a             -6.6106             0.7470 a      11.7581 a   0.5771
 Capital in 1996 < median                         (0.9432)               (0.3486)            (7.0263)             (0.1742)       (1.8327)    [41]

 Countries with private credit/GDP per             -1.4294              -1.1717 b            2.4402 b              0.2125       8.1512 a    0.2706
 Capital in 1996 > median                         (0.9430)               (0.4560)            (1.1115)             (0.1411)      (2.7431)     [42]

                                           Panel C: Countries ranked by property rights index of the 1990s

 Countries with property rights index <           -2.6439 b             -2.4088 a            5.9947 a             0.6744 b      12.1181 a   0.4536
 median                                            (1.0577)              (0.6468)            (1.4949)             (0.2766)       (3.3832)    [37]

 Countries with property rights index >            -0.6025              -1.7726 a            2.6081 a             0.3291 b      10.8791 a   0.4861
 median                                           (0.8916)               (0.3647)            (0.9238)             (0.1395)       (2.2572)    [44]


a=Significant at 1% level; b=Significant at 5% level; c=Significant at 10% level.




                                                                         47
                                                        Appendix A
          This appendix describes the data sources used to calculate government ownership of banks in each country.

Country                                                Sources of ownership data
Afghanistan           The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Algeria               Algerian Embassy.
                      Jeune Afrique Economie N163, Special Banques, pg 79-88, Jan ‘93.
                      The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
                      The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.


Argentina             America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                      Annual Edition 1995/96.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Australia             Annual Reports.
                      The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      World Scope Global Disclosure Inc. 1996.

Austria               Annual Reports.
                      Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
                      Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                      The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                      World Scope Global Disclosure Inc. 1996.

Bahrain               Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
                      Telephonic Conversations.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                      Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Bangladesh            The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Belgium               Annual Reports.
                      French Company Handbook 1996, Herald International Triune, SBF Paris Bourse, France.
                      Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
                      Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                      The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                      World Scope Global Disclosure Inc. 1996.

Bolivia               Annual Reports.
                      America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                      Annual Edition 1995/96.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.



Brazil                America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                      Annual Edition 1995/96.
                      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                      Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
Country                                            Sources of ownership data
Bulgaria         The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Canada           Annual Reports.
                 Telephonic Conversations.
                 The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Chile            America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                 Annual Edition 1995/96.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

China            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Colombia         America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                 Annual Edition 1995/96.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Costa Rica       The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Cote D’Ivore     Annual Reports.
                 Faxed Information.
                 Jeune Afrique Economie N163, Special Banques, pg 79-88, Jan ‘93.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Croatia          The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Cyprus           The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Czech Republic   Essinger, James, Eastern European Banking , 1st Edition 1994, Published by Chapman & Hall,
                 London, U.K.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Denmark          Annual Reports.
                 Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
                 The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Dominican        Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
Republic         U.S.A.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Egypt             Annual Reports.
                 Jeune Afrique Economie N163, Special Banques, pg 79-88, Jan ‘93.
                 The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
                 The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.

El Salvador      Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
                 U.S.A.
                 Telephonic Conversations.
                 The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                 Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
Country                                       Sources of ownership data
Finland     Annual Reports.
            Electronic mail from the respective bank.
            Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
            Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
            Telephonic Conversations.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
            World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.

France      Annual Reports.
            Telephonic Conversations.
            Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
            French Company Handbook 1996, Herald International Triune, SBF Paris Bourse.
            Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.

Germany     Annual Reports.
            Germany’s Top 5,000, 1997 Edition, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Gmbh Infomation Services.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Greece      Annual Reports.
            Telephonic Conversations.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Guatemala   Guia Bancaria Latinoamericana, 16th Edition 1996, Federacion Latinoamericana de Bancos, Bogota,
            Colombia.
            Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
            U.S.A.
            Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Honduras    Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
            U.S.A.
            Telephonic Conversations.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Hong Kong   Annual Reports.
            Telephonic Conversations.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            Asian Company Handbook, 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Kenzai Inc., Tokyo, Japan .
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Hungary     Essinger, James, Eastern European Banking , 1st Edition 1994, Published by Chapman & Hall,
            London, U.K.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Iceland     The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

India       Bankers Handbook for Asia 1994-1995, Dataline Asia-Pacific Limited.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Indonesia   Annual Reports.
            The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
            Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
            The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
            World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.
Country                                        Sources of ownership data
Iran          The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Ireland       Annual Reports.
              Telephonic Conversations.
              Faxed Information.
              Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
              Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.
              Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet .

Israel        Telephonic Conversations.
              Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
              Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Italy         Annual Reports.
              Telephonic Conversations.
              Electronic Mail.
              Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
              Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Japan         Japan Company Handbook, Spring 1997, Toyo Kenzai Inc., Tokyo, Japan.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Jordan        The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Kazakhstan    The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Kenya         Annual Reports.
              The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
              The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Korea-South   Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Kuwait        Faxed Information.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Laos          Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Lebanon       The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Libya         The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
Country                                         Sources of ownership data
Macau         Bankers Handbook for Asia 1994-1995, Dataline Asia-Pacific Limited.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Macedonia     The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Malaysia      Annual Reports.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.

Mexico        Extel Financial Ltd., 1995.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Morocco       Annual Reports.
              The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Moroccan Embassy.
              The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
              Hartland-Peel, Christopher, African Equities, Euromoney Publication PLC, 1996, London, U.K.
              Jeune Afrique Economie N163, Special Banques, pg 79-88, Jan ‘93.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Netherlands   Annual Reports.
              Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
              Telephonic Con.versations.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
              Polk World Banking Profiles, 1997 Edition, Thomson Financial Publication, Skokie, IL, U.S.A.

New Zealand   The New Zealand Company Register, 1994-1995, Headliner Publishing Co., Christchurch, New
              Zealand.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Nicaragua     Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
              U.S.A.
              Telephonic Conversations.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Nigeria       Annual Reports.
              The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Hartland-Peel, Christopher, African Equities, Euromoney Publication PLC, 1996, London, U.K.
              Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
              The Economist Intelligence Unit, ILT March 1995.

Norway        Annual Reports.
              Telephonic Conversations.
              The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
              Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
              World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.
              Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.

Oman          Major Companies in the Arab World.
              The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.

Pakistan      The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
              Bankers Handbook for Asia 1994-1995, Dataline Asia-Pacific Limited.
Country                                          Sources of ownership data
Panama         America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
               Annual Edition 1995/96.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Paraguay       Telephonic Conversations.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
               U.S.A.

Peru           Telephonic Conversations.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
               U.S.A.
               Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
               LIBRO?

Philippines    The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
               MC?

Poland         Annual Reports.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Portugal       Annual Reports.
               Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Qatar          The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Romania        The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Essinger, James, Eastern European Banking , 1st Edition 1994, Published by Chapman & Hall,
               London, U.K.

Russia         Annual Reports.
               Banks, 1996-1997, SVOP Publisherers, Moscow, Russia.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, World Reference, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Saudi Arabia   Annual Reports.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, World Reference, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Senegal        The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Singapore      Asian Company Handbook, 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Kenzai Inc., Tokyo, Japan.
               Annual Reports.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
Country                                          Sources of ownership data
Slovakia       The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Slovenia       The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

South Africa   Annual Reports.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
               Who Controls Whom in South Africa, Financial Mail Survey Dec. 6 1996, South Africa.

Spain          Annual Reports.
               Telephonic Conversations.
               Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
               The Maxwell Espinosa Shareholder Directory, 7th Edition, 1994, Union Editorial, Madrid, Spain.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Sri Lanka      Annual Reports.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
               Bankers Handbook for Asia 1994-1995, Dataline Asia-Pacific Limited.

Sweden         Annual Reports.
               Electronic Mail.
               Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
               Financial Times’ Companie Briefings, Internet.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
               The Maxwell Espinosa Shareholder Directory, 7th Edition, 1994, Union Editorial, Madrid, Spain.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

Switzerland    Annual Reports.
               Telephonic Conversations.
               Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               Moody’s International Company Data, Moody’s Investors Service, 1994 Version, New York, U.S.A.

Syria          Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Taiwan         Bankers Handbook for Asia 1994-1995, Dataline Asia-Pacific Limited.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.

Tanzania       The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Thailand       Asian Company Handbook, 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Kenzai Inc., Tokyo, Japan.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               The MFC Investment Handbook, Thailand, 1996 Edition, The Mutual Fund Public Co., LTD.
               Bangkok, Thailand.

Trinidad and   Telephonic Conversations.
Tobago         Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

Tunisia        Jeune Afrique Economie N163, Special Banques, pg 79-88, Jan ‘93.
               The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
               The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
               The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
               Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
 Country                                              Sources of ownership data
 Turkey              Annual Reports
                     Faxed Information.
                     The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                     The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                     Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
                     The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.

 United Arab         Major Companies in the Arab World.
 Emirates            The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                     The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                     Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

 United Kingdon      20F
                     Annual Reports.
                     Telephonic Conversations.
                     Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside.
                     The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                     The Company Guide, Hemmington Scott Publishers 1997, London, U.K.
                     World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.

 Uruguay             America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                     Annual Edition 1995/96.
                     The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                     The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                     Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

 United States       World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.

 Venezuela           Annual Reports.
                     America Economia, Latin America’s Business Magazine, 500 Latin America’s Largest Companies,
                     Annual Edition 1995/96.
                     Hoover’s Masterlist of Major Latin American Companies 1996-1997, The Reference Press, Tx,
                     U.S.A.
                     Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
                     The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

 Vietnam             The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                     The Europa World Yearbook 1996, Europa Publications.
                     Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.

 Yugoslavia          The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.

 Zimbabwe            Annual Reports.
                     Jeune Afrique Economie N163, Special Banques, pg 79-88, Jan ‘93.
                     The AED African Financial Directory, 1987, Middle East Economic Digest Limited, London, U.K.
                     The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K.
                     The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K.
                     Thomson Bank Directory 1996, Thomson Financial Publishing.
                     Hartland-Peel, Christopher, African Equities, Euromoney Publication PLC, 1996, London, U.K.

References for General Sources:

Polk World Banking Profiles, 1997 Edition, Thomson Financial Publication, Skokie, IL, USA
The Euromoney Bank Register 1996, 11th Edition, Euromoney Publications, London, U.K
The Banker’s Almanac, January 1997 Edition, Reed Information Services, London, U.K
World Scope Global Disclosure Inc 1996.
International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund.
Japan Company Handbook, Spring 1997, Toyo Kenzai Inc., Tokyo, Japan
Germany’s Top 5,000, 1997 Edition, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Gmbh Infomation Services
French Company Handbook 1996, Herald International Triune, SBF Paris Bourse
Asian Company Handbook, 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Kenzai Inc.
Major Companies of the Arab World1994/1995, 18th Edition, Graham & Trotman, London, U.K.
The MFC Investment Handbook, Thailand, 1996 Edition, The Mutual Fund Public Co., LTD. Bangkok, Thailand
Hartland-Peel, Christopher, African Equities, Euromoney Publication PLC, 1996, London, U.K.
Essinger, James, Eastern European Banking , 1st Edition 1994, Published by Chapman & Hall, London, U.K.
Major Financial Institutions of Europe 1995/96, Graham & Whiteside
