                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OUTWARD FDI AND PARENT EXPORTS AND EMPLOYMENT:
                    JAPAN, THE UNITED STATES, AND SWEDEN


                                           Robert E. Lipsey
                                          Eric D. Ramstetter
                                          Magnus Blomström


                                          Working Paper 7623
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7623

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 by Robert E. Lipsey, Eric D. Ramstetter, and Magnus Blomström. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Outward FDI and Parent Exports and Employment: Japan, the United States, and Sweden
Robert E. Lipsey, Eric D. Ramstetter, and Magnus Blomström
NBER Working Paper No. 7623
March 2000
JEL No. F14, F23, L23


                                           ABSTRACT

       Within Japanese multinational firms, parent exports from Japan to a foreign region are
positively related to production in that region by affiliates of that parent, given the parent’s home
production in Japan and the region’s size and income level. This relationship is similar to that found
for Swedish and U.S. multinationals in parallel studies.
       A Japanese parent’s worldwide exports tend to be larger, relative to its output, the larger the
firm’s overseas production. In this respect also, Japanese firms resembled U.S. multinationals.
       A Japanese parent’s employment, given the level of its production, tends to be higher, the
greater the production abroad by the firm’s foreign affiliates. Japanese firms’ behavior in this
respect is similar to that of Swedish firms, but contrasts with that of U.S. firms. U.S. firms appear
to reduce employment at home, relative to production, by allocating labor-intensive parts of their
production to affiliates in developing countries. Swedish firms seem to allocate the more capital-
intensive parts of their production to their foreign affiliates, mostly in high-wage countries. We
conclude that in Japanese firms, supervisory and ancillary employment at home to service foreign
operations outweighs any allocation of labor-intensive production to developing countries.

Robert E. Lipsey                                      Eric D.Ramstetter
NBER                                                  The International Centre for the Study of
365 Fifth Ave., Suite 5318,                           East Asian Development
New York, NY 10016                                    11-4 Otemachi
and CUNY                                              Kitakyushu, 803-0814
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu                                   Japan

Magnus Blomström
European Institute of Japanese Studies
Stockholm School of Economics
PO Box 6501
S-113 83, Stockholm, Sweden
and NBER
gmb@hhs.se
 Outward FDI and Parent Exports and Employment: Japan, the United States, and
                                  Sweden

                  Robert E. Lipsey, Eric D. Ramstetter, and Magnus Blomström


Introduction

       One aspect of foreign direct investment that has been studied intensively is the

relationship between a firm’s production abroad and its exports from its home country, or

exports in general from the home country. There have been quite a few studies of U.S. and

Swedish firms, because these countries led in collecting data and making it accessible. There

was also a one-time study of UK investment and its effects, and there have been recent parallel

studies for France, Italy, and Austria, and perhaps others. Now Japan has begun to permit access

to the firm-level data that has been collected over many years by the Ministry of International

Trade and Industry (MITI).

       The motivation behind most of the past studies was the fear that direct investment abroad

replaced home country production and exports in foreign markets and, as a consequence, caused

unemployment at home. This motivation was probably misguided, for many reasons. What we

have actually been studying is why there are differences among firms in their strategies for

serving foreign markets or for allocating their production among geographical locations. There

are differences among industries, among types of firms, possibly among countries, and

differences over time. None of these have obvious implications for aggregate home

employment levels, even if they do affect employment by the parent firms making the

investments. In this respect, the firm investment decisions are akin to those made by trade

markets to allocate production among countries according to their comparative advantages.




                                                                                               1
Japanese FDI in and Exports to a Region

        In this paper, we will summarize some of the findings from two papers based on MITI

data for individual parent firms and affiliates and compare them, and their implications, with

what has been found for the most intensively studied other developed countries. The studies for

Japanese firms reported here followed closely, partly for reasons of comparability, the methods

described and used in earlier studies for the United States and Sweden. Those for the United

States go back to Lipsey and Weiss (1969, 1976a, 1976b, 1981, and 1984), and those for Sweden

go back to Swedenborg (1973, 1979, and 1982).

        Despite the intention to duplicate the methods used in the studies for other countries,

there are characteristics of the Japanese data and the Japanese economy that limit the degree of

comparability. One is the uncertain and inconsistent coverage of the MITI data, inconsistent

over time, across industries and firms in any one survey, and across survey questions even for a

single firm’s responses in a particular survey. Another problem, institutional rather than purely

statistical, but with statistical implications, is the important role played by the large general

trading companies (the sogo shosha) in Japanese exports, not matched in any other country. The

trading companies are not included in our calculations because we focus on manufacturing

parents. If the trading companies handled the exports of manufacturing parent companies, and

the manufacturing parents reported their sales to the trading companies as domestic sales, exports

from manufacturing parents would be understated and the equations for parent exports distorted.

However, there is at least one indication that some manufacturing parents report exports through

trading companies as their own export sales: the reported total exports by all parents are greater

than aggregate exports reported in the balance of payments in each of the three years studied,

1986, 1989, and 1992 (Lipsey, Ramstetter, and Blomström, 1999a, p. 97).




                                                                                                    2
        The equations here for exports to a region relate a parent firm’s exports to a region to

some of the usual variables in a gravity equation, such as the region’s real income, per capita real

income, and the average distance of the region’s countries from Japan. For GDP and GDP per

capita, we expect positive coefficients, although the latter depend also on the income elasticity of

demand, and for distance we expect negative coefficients, varying with industry transport costs.

A variable for parent sales is included to remove the influence of parent size. That variable, of

course, is expected to have a positive coefficient. The relation to foreign affiliate activity is

estimated using two alternative measures, value added in affiliates and employment in affiliates.

Value added in affiliates is the closest approximation to affiliate output. Employment in

affiliates is available for a larger fraction of affiliates than value added and it is less affected by

exchange rate fluctuations than value added, sales, assets, or other monetary measures. There is

no a priori expectation as to the sign of this coefficient.

        The first pair of equations is 1a and 1b, which are the same except that in equation 1b,

employment is substituted for value added.

(1a) PSXR = f1a (GDPR, GDPPR, DISTR, PS, AVMR)

(1b)   PSXR = f1b (GDPR, GDPPR, DISTR, PS, AEMR).

        Where:

        PSXR = exports of parent p to region h, in millions of Yen.

        GDPR = real GDP of region h, at current international prices, in thousands of current

                                international dollars.

        GDPPR = real per capita GDP of region h, at current international prices, in thousands

                                of current international dollars

        DISTR = average distance from Japan to region h, in thousands of nautical miles




                                                                                                    3
       PS = total sales of parent p, in millions of Yen.

       AVMR = value added (sales less purchases) in affiliates of parent p in non-oil

                       manufacturing industries of region h for all affiliates reporting

                       positive value added and intermediate purchases, millions of Yen.

       AEVMR= number of employees in affiliates of parent p in non-oil manufacturing

                       industries of region h for all affiliates reporting positive employment,

                       value added, and intermediate purchases.

       The great majority of the coefficients on affiliate production that are significant at the 5

per cent level are positive (Table 1). In 1986, the coefficients were positive for 3 out of the 10

industries, in 1989, 4 were positive and one negative, and in 1992, 7 were positive. Larger

production in a region by a firm’s affiliates is associated with larger exports to the region from

the parent firm, aside from the influence of region size and income level, parent firm size, and

distance from Japan. Aside from one extremely large coefficient for Precision machinery in

1992, the other 13 positive and significant coefficients seem to be clustered around 1, with an

average of 1.1. Thus, a firm that produces a million Yen more in a region than another tends also

to export a million Yen more to that region. The Electrical machinery industry is a consistent

outlier; the equation always explains two thirds or more of the variation in parent exports to a

region, the coefficients are significant by any standard criterion, and they are larger than for most

industries, close to or above 2.

       The general impression from these calculations is that a firm’s exports to a region and its

affiliates’ production in the region are positively related to each other. The export-promoting

effects of affiliate production, plus whatever firm-specific characteristics (such as R&D

intensity) or region-specific characteristics (such as openness to trade and investment) tend to




                                                                                                  4
increase both parent exports and affiliate production, seem to be predominant. They outweigh

any tendencies of affiliate production to replace parent exports and any firm-specific or region-

specific influence that tend to favor parent exports at the expense of affiliate production (such as

restrictions on foreign ownership), or affiliate production at the expense of parent exports (such

as tariffs).

        One reason for choosing the particular equation forms used here was the desire to

compare the Japanese results with earlier ones for the United States and Sweden, although

differences in the content and detail of the data make the comparisons inexact. One of the

earliest of the similar studies was by Lipsey and Weiss (1981), reporting results described more

fully in two unpublished 1976 papers by the same authors (1976a) and (1976b). These used a

cruder measure of U.S. affiliate production (net sales), but added a still cruder measure of the

presence of affiliates of firms from 13 other countries. They divided the world into many more

export markets, and used exports by industry for both the U.S. (rather than by U.S. parent firms),

and by 13 rival exporting countries. The use of country exports has advantages and drawbacks.

It loses the variation across firms within industries but it takes account of any effect of one firm’s

affiliate activity in a market on exports by rival firms in the same industry to that market.

        This study found only positive coefficients for U.S. affiliate activity in equations for U.S.

exports among those significant at the 5 per cent level. These were 10 out of 14 for exports to

developed countries and 9 out of 11 for exports to developing countries (Lipsey and Weiss,

1981, Table 1). The significant coefficients for developed country affiliate activity averaged

about .16, while those for developing country affiliate activity averaged about .41. Since net

sales are roughly three times gross product for U.S. manufacturing affiliates as a whole, these

estimates should be multiplied by three for comparison with the Japanese coefficients. That




                                                                                                 5
would give about .5 for affiliates in developed countries and about 1.2 for those in developing

countries. Since the affiliates in developed countries are much more important, the average

across all countries would still probably be below the coefficient we calculated for Japan.

       In this early paper for the U.S., the authors attempted to reduce the role of omitted

characteristics of destinations, such as market openness, by including in the equations a rough

proxy for the presence of non-U.S. affiliates in each market. The coefficients for those affiliates

were negative when they were significant, suggesting that affiliate activity was not acting simply

as a proxy for market characteristics, such as demand or openness. Thus it was the affiliate

activity, rather than market characteristics, that accounted for the positive coefficients for U.S.

activity on U.S. exports. A further test of this interpretation was to include U.S. affiliate activity

in equations for exports to a market by the 13 countries other than the U.S. These coefficients

were generally negative, lending further support to the interpretation that affiliate activity by a

country’s firms encouraged exports from that country, and discouraged exports from other

countries, to the affiliate location. It does appear that one country’s affiliate production tends to

substitute for exports by rival countries while promoting exports from the affiliates’ home

countries. The test is still not conclusive, because it assumes, in effect, that the host countries are

homogeneous in their relationships to home countries. It is possible that they are not, and that

some host countries have close political or economic ties to the United States that encourage

both trade and investment from the U.S. but discourage it with other countries. Other host

countries may have close ties to home countries other than the United States that discourage both

imports and investment from the U.S.

       A later study ( Blomström, Lipsey, and Kulchycky, 1988) based on the 1982 U.S.

outward investment survey covered 34 industries with total U.S. industry exports as the




                                                                                                 6
dependent variable. The equations included GDP and per capita GDP in host countries as

independent variables. Among the coefficients for affiliate net sales that were statistically

significant, there was a mixture of positive and negative ones, 7 positive and 4 negative. The

positive ones were for Textiles and apparel, Printing and publishing, Agricultural chemicals,

Office and computing machinery, Electronic components, Instruments, and Other manufacturing.

Three of the seven are relatively high-tech industries, but the others are far from high-tech. The

industries for which the coefficients of affiliate net sales were negative were Other food

products, Drugs, Primary nonferrous metals, and Lumber, wood, furniture, and fixtures. Only

one of these, Drugs, is a high-tech industry, and that one showed positive relationships between

affiliate production and both parent exports and industry exports in Lipsey and Weiss (1981) and

(1984). In the parent export equation, the explanation of the difference seems to be related to the

market size measure used. The positive coefficients in Lipsey and Weiss (1981) and (1984) were

from equations using a market size measure based on the consumption of pharmaceutical

products, rather than GDP, and also included a variable that was a proxy for the innovativeness

of the parent firm. The corresponding equation based on GDP as a market size measure had a

negative, but not statistically significant, coefficient for affiliate net sales.

        The same paper included a set of Swedish export equations for seven broad industry

groups, including as market size measures real PPP-converted GDP and GDP per capita and a

dummy for Nordic countries. All the coefficients for affiliate net sales were positive, and the six

that were statistically significant at the 5 per cent level averaged out to .5, implying a coefficient

for production of perhaps 1.5, even above that for Japanese affiliate production.

        Another experiment with the Swedish data examined the change in Swedish exports in

seven broad industry groups between 1970 and 1978. Given the level of exports by each




                                                                                                  7
industry to each destination in 1970 and the change in real GDP in each importing country, the

change in exports was related to the level of affiliate net sales in 1970 and the change in them

from 1970 to 1978. The higher the initial level of affiliate net sales in an industry in a host

country, the larger the increase in Swedish exports in that industry to that country. And the

larger the growth in affiliate net sales in an industry in a host country, the larger the growth in

Swedish exports to that country in that industry.

       The closest analogue for the United States to the Japanese export equations in this paper

is a set for U.S. multinational firms’ parent exports to five developed country regions in 1970

(Lipsey and Weiss, 1984). The control variables were market size, as represented by nominal

GDP, and parent sales in the United States, and a variable for non-production affiliates was also

included. The significant coefficients, for five out of fifteen industries, were as follows:

               Drugs                                           .085

               Other nonelectrical machinery                   .246

               Office machinery and computers                  .116

               Household appliances and electrical appl..      .152

               Stone, clay, glass, & concrete products          .036

The average coefficient for net sales in the equations for parent exports was .13, which means

that the corresponding coefficient for output would be about .4, fairly close to the .5 for total

U.S. industry exports to the more detailed set of destinations in the earlier U.S. study.

       Another analogue to the Japanese equations is in the series of studies of Swedish

multinationals by Swedenborg (1979), (1982), and (1985). They use, as their dependent

variable, exports by Swedish parent firms, rather than industry exports, as in the U.S. studies

cited above. In that way they more closely resemble the Japanese study here. However, they are




                                                                                                    8
based on net sales as a production measure, rather than value added, and the equations are run

across all industries because there are not enough Swedish firms to permit individual industry

equations. In Swedenborg (1985) the author pooled data from four cross-sections, for 1965,

1970, 1974, and 1978, and used a 2SLS procedure to remove the effects of simultaneity between

decisions to produce abroad and decisions to export. She concluded that, for manufacturing as a

whole, a parent firm’s “…total exports to a country increase by about .10 dollars…when foreign

production increases by $1.” (1985, p.235). “Foreign production” in these equations is measured

by net sales. If value added or gross product were used, instead of net sales, that might translate

into about .30 dollars in exports for every dollar of production. That figure is lower than the one

for the U.S. exports to developed countries (Sweden’s investment is heavily concentrated in

developed countries) from a very different calculation, and still lower than the Japanese

coefficient relating to all countries. The levels of the coefficients differ, but it is hard to interpret

the differences without redoing the calculations for the three countries in a uniform way.

However, there is no doubt about the predominance of positive relationships between production

in a host country by firms from a home country and exports to that host country from that home

country.



Japanese FDI and Total Parent Firm Exports

        One objection that has been raised to drawing conclusions about FDI-trade relationships

from data by country or region is that foreign affiliates in one country or region might, by their

own exports, displace parent exports to a third country or region. That issue has been raised

particularly by Svensson (1996), with respect to Swedish multinational firms.




                                                                                                    9
        Lacking detailed data on affiliate export trade it is difficult to study this question for

Japanese multinationals. One possibility is to relate total foreign affiliate activity by a firm to the

parent’s total exports to all foreign destinations. If there were displacement of parent exports to

third countries it should be reflected in this export total.

        There are some additional problems with interpreting this relationship. Characteristics

specific to a firm that influence both FDI and exports become more important than in an equation

for individual export destinations. In an equation for exports to individual countries, if there

were enough country observations, the firm characteristics could be allowed for by using firm

dummy terms, but that is not possible for total parent exports. A useful experiment would be to

introduce a variety of parent characteristics, in addition to parent size, that might affect both

affiliate production and parent exports. A problem with the Japanese data is that samples

become small for some industries, especially in the earlier years, and some equations have been

omitted here for that reason.

        The form of the calculations run here is described by equations 2a and 2b.

(2a) PSX = f2a( PS, AVMMDR, AVMLDR)

(2b) PSX = f2b( PS, AEMMDR, AEMLDR)

        where

        PSX = total exports of parent p, millions of Yen

        PS = total sales of parent p, millions of Yen

        AVMMDR = value added in affiliates of parent p in non-oil manufacturing industries

                        of more developed regions for affiliates that report positive value added

                        and intermediate purchases, millions of current Yen

        AVMLDR = same for affiliates in less developed regions




                                                                                                 10
       AEMMDR = number of employees in affiliates of parent p in non-oil manufacturing

                       industries of more developed regions that report positive employment

       AEMLDR = same for affiliates in less developed regions

       On the whole, parent firms that produced more abroad, also exported more. Negative

relationships were more common for production in developed countries than for production in

developing countries. Coefficients that were significant at the 5 per cent level were positive in 8

out of 13 cases for production in developed countries and in 7 out of 9 cases for production in

developing countries (Table 2). These relationships were not as consistent as those for

production in and exports to regions. Even statistically significant coefficients changed signs

over time within an industry. The most consistent result was that the coefficients for affiliate

production in the Precision machinery industry in developed and developing countries were each

positive in two out of the three periods.

       Employment abroad does not appear to have a clear relationship to parent exports. There

is only one significant coefficient out of 28 equations for employment in developing countries.

For employment in developed countries, there are more, almost evenly split between positive and

negative coefficients, with a slight leaning toward a negative relationship. In no industry are the

coefficients significant in all three periods but in the three industries for which there are two

significant coefficients, both are negative for Chemicals and Electric machinery and both are

positive for Miscellaneous manufacturing. The employment data do not point to any strong

relationship between a firm’s foreign affiliate activity and parent exports. In contrast to what we

found for production, foreign employment is as frequently associated with lower parent exports

as with higher exports.




                                                                                                11
        An earlier study of U.S. multinational firms (Lipsey and Weiss, 1984) examined the

impact of worldwide affiliate production on worldwide exports by pharmaceutical industry

parents in 1970. It used a market size measure more specific to the industry than GDP, added a

measure for the innovativeness of individual firms, and took account of parent size, as in the

Japanese equations. A significant positive coefficient was found for affiliate production, as

measured by net sales. An equation for exports to affiliates alone produced a slightly smaller

coefficient for affiliate net sales, indicating that for the parent firm as a whole, exports to

affiliates were not a substitute for exports to others.

        Each one of the analyses here has defects. While they include various attempts to escape

the problem of simultaneity between exporting from home and producing abroad, additional

steps in this direction could be taken. However, we think it is safe to conclude that larger

production abroad has not, on average, been associated with lower levels of exports by parent

firms or their industries in home countries, or with lower exports relative to home sales. In this

respect, the findings from the newly available data for Japan match very well those from similar,

though not identical, data for the United States and Sweden.

Japanese Parent Employment and Foreign Production

        If firms are not, on average, moving production out of home countries, they may

nevertheless be reallocating their production to economize on transport costs, to gain foreign

market share by proximity to customers, or to take advantage of differences in factor prices and

factor abundance. Since home countries tend to be high-income and high-skill countries,

multinationals might tend to allocate their labor-intensive or unskilled-labor-intensive production

to their foreign operations, especially those in developing countries. And they might tend to

allocate capital-intensive or skill-intensive production to their home operations. If they did that,




                                                                                                  12
they would use less labor at home for any given level of home output than a firm that had less

production abroad or did not allocate its production in this way. On the other hand, foreign

production might require home employment for supervision or for ancillary services not needed

for home production, but more suitably performed at home rather than in foreign locations. In

that case, parents with larger foreign operations would tend to have higher employment at home

for a given level of home production than firms with smaller foreign activity.

       The possible impacts on home employment are examined here using equation 3. It

relates parent employment to parent production and to affiliate production. Affiliate production

is divided for this purpose into manufacturing and non-manufacturing affiliates and into

developed and developing countries:



(3)    PE = f3 (PV, AVMMDR, AVMLDR, AVNMDR, AVNLDR)

       Where:

       PE = Number of employees in parent p

       PV = Value added (sales less intermediate purchases) of parent p, in billions of Yen.

       AVMMDR = Value added in affiliates of parent p in non-oil manufacturing industries

                       of more developed regions that report positive value added and

                       intermediate purchases, in millions of Yen

       AVMLDR = Same for less developed regions

       AVNMDR = Same for trade and other affiliates in more developed regions

       AVNLDR = Same for trade and other affiliates in less developed regions

There is little support here for the idea that Japanese firms allocated labor-intensive operations to

their affiliates and therefore employed fewer workers at home relative to their home production.




                                                                                               13
The coefficients for affiliate production, in equations explaining home employment, given home

production, were mostly not statistically significant; out of 136 equations, only 51 had significant

coefficients. Of these, 39 were positive and only 12 were negative. It would appear that the

need for supervision, or other home activities needed for overseas production, was the dominant

influence on home employment. Most of the negative coefficients were for production in

developed countries, not what we would expect if labor costs were driving the allocation of

overseas production. Not only were the negative coefficients concentrated in developed

countries, but there seemed to be a trend toward positive coefficients. There were 6 negative

coefficients out of 18 significant ones in 1986, 4 out of 15 in 1989, and only 2 out of 18 in 1992.

If allocation of production to low labor cost areas had any importance as an influence at one

time, it does not seem to be important in the later period.

        Swedish firms’ behavior resembled that of Japanese firms, in that larger affiliate sales

were associated with higher employment in parent operations, for a given level of parent sales

(Blomström, Fors, and Lipsey, 1997). That positive effect on parent employment was much

larger per unit of affiliate sales for affiliate activity in developing countries than for affiliate

activity in developed countries, where Swedish firms have most of their investment. The

coefficients for the effect of affiliate activity in general have been declining over the last twenty

years, possibly because of the increasing importance of production in developed countries.

Affiliate production in general is associated with higher blue collar employment at home, an

association that suggests an allocation of capital-intensive and skill-intensive activities to foreign

affiliates, rather than increased supervisory or research activities at home to support foreign

production operations.




                                                                                                   14
       A similar set of equations for U.S. multinationals in six manufacturing industries (Lipsey,

1999) produced quite different results, although it is not possible to make exact comparisons

because of differences in the grouping of countries and types of affiliates. In that paper, affiliates

were divided between those in developed and developing country locations, as in the Japanese

calculations, but in addition, the developing countries were further divided, very roughly, into

those that were “outward-oriented,” defined as Mexico and Asian countries except India, and

“inward-oriented,” which were all others.

       Almost all the coefficients for affiliate net sales (value added was not available) were

statistically significant at the 5 per cent level. In equations for all manufacturing industries

combined, non-manufacturing affiliate activity was associated with higher levels of parent

employment, given parent output, while manufacturing affiliate activity was associated with

lower parent employment. If the affiliates are divided between developed and developing

countries, all the negative effect on parent employment is from the developing countries, as

would be expected if multinationals are allocating labor-intensive activities to those locations. If

the affiliates are further subdivided into the more and less open groups, all the negative effects

are from production in the inward-oriented group, as if the location of production there had been

influenced by barriers to trade.

       If the multinationals are divided into industry groups, and affiliates are not separated by

type of country, the two machinery industries show significant positive relationships of affiliate

activity to parent employment and Transport equipment a significant negative relationship. Once

the affiliates are divided up by type of country, the simplicity of the relationships disappears. In

no industry group do the all three affiliate activity coefficients have the same sign. The positive

relationships in machinery industries and negative ones for Transport equipment are duplicated




                                                                                                   15
for developed countries and outward-oriented developing countries, but the signs for inward-

oriented countries are the opposite. For the other industries, many of the affiliate activity

coefficients are significant, but the pattern of positive and negative coefficients is not easily

explained.

       The apparent pattern of allocating labor-intensive activities to developing countries,

visible for U.S. multinationals in Transport equipment, contrasts with the Japanese case where

the parent employment relationship to developed country affiliate activity, in which the United

States is probably important as a host country, is positive. Another contrast is in Electrical

machinery, where the Japanese firms show some signs of a negative relationship, but only for

developed country affiliates, while the relationship in U.S. firms in this industry is positive,

particularly for activity in developed countries.

       On the whole, the effects of overseas production on parent employment in Japanese firms

seem to resemble those for Sweden more than those for the United States. We have no firm

explanation for the contrasts among the countries. Since the Japanese firms were later starters in

developed country affiliate activity, they may be at an earlier stage of development. The

apparent trend toward positive relationships in Japanese firms makes that interpretation seem

unlikely. It may also be that both Japanese and Swedish firms would prefer to make the

reallocations of production that U.S. firms have carried out, but find it more difficult to alter the

composition of their home labor force than U.S. firms do.



Summary

       Within individual Japanese manufacturing firms, parent exports from Japan to a foreign

region are positively related to production in that region by affiliates of that parent, in industries




                                                                                                 16
where there is any significant relation. The relationship has become stronger over time and

implies that a firm that produces a million yen more in a region tends also to export a million yen

more to that region from Japan, given the parent’s size and the region’s size and income level.

This relationship is similar to that found for U.S. and Swedish firms in parallel studies, although

the impact of affiliate production on parent exports seems to be larger for Japanese firms.

Japanese parent worldwide exports also tended to be larger, relative to parent size, for firms that

carried out more production overseas. The relationship was not as strong as for parent exports to

a particular region, but it resembled that found in other studies for U.S. multinational firms.

        Japanese parent employment, given the level of parent production, tends to be higher, the

more the firm produces abroad. Thus there is little indication that labor-intensive operations

have been allocated to foreign locations to any major extent. The higher employment at home

may result from a need for supervisory or ancillary employment at home to service foreign

operations. An alternative explanation, that labor-intensive operations are being concentrated at

home by Japanese firms, is unlikely for such a high-wage country.

        The Japanese firms’ behavior with respect to home employment is somewhat similar to

that of Swedish firms, but contrasts with that of U.S. firms. Among U.S. firms, production in

developing countries is associated with lower parent employment at home, given the level of

parent output. We interpret that as indicating that U.S. multinationals are allocating the more

labor-intensive parts of their output to developing countries and the more capital-intensive or

skill-intensive parts to the home, or parent facilities.




                                                                                              17
References

Blomström, Magnus, Gunnar Fors, and Robert E. Lipsey (1997), “Foreign Direct Investment and

       Employment: Home Country Experience in the United States and Sweden,” Economic

       Journal, Vol. 107, No.445, November, pp. 1787-1797.

Blomström, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey, and Ksenia Kulchycky, (1988), “U.S. and Swedish

       Direct Investment and Exports,” in Robert E. Baldwin, Editor, Trade Policy Issues and

       Empirical Analysis, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, pp. 259-297.

Japan, Institute for International Trade and Investment (1999), Analytical Research Based on

       Data from the Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Survey Research on Harmonizing

       Globalization Based on the 1997 Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Tokyo,

       Institute for International Trade and Investment.

Lipsey, Robert E. (1999), “The Geographical Allocation of Production by U.S. Firms and Parent

       Firm Employment and Wages,” Paper for presentation at Western Economic Association

       74th International Conference, San Diego, July.

Lipsey, Robert E., Eric D. Ramstetter, and Magnus Blomström (1999a), “Parent Exports and

       Affiliate Activity in Japanese Multinational Companies, 1986, 1989, 1992,” in Japan,

       Institute for International Trade and Investment, 1999, pp.93-146.

________________________________________________ (1999b), “A Note on Parent

       Employment and Affiliate Activity in Japanese Multinational Corporations, 1986,1989,

       1992,” in Japan, Institute for International Trade and Investment (1999), pp. 148-185.

Lipsey, Robert, and Merle Yahr Weiss (1969), “The Relation of U.S. Manufacturing Abroad to

       U.S. Exports: A Framework for Analysis,” 1969 Preceedings of the Business and

       Economic Statistics Section, American Statistical Association, pp. 497-509.




                                                                                           18
_______________________________ (1976a), “Exports and Foreign Investment in the

       Pharmaceutical Industry,” NBER Working Paper No. 87, Revised, January.

_______________________________ (1976b), “Exports and Foreign Investment in

       Manufacturing Industries,” NBER Working Paper No. 131, Revised, May.

_______________________________ (1981), “Foreign Production and Exports in

       Manufacturing Industries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume LXIII, No. 4,

       November, pp. 488-494.

________________________________ (1984), “Foreign Production and Exports of Individual

       Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 66, No. 2, May, pp. 304-308.

Svensson, Roger (1996), Foreign Activities of Swedish Multinational Corporations, Economic

       Studies 25, Uppsala, Department of Economics, Uppsala University.

Swedenborg, Birgitta (1973), Den Svenska Industrins investeringar i utlandet, Industriens

       Utredningsinstitut, Stockholm.

_________________ (1979), The Multinational Operations of Swedish Firms: An Analysis of

       Determinants and Effects, Industriens Utredningsinstitut, Stockholm.

__________________ (1982), Svensk industri i utlandet. En analys av drivkrafter och effekter,

       Industriens Utredningsinstitut, Stockholm.

__________________ (1985), “Sweden,” in John Dunning, Editor, Multinational Enterprises,

       Economic Structure, and International Competitiveness, Wiley/IRM Series on

       Multinationals, Chichester, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 217-248.

__________________, Göran Johansson-Grahn, and Mats Kinnwall (1988), Den Svenska

       Industrins Utlandsinvesteringar, 1960-1986, Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut.




                                                                                            19
