NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT HAS WELFARE REFORM ACCOMPLISHED?
IMPACTS ON WELFARE PARTICIPATION, EMPLOYMENT, INCOME,
POVERTY, AND FAMILY STRUCTURE

Robert F. Schoeni
Rebecca M. Blank

Working Paper 7627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7627
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2000

We thank seminar participants at UC Berkeley, UCLA, Michigan State, and RAND for comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Robert F. Schoeni and Rebecca M. Blank. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

What has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts on Welfare Participation,
Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure
Robert F. Schoeni and Rebecca M. Blank
NBER Working Paper No. 7627
March 2000
JEL No. I3

ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the effectiveness of recent welfare reforms, investigating the effects of both
state-specific waivers in the early 1990s and the 1996 federal reform legislation. Unlike earlier work,
we analyze a wide array of indicators, including welfare participation, labor market involvement,
earnings, income and poverty, and family formation. While no single methodology is entirely
satisfying, the results in this paper are convincing in part because they are consistent across alternative
approaches. We find strong evidence that these policy changes reduced public assistance participation
and increased family earnings. The result was a rise in total family income and a decline in poverty.
The gains from the 1996 reforms were not as broadly distributed across the distribution of less-skilled
women as were the effects of waivers. Waivers also increased labor market involvement among the
less-skilled, but the 1996 reforms had little additional impact on work behavior after controlling for
economic forces. These policies also appeared to have an impact on family structure.

Robert F. Schoeni
RAND
1700 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
schoeni@rand.org

Rebecca M. Blank
Gerald R. Ford of Public Policy
University of Michigan
440 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
blank@umich.edu

What Has Welfare Reform Accomplished?
Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure

1. INTRODUCTION
Recent welfare reform efforts have been undertaken for many reasons. The major federal reform
legislation passed in 1996 (the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
or PRWORA) listed four goals: (i) end dependence of needy parents upon government benefits
by promoting job preparation, work, and marriage; (ii) aid needy families so that children may be
cared for in their homes or those of relatives; (iii) prevent and reduce out-of-wedlock pregnancies
and establish goals for preventing and reducing their incidence; and (iv) encourage formation and
maintenance of two-parent families. This legislation abolished the Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC) program and replaced it with the Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families (TANF) block grant. States and counties, which were given much greater discretion
over welfare policy under the block grant, had additional goals, such as reducing poverty and
improving child wellbeing.
To date, there is little evidence on how well this broad list of goals is being met. Evaluations of
the effectiveness of welfare reforms have been of three types: analyses of the effects of welfare
policies on the number of people receiving welfare, i.e., “caseload studies”; analyses of the well
being of people who stopped receiving assistance following welfare reform, i.e., “leavers
studies”; and estimates of changing work participation among various groups of less-skilled
women. Each of these approaches has its limitations and provides at best an incomplete picture
of the overall effectiveness of welfare reform. For example, caseload declines provide no
information on what is happening to the wellbeing of families who leave welfare (or never enter
the program). Work participation estimates provide little information on how income levels
among poor families have changed; some families may be working more but lose more in public
assistance than they gain in earnings. Studies that follow current and former recipients often face
serious problems of attrition bias, and are also limited because they tell us nothing about the
people who never even apply for public assistance because of welfare reform. Except for the
2

leavers’ studies, very few of these evaluations use post-1996 data, and instead analyze changes
that occurred before national welfare reform was enacted.
This paper provides the most comprehensive evidence available to date on the effectiveness of
recent welfare reforms. We look at the impact of both state-specific waivers that were granted in
the early 1990s prior to welfare reform and the 1996 federal reform legislation. In order to
achieve a more complete picture of how legislative changes have affected low income families,
we analyze a wide array of indicators, including welfare participation, participation in the formal
labor market, hours and weeks worked, labor market earnings, income, poverty, marital status,
and household structure. We pay close attention to the timing of policy changes, and control for
other changes in the economic environment. This allows us to make comparative statements
about changes in participation (for both welfare and the labor market), changes in economic
wellbeing (earnings, income and poverty), and changes in family composition (marital status and
household structure). We investigate distributional impacts as well as average changes among
the low-skilled population.
We find strong evidence that these policy changes reduced public assistance participation and
increased family earnings. The result was a rise in total family income and a substantial decline
in poverty among those affected by these reforms. While waivers increased income across the
income distribution among less-skilled women, there is some evidence that the 1996 reforms did
not create the same income gains among the poorest women. These changes also appeared to
have an impact on family structure. The paper begins with a discussion of recent changes in
welfare caseloads, the related research literature, and a description of recent policy changes. A
series of alternative estimation techniques are then described and used to investigate the impacts
of these policy changes.

2. CHANGES IN WELFARE PARTICIPATION AND RELATED RESEARCH
The number of people receiving welfare has been declining at record rates. After peaking in
1994, welfare caseloads had dropped 50 percent by June 1999; at that time, just 6.9 million
3

people representing 2.5 percent of the population were receiving welfare. Not since 1967 has
such a small share of the population relied on welfare. Figure 1 shows the change in welfare
participation from 1960 (the earliest year readily available) through 1999 (June).
Not only have the declines been large, they have been widespread and continuous. Between
1993 and 1998, all 50 states and the District of Columbia experienced double digit percent
reductions in welfare participation, and in most states the declines were unprecedented. Thirtyseven states have experienced caseload declines of at least one-third, and in 23 states the number
of participants is currently less than half of what it was in 1993. And although a substantial share
of the reduction occurred between 1994 and 1996, in many states the largest declines have
occurred more recently. In fact, in 22 states the percentage decline in 1998 (from January to
December) was greater than in 1997. In almost all states (45) caseloads were still declining
during the final months of 1998.
Two primary factors have been posited to explain the recent caseload changes: the strong labor
market, and changes in welfare policy. In 1997, the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) issued
a report using data from 1976 to 1996 to examine the causes of caseload change, with particular
attention to the decline in caseloads between 1993 and 1996.1 A number of subsequent studies
examined changes in welfare caseloads during this and earlier periods (Bartik and Eberts, 1998;
Blank, 1997; Figlio and Ziliak, 1999; Levine and Whitmore, 1998; Moffitt, 1999; Page, Spetz,
and Millar, 1999; Stapelton, 1998; Turner, 1999; Wallace and Blank, 1999; Ziliak, Figlio, Davis,
and Connolly, 1997). Although the estimates of the causes of the caseload decline through 1996
vary, most find that roughly 15 percent can be explained by welfare policies (in particular,
welfare waivers, which are discussed below) and 30-40 percent can be explained by improved
labor market conditions. The only study that has examined the effects of the 1996 reforms on
post-1996 caseloads is a 1999 CEA study, which found that one-third of the decline between
1996 and 1998 was due to welfare reform and 8-10 percent was due to improvements in the labor
market.
1 Actually, the caseload decline starts in 1994 and it would be more accurate to focus on 1994-96. The CEA study uses an
initial date of 1993 since that was when the Clinton Administration took office.

4

Coincident with these caseload changes, there have been strikingly large changes in work
behavior and earnings, as well as a decline in poverty rates. Figure 2 plots the probability of
work and the mean weeks of work among unmarried female family heads with dependent
children between 1979 and 1998.2 Figure 3 plots mean earnings and the poverty rate among the
same population.3 The recent changes in both figures are quite dramatic, and show substantial
increases in work and earnings at the same time that poverty has declined.
National estimates also show that the employment of current welfare recipients has increased,
which is interpreted as a sign of success for welfare reform. Between 1992 and 1997, the share of
adult welfare recipients who participated in work activities tripled (Rolston, 1999). Between
1997 and 1998 the state-reported work participation rate for TANF recipients increased from
28.1 to 35.4 (USDHHS, 1999). In figure 4 we present estimates of the employment rate in
survey years 1977 through 1999 among women who report participating in welfare during the
calendar year prior to the survey. There was a substantial rise in employment among these
women beginning in the early 1990s. By 1999 the employment rate was 37 percent, or 17
percentage points higher than the 1990 rate.
Since these changes are occurring at the same time as a booming economy and very low
unemployment, it is difficult to say anything about the separate importance of policy on these
trends from the simple tabulations depicted in these figures. Evidence of the direct impact of the
1996 policy changes on work behavior, earnings levels, income and family structure, is not
readily available. Much of what has been done simply tabulates changes in one or more of these
variables among a target population. This work does not do a good job of investigating the
overall effects of policy changes on key wellbeing indicators, controlling for other effects.
In a number of states, researchers have tried to track individuals who have left welfare
2 These changes in labor force participation are even more striking since labor force participation among single women without

children has not risen (Blank and Card, 2000).

5

(voluntarily or through sanctions or time limits). It is hard to know how generalizable these
studies are across all states, and many of them suffer from serious methodological problems. (A
summary is provided in USGAO, 1999, and in Brauner and Loprest, 1999.) In general, these
studies suggest that the majority of persons who have left the rolls are employed at a future date
(the number varies from around 55 to 85 percent across studies). Few of these studies explicitly
compare post-welfare income with the income they would have received if remaining on aid.
The scant evidence available in a few states (based on individuals’ assessments of their family
income situation) suggests that between one-half and two-thirds report higher incomes postwelfare.4 The lack of information about those who never enter welfare because of policy changes
is a major limitation of these studies.
In contrast to much recent research, which is primarily focused on work and welfare
participation, a recent study released by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (Primus, et.
al., 1999) tabulated changes in earnings and income among single-mother families by income
quintile between 1993-95 and 1995-97. The study finds that disposable income fell among the
poorest quintile in this population in the 1995-97 period, a result that was widely reported in the
popular media as a criticism of the 1996 welfare reform. These data, however, are collected early
in the implementation of the 1996 federal reform legislation. The study also makes no effort to
separate the effect of legislative and policy changes from other changes in the economic
environment.
In short, the research literature to date includes a growing number of studies that focus on trying
to explain the determinants of caseload changes. Evidence on the impact of recent policy
changes on other variables of concern is much less available and the studies that are available are
less reliable and generalizable than one would ideally like. This paper is designed to provide
better evidence on a range of important outcomes and their relation to policy changes.

3 The data for figures 2 and 3 are calculated from the March CPS, 1980-99. Data for 1980-98 are taken from Table 8 in Blank,

Card, and Robins (2000). David Card kindly provided an updated data point from the 1999 data.
4 Cancian, et. al. (1998) calculate estimated incomes if families had stayed on welfare and compare them to observed income

levels, using data from Wisconsin. Their calculations indicate that somewhat more than 50 percent of families have lower postexit income than pre-exit income.

6

3. CHANGES IN FEDERAL AND STATE WELFARE POLICIES
Welfare Waivers. Since 1962, the Secretary of Health and Human Services has had the authority
to waive federal welfare requirements if a state proposed experimental or pilot programs that
furthered the goals of AFDC. Although there were a few waivers granted in the 1980s, it was not
until the early to mid-1990s that major, state-wide waivers became widespread.
These waivers varied substantially across states, and in many cases they differed greatly from the
rules under AFDC. Some waivers increased the amount of earnings recipients were allowed to
keep and still be eligible for welfare. Other waivers expanded work requirements to a larger
number of recipients, established limits on the length of time recipients could remain on aid,
permitted states to sanction participants who failed to meet work requirements, or allowed states
to eliminate benefit increases to families who conceived and gave birth to children while on
welfare (the so-called “family cap”). Given the widespread use of waivers (27 states had a major
waiver implemented by the time the 1996 legislation was passed) and the degree to which these
policies differed from traditional AFDC policy, there is substantial reason to believe that waivers
contributed to changes in welfare caseloads and affected the wellbeing of welfare families.
PRWORA and TANF. In August of 1996, President Clinton signed PRWORA into law,
dramatically changing federal welfare policy. PRWORA was designed to emphasize selfsufficiency and employment in place of welfare dependency, and it gave states greater flexibility
to design and implement programs to achieve these goals. Benefits are time-limited; adults
usually cannot receive federal aid for more than 5 years during their lifetime, and some states
have chosen to set shorter time limits. Most recipients must also participate in a work activity
within two years to continue receiving aid.
Under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block grant established by
PRWORA, federal assistance consists of an annual fixed transfer to each state. Most of the
authority to design welfare programs was given over to the states, who are required to have half
7

of all recipients working by 2002 (40 percent by 2000). As a result, there are now substantial
differences in how welfare programs operate across the nation. Some states increase benefits to
welfare families who have additional children, while others do not. Some states stop payment of
benefits to the entire family at the first instance of their failure to meet work activity
requirements, while other states never sanction more than the adult. Some states are much are
actively engaged in “diversion” activities, designed to keep people from entering public
assistance. And some states allow welfare recipients to keep a substantial portion of their labor
market earnings without reducing their welfare payments, while others do not.5

4. DATA
This study estimates the effects of welfare policies on a variety of indicators of success using
data on adult women from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS) from 1977 through
1999. We are particularly interested in the impact of waivers in the 1992-96 period, and the
impact of the 1996 PRWORA legislation in the following years. The analysis consists of a set
of reduced form models where the key policy explanatory factors are two indicators: one
indicator for whether welfare waivers were in effect in each state in each year, and one indicator
for whether TANF was in effect in each state in each year. The outcomes examined include the
following:
Annual family earnings
Welfare participation6
Employment
Annual family income
Annual weeks worked
Poverty status
Usual weekly hours
Marital status
Annual personal earnings
Household headship status
Annual earnings of other family members
For all outcomes except marital status and household headship, the variables are reported for the
5 For more information on differences across state programs, see Gallagher, et. al., (1998).
6 Estimates of welfare participation using the March CPS have historically been lower than estimates from administrative data.

Moreover, recent evidence suggests that under-reporting in the CPS increased beginning around 1993 (Bavier, 1999). One
concern is that when a state implemented waivers or TANF the name of their welfare program changed (e.g., AFDC in
California became CalWORKS), and the CPS respondent who actually receives welfare may identify welfare by a name other
than the one used in the CPS instrument. This pattern would cause a spurious decline in reported welfare participation simply
due to increased under-reporting. However, our estimates of the effects of welfare waivers on welfare participation using the
CPS lead to the same qualitative conclusions as estimates based on administrative caseloads data (CEA, 1999), suggesting that
increased under-reporting may not be a substantial problem for these analyses.

8

calendar year prior to the survey year. Therefore, actual data is for 1976 through 1998.
Similar to Moffitt (1999), the sample consists of all women 16-54 years old. We do not restrict
the sample, for example, to single mothers because there is some evidence that fertility and
marital status are effected by welfare policy. However, estimates are reported for women with
different education levels, with the expectation that larger effects would be experienced among
women with fewer years of schooling because they are most likely to rely on welfare.7
There are 959,243 women ages 16-54 in the sample. We choose to collapse the CPS data to the
state level by calculating the mean of each outcome within each state, year, education group
(less than 12 years, 12 years, and more than 12 years of schooling), and age group (16-25, 2634, 35-44, 45-54). For weeks worked, hours worked, and all earnings variables, we calculate
two sets of means: one set includes the zero values and one set excludes the zero values.
Estimates reported in all tables include the zeros, while estimates conditional on positive values
are discussed in the text. The resulting data set consists of 14,076 observations (51 states*23
years*4 age groups*3 education groups). The average number of observations within each cell
is 71; 93 percent of the cells contain at least 15 observations and 80 percent contain at least 25
observations. The means are calculated using the CPS sampling weights, although the estimates
of the effects of welfare policies change very little when the sampling weights are not used to
calculate the means.
5. SIMPLE COMPARISONS REGARDING WELFARE WAIVERS
We start by trying to measure the effects of waivers with a number of simple difference-indifference estimates, comparing the changes in the variables of interest before and after the
implementation of waivers (in states that enacted waivers) with changes in those variables over
the same time period in states that did not enact waivers. This approach assumes that nonwaiver
states provide a reliable comparison group for waiver states (an assumption made by a number of
existing papers) and which we return to below. We also compare these effects among more and

7 Education is a strong predictor of income. Among women without a high school degree, 20 percent are in the bottom decile

of the income distribution among all women 16-54; 35 percent are in the bottom quintile of the distribution.

9

less-educated women, as a specification test, since one might expect that only lower skilled
women would have been impacted by state waivers in public assistance programs.
Figures 5a, 6a, and 7a show changes in three key variables -- AFDC participation, work rates,
and poverty rates – before and after the implementation of waivers, comparing states that
implemented such waivers to states that did not. In states without waivers the “waiver” date is
assumed to be equal to the average date that waivers were implemented among those states that
had a waiver, which was 1994. These figures are based on the sample of female high school
dropouts, the women most likely to be affected by welfare waivers.
Quite contrary to expectations, Figure 5a indicates that states with waivers experienced less of a
decline in welfare participation after the implementation of waivers than did states without
waivers. Figures 6a and 7a show similar effects for trends in employment and the poverty rate.
A simple difference-in-difference calculation between waiver and nonwaiver states pre- and postwaiver implementation does not show a statistically significant difference for any of these three
indicators. (Table A.2 shows the difference-in-difference calculation underlying the data in these
figures.)
These difference-in-difference comparisons assume that non-waiver states form an adequate
control group for waiver states; that is, they assume that conditions in waiver states would, in the
absence of waivers, have evolved as they did in non-waiver states. Figures 5a through 7a
indicate that this is not an accurate assumption; data trends in waiver and nonwaiver states
differed even before the implementation of waivers. As it turns out, waiver states had a worse
economy than non-waiver states. Unemployment actually rose slightly in waiver states, while it
fell in nonwaiver states; the difference-in-difference estimate of the change in unemployment
rates between waiver and nonwaiver states is large (1.33 points) and statistically significant
(Table A.2). This means that the economic effects in waiver states (which would have increased
participation and reduced work relative to the nonwaiver states) offset waiver effects.

10

Figures 5b, 6b and 7b provide a somewhat more sophisticated way to compare AFDC
participation, work participation and poverty rates among waiver and nonwaiver states. In these
figures, the data are calculated from a regression in which the dependent variable is regressed on
current and lagged state unemployment rates and current and lagged state employment growth
rates. The remaining variation in the data after economic effects have been controlled for is
captured by year dummy variables, and it is these dummy variables that are plotted in the three
figures.
The results in these alternative figures are strikingly different. Once the economic differences
across states are controlled for, waiver and nonwaiver states appear much more similar before the
implementation of waivers and there is a noticeable affect of waivers on AFDC usage, work
participation and on poverty rates. Simple difference-in-difference calculations (see Table A.2)
indicate that AFDC usage and poverty fell significantly faster in waiver states while employment
rose significantly faster.
These figures suggest the problems with trying to deduce policy effects from simple tabulations
of the data, an approach taken in some of the existing literature. The economic differences
between waiver and nonwaiver states make nonwaiver states by themselves an inadequate control
group for studying the impact of waivers.
Table 1 estimates the difference-in-difference effects for 11 variables of interest, controlling for
unemployment rates and employment growth rates across the states in the same way as we did in
figures 5b, 6b and 7b. Pre- and post-waiver estimates are calculated over the two years
immediately before and two years immediately after the implementation of waivers (1994 for the
nonwaiver states). The top of Table 1 uses the high school dropout sample only. For instance,
the first column of Table 1 indicates that AFDC participation fell 2.5 percentage points in waiver
states among high school dropouts, but rose by 0.2 percentage points in nonwaiver states, for a
statistically significant difference-in-difference estimate of 2.7 percentage points.

11

In general, the results imply that welfare waivers caused a significant decline in welfare
participation and an increase in work participation. Labor market earnings of the women under
consideration changed very little, but the difference-in-difference estimates suggest that waivers
caused a 4.8 percent increase in total family earnings, largely due to greater increases in the
earnings of other family members. Family income increased by 3.2 percent due to waivers, less
than the increase in family earnings (because of the decline in welfare income). Neither the
income or earnings changes are significant in the difference-in-difference estimates; they are
quite large but imprecisely estimated.
Poverty declined by 2.0 percentage points among waiver states, from 33.8 percent to 31.8
percent; the difference-in-difference estimator implies a significant 3.7 percentage point
reduction due to waivers. The share of women heading their own household also fell in waiver
states, although the estimate is not statistically precise.
As an additional test of the specification, in the bottom half of Table 1 we report the same
analysis but for women with 13 or more years of schooling, who we do not expect to be affected
by these policy changes. The estimates in Table 1 show that, among more educated women, there
are no significant differences in how these variables are changing within waiver states and nonwaiver states. These results provide reassurance that the effects estimated among high school
dropouts are not spurious.

6. ECONOMETRIC ESTIMATION USING TIME SERIES OF CROSS SECTIONS
While the economic controls in Table 1 are clearly useful, they may not entirely satisfy someone
who believes that waivers are endogenously determined. For instance, it might be that states
whose governors were extremely interested in reforming the welfare bureaucracy were more
likely to apply for waivers. But these states might also have been more likely to implement a
variety of non-waiver reforms as well, which might also have reduced caseloads. While we
cannot fully satisfy the endogeneity argument in our analysis of waiver effects, the econometric
12

estimates to which we now turn should at least reduce its force, by including a wide variety of
additional control variables that hold constant at least some of the underlying economic,
demographic, and political differences across states. In addition, we must turn to alternative
estimating techniques to study the impact of the 1996 legislation, was implemented nationwide in
all states.

6a. Estimation Technique
Our second approach is similar to that of Moffitt (1999), who uses the CPS to examine the
effects of welfare waivers on a subset of the outcomes that we investigate. Specifically,
regression models are estimated using the aggregated state panel data. The models for the
baseline sample take the following form:
(1) Yaest = Waiver st * Educ * β eWaiver + TANF st * Educ * β eTANF + γ s + γ t + trend * γ s + Z aest * β z + ε aest
The variables are defined for women in age group a and education group e who live in state s in
calendar year t as follows:
Y:

one of the outcome variables listed above.

Waiver :

an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the state in which the
woman lived had a major waiver in effect; the indicator is turned off when
TANF is implemented in the state.8 See Table A.1 for the date that waivers
were approved and implemented in each state.

TANF :

an indicator variable that takes the value of one if TANF was in effect
in the state in which the woman lived; the TANF implementation date
varies across states, as discussed below.

Educ :

indicator variables for education groups: less than 12 years,
12 years, and 13 or more years.

8 In most cases, the waiver concept became meaningless once TANF was implemented because states were given broad control

over their welfare policies. In particular, states could make broad changes in their programs under TANF, whether or not they
were continuing a waiver. However, if a state had initiated time limits under a waiver, then participants’ time clocks in that
state would have been running prior to TANF implementation. As a result, these participants would reach their time limits
more quickly than if their clock would have been reset on the date of TANF implementation.

13

γs:

state fixed effects.

γt:

year fixed effects.

trend*γs:

linear state-specific time trends.

Z:

a vector of control variables: current and lagged unemployment rate
and current and lagged employment growth rate each interacted with each
of the three education groups, log maximum AFDC benefit for a family of
three interacted with each of the three education groups, education
dummies for each of the three groups, year effects interacted with each
education group indicator, age (indicator variables for 16-25, 26-34, 35-44,
and 45-54), each age indicator interacted with each education indicator,
and race (proportion Hispanic and proportion non-Hispanic black)

All estimates use weighted least squares with weights based on the size of the CPS sample used
to calculate the means for each year/state/education/age group. All dollar values are expressed in
1998 dollars using the CPI-U-X1.
Welfare policies, in particular Waiverst and TANFst in equation (1), are difficult to categorize
and measure, and the pace and intensity of their implementation typically varies across and
within states. Most policies were not in effect the entire calendar year that they were
implemented. In these cases, fractional values are used that correspond to the share of the
calendar year that the policy was in effect.
The most complete attempt to quantify these policies was undertaken by the Council of
Economic Advisers (1999) and we use the resulting set of policy variables here. The CEA study
relied on experts from the Department of Health and Human Services as well as non-government
research institutions to characterize policies as fully as possible. The details of CEA’s
codification scheme are described in its 1997 and 1999 reports; we provide only an overview
here. Table A.1 lists the dates when TANF programs and major welfare waivers were
implemented in each state.
14

Welfare Waivers. For the waiver period, we focus on major waivers that received approval to be
implemented state-wide.9 This includes waivers providing for termination time limits, work
requirement time limits, family caps, JOBS exemptions, JOBS sanctions, and the earnings
disregard. These are discussed in detail in the appendix to the 1997 CEA Technical Report.
Some of the waivers that were approved for state-wide implementation were initially
implemented state-wide, some were implemented in selected areas of the state, while still others
began in small regions of the state but were eventually phased in state-wide. Information on the
pace of implementation is not available for all states. Therefore, the date that is used to signal
implementation is the date that the waiver actually began to be implemented; estimates based on
the date the waiver was approved instead of the date of implementation are very similar.10
PRWORA & TANF. PRWORA was signed into law in August of 1996, but a given state could
not begin its TANF-funded program until that state submitted its TANF plan and it was certified
as complete by the federal government. Upon approval, the state could formally implement its
TANF plan and begin to draw down federal funds, subject to all of the requirements and
restrictions in TANF. The earliest official implementation date was September 1996 and the
latest was July 1997, when all states were required to begin operating under TANF. However, in
some states the initial official plan was simply a placeholder, designed to allow the state to begin
to draw down its TANF block grant, and some state policies were not changed until a later date.
Therefore, the actual implementation date may differ from the official date. In particular,
specific information was available for five states (California, Mississippi, New Jersey, New
York, and Wisconsin) which indicated that the policies most associated with TANF – time limits,
work requirements, sanctions – were not implemented until a later date; in these cases, the later
date was used to construct the TANF indicator.

9 In a few instances, waivers were included which were not approved to be implemented state-wide but which nonetheless

affected a large share of the state’s caseload.

15

There are other policy factors that may affect the outcomes we examine, including expansions in
the Earned Income Tax Credit, the availability of child care, transportation, housing subsidies, or
Medicaid coverage. Although our models do not directly examine these factors, state, year, and
state-specific time trends are included to capture unobserved factors that may be correlated with
the included variables. To the extent that these unobserved factors are largely fixed within the
state over time (or change only with a trendline), or if they change across all states at the same
time (such as changes in the federal EITC), their effects will be subsumed in the fixed effect
coefficients.

6b. Estimates of Equation 1
Table 2 presents the coefficients from estimates of equation (1) using eleven dependent variables
relating to welfare participation, work, earnings, income, and family structure. Reported in the
table are the βeWaiver and βeTANF coefficients, showing the interaction of the waiver and the TANF
variables with each of the three educational categories. At the bottom of Table 2 we show the
mean levels of the dependent variables among each education group.11
Effects of Welfare Waivers
The welfare waiver results in Table 2 confirm the results from the difference-in-difference
estimates shown in Table 1. Among all women with less than a high school education, waivers
decreased welfare participation by 0.9 percentage points, or about 10 percent. While welfare use
declined, the share of women working increased by 2.0 percentage points, which is a modest but
sizable increase given that 53 percent of less educated women in the sample worked. The
number of annual weeks and weekly hours worked also increased as a result of waivers, by 0.73
weeks and 0.97 hours, respectively. All of these gains are statistically significant. Estimates on
the sample of working women only (not shown in the table) find that weeks worked, conditional
on working, did not increase, but that hours worked per week did increase by 0.63 (t-statistic of
10 The 1997 CEA study used approval dates, while the 1999 CEA study used implementation dates to define the presence of a

waiver in a state.
11 As a robustness check, we have estimated this model interacting the unemployment rate and employment growth rate. We

have also dropped all observations based on cells with fewer than 20 cases, and dropped the youngest age group because
educational attainment of these younger women may be effected by the policies we examine. The qualitative conclusions on
the effects of waivers and TANF do not change in these alternative specifications.

16

2.36) for this sample.
The women’s own annual earnings increased 5.03 percent due to waivers. This gain is due
largely to the increase in the share of women working; among those who work, earnings
increased by just 1.3 percent and the increase is not statistically significant (t-statistic=0.63).
Despite the decline in welfare participation and the modest rise in own earnings, total family
income increased by 6.07 percent because of waivers. The increase in family income is driven by
a rise in the earnings of other family members (10.32 percent). As a result of the significant
increase in family income, poverty declined by 2.36 percentage points, which represents a 9
percent decline in the poverty rate among these women based on its average over the entire
sample period (28.7 percent).
The estimates also imply that welfare waivers are responsible for a modest increase in the
probability of being married (by 2.39 percentage points) and reduction in the probability of
household headship (by 1.71 percentage points).12 These results suggest that family formation
may be influenced by waiver policy, which is one reason why we estimate our models on all
women rather than restricting the model only to female household heads.
The effects among more educated women are expected to be much smaller, and they are. In only
two cases are effects among these women large or precisely estimated. There is a significant
negative effect of waivers on the probability of being married among women with 12 years of
schooling. Among the most educated women, waivers are associated with a precisely estimated
decrease in the earnings of other family members (which also drives a modest effect on total
family earnings), although the magnitude of the effects is relatively small (2.22 percent)
These results indicate that state implementation of waivers had a significant effect on a wide

12 Our estimates are qualitatively similar to Moffitt (1999); that is, welfare waivers are found to decrease welfare participation
and increase weeks and hours worked. However, unlike Moffitt, we find that total family income does rise in response to
waivers. In comparisons with Moffitt’s analysis, our analyses include data through 1999 instead of 1995, we use the date the
waivers were implemented instead of approved, and we use weighted instead of unweighted regressions.

17

variety of outcome variables, including family formation patterns. The results are robust to
alternative specifications, which gives us confidence in these estimates. To the extent that the
TANF-funded reforms that started in 1996 implemented sweeping reforms in all states, modeled
at least in part on these waiver programs, one would expect that the TANF effects would be as
large, if not larger than the waiver effects. We turn to these next.
Effects of TANF
Table 2 shows that TANF had twice as large of an effect on welfare participation (1.90
percentage point decline) as did waivers (0.86 percentage point decline) among high school
dropouts. However, unlike waivers, we estimate no significant effects of TANF on work
participation, weeks worked, hours worked, own earnings, or family earnings. Restricting the
sample to women or families who had earnings, we continue to find no statistically significant
effects of TANF on own earnings or family earnings (not shown in the table). Family income
does increase by a substantial amount (3.13 percent) as a result of TANF, but the effect is not
precisely estimated. There is a significant decline in poverty of 2.24 percentage points.13
These results are surprising, since we expected the major system-wide changes implemented by
the 1996 legislation to have larger effects than waivers. There are two ways to read these results.
It may be that TANF had few effects on behavior and income. But it is also possible that these
estimates are unreliable. We have very few post-TANF observations, and most state TANF
programs are implemented within a year of each other. With fixed state and year effects in the
model, it is difficult to identify the effects of TANF in equation (1). Because of this, we try an
alternative approach to estimate the effects of the 1996 reforms.

13 If one interacts the waiver effects with the TANF effects, both waiver and nonwaiver states show equivalent reductions in

caseloads following the implementation of TANF. But changes in earnings, income, and poverty are concentrated in the waiver
states. It is not entirely clear how to interpret this however. Iit could reflect the fact that waiver states were able to implement
their full TANF programs much more rapidly. It could indicate that programs in waiver states are different in kind from
programs in nonwaiver states. Looking at the differences in program characteristics that are readily identifiable, it does appear
that nonwaiver states are somewhat more likely to have family caps, have stronger sanction policies, and allow no work
exemptions on the basis of age of the youngest child.

18

7. ALTERNATIVE ESTIMATES OF THE EFFECTS OF PRWORA
There is substantial variation in the timing of waiver implementation. Some states implemented
their policies in the early 1990s, while others implemented in the mid-1990s, making
identification of waiver effects quite stable. However, all states implemented TANF within a 17month time period. As a result, identification of the TANF effect is somewhat tenuous given the
fact that we are including state and year effects in our model.

7a. Looking at Residual Changes as a Measure of the Impact of PRWORA
As an alternative, we provide estimates of PRWORA effects based on the changes in year effects
alone. Using our aggregated state/year/education/age data set for all women 16 to 54 years old,
we estimate models of each of our outcomes of interest using the same specification reported in
Table 2 except that the policy factors (waiver indicator variable, TANF indicator variable, and
maximum AFDC benefit) and state-specific time trends are excluded. That is, the models
include: age dummies (16-25, 26-34, 35-44, 45-54), education dummies (<12, =12, >12), age
dummies interacted with the education dummies, race (Hispanic, non-Hispanic black), year
effects, year effects interacted with education dummies, state effects, current and one-year lagged
unemployment rate and employment growth rate, and interactions between education and current
and one-year lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate. The difference in the year
effects representing 1995 and 1998 for each education group is an estimate of the effects of
PRWORA on that group.14
One drawback of such estimates is that our measure of the impact of the 1996 welfare reform
includes all year-specific effects that are not controlled for elsewhere in the model, i.e., it
interprets all residual changes as the impact of welfare reform. Particularly given the robust
economy, we do not believe that we can adequately control for all of its effects in the model, and
expect that the comparative year effects between 1995 and 1998 include at least some economic
effects as well as policy effects. We deal with this by calculating a difference-in-difference
estimator that compares the residual year effects among less educated women with the residual
14 We compare 1995 and 1998 rather than 1996 and 1998 because some states began to implement TANF in 1996; also there

was extensive congressional debate in the spring and summer prior to TANF’s enactment which may have affected behavior.

19

year effects among more educated women. While both groups should benefit from the booming
economy, only less educated women should be impacted by welfare policy changes. If less
educated women show substantially larger residual changes, this provides at least some evidence
consistent with the hypothesis that welfare reform was influencing economic outcomes among
this group of women.
These alternative estimates may allow us to get a better handle on the effects of welfare reform.
However, they differ in important ways from the estimates of equation (1). This analysis captures
all changes not separately controlled for in the model, and attributes it to PRWORA. This means
that it would include the effects of other policy changes that occurred outside of the
implementation of TANF programs, such as changes in immigrant eligibility for public
assistance. In addition, if behavior were effected because of the announcement of policy changes
at the federal level or new widely publicized changes in expectations for welfare recipients, then
these effects would be included in the “PRWORA effect” as estimated by the residual approach.
Alternatively, if the EITC expansions of the early 1990s are causing some of the observed
changes over time from 1995 to 1998, then we would attribute some of the EITC effect to
PRWORA. This suggests that these estimates are likely to be larger than those from equation
(1).
On the other hand, the estimates of TANF effects in equation (1) are relative to AFDC under no
waivers, because waivers are controlled for in that model. This alternative approach estimates the
effects of post-1995 policy changes relative to the state of world in 1995, and many waivers had
been implemented by 1995. This fact would cause the alternative estimate to be smaller than the
estimated effects from equation (1). While this makes it theoretically unclear whether one would
expect these alternative estimates to be larger or smaller than those in Table 3, we expect that the
first effect dominates the second and that these estimates are likely to be larger.

7b. Estimates of PRWORA Using this Alternative Approach
Table 3 contains the alternative estimates of the effects of welfare reform, based on residual
20

changes in outcome variables before and after the legislation was passed, controlling for other
variables. Column (1) in each case includes controls only for demographic variables; column
(2) also includes controls for economic variables.
First compare the results without and with economic controls (column 1 versus column 2) for
low-skilled women only. In every case, this analysis indicates bigger residual changes in the
outcome variables when the economic controls are excluded. For instance, without economic
controls, there are significant residual increases in the percent working, weeks worked and
hours worked. Once economic controls are included, only weeks of work appears to show a
residual increase. Other outcome variables show smaller but still significant residual effects
even after economic controls are included. Since we are trying to isolate the effects of policy
change, we prefer the estimates in column (2) of Table 3. As expected, the table indicates that
the economic expansion had a significant effect on outcomes among less skilled women over
this time period and controlling for these effects is important. In fact, much of the increase in
labor force participation appears due to the economy.
Focusing just on the estimates in column (2) for less skilled women, Table 3 indicates that there
have been large and significant residual changes in welfare participation, weeks of work,
earnings and income. For instance, the estimates indicate that welfare participation fell by 4.5
percentage points from 1995 to 1998 among high school dropouts, more than twice the TANF
effect estimated in Table 2. Family earnings grew by almost 9 percent, while family income
grew by almost 7 percent. Poverty fell by 2 percentage points. While there are no significant
effects on marriage in column (2), the percent who head their own household appears to grow
by almost 3 percent, a counter-intuitive result.
The difficulties in interpreting these residual changes for less skilled women as policy effects
are highlighted by examining the estimated effects among more educated women. Because so
few women with more than a high school education receive welfare, it is unlikely that welfare
reform substantially altered their employment, earnings, and income. But Table 3 also shows
21

significant residual changes in welfare use, earnings, income, and family formation among
women with more than 12 years of education. If the residual changes over time reported in
Table 3 are interpreted as the effect of welfare reform alone, then one would conclude that there
were in fact substantial effects among women with more than a high school degree. However,
we expect that our economic controls do not fully capture the effects of the economic expansion
in the labor market. Unemployment rates and employment growth rates may very inadequately
control for the market forces that are increasing work and wages among women at all skill
levels, particularly during the years of a record-setting economic expansion.
At the bottom of Table 3 we try to control for omitted economic factors that may be affecting
women of all skill levels, by calculating a difference-in-differences estimator of the 1995-98
changes among less skilled women versus more skilled women. While we show comparisons
among all three education groups at the bottom of Table 3, we prefer to focus on the differencein-differences estimator in column (2) between the least skilled (education less than 12 years)
and the most skilled (education greater than 12 years). These results indicate that less skilled
women show significantly larger declines in welfare, greater increases in family earnings (due
to a greater increase in other family members’ earnings), and greater declines in poverty.
Family income among the least skilled rises faster when compared with the middle education
group, but not the most educated. These difference-in-difference estimates also produce a more
believable result on family formation, showing that the percent of women heading their own
household went up significantly among all groups, but it fell among the least skilled relative to
the more skilled. These difference estimates confirm the labor force participation results noted
above, indicating that increases in the percent working, weeks worked or hours worked, all
appear to be explained by the economy and are not significantly higher among less skilled
women than among more skilled women.
Despite the difficulty of identifying an effect of TANF using the approach in Table 2, fairly
similar estimates are found in Tables 2 and 3. This is particularly true if one focuses on our
preferred estimates, which are the difference-in-difference estimates between the least and most
22

educated women in Table 3. Neither approach finds a statistically significant or substantively
large effect of TANF on work participation, weeks, hours, own earnings, or marriage. The
residual difference-in-difference approach leads to precisely estimated effects on five outcomes:
welfare participation, family earnings, other family member’s earnings, poverty, and headship.
Although the estimates of the effects of TANF in Table 2 are not precise for each of these five
outcomes, the magnitudes of the effects are quite similar to those found in Table 3. For
example, while the residual difference-in-differences approach implies that TANF caused a
reduction in welfare participation by 3.3 percentage points, estimates in Table 2 imply a
reduction of 1.9 percentage points. Similarly, the difference-in-differences estimates of the
effect of TANF on family earnings (3.5 percent), other family member’s earnings (6.5 percent),
poverty (-1.6 percentage points), and household headship (-2.0 percentage points) are similar to
the Table 2 estimates of 3.1 percent, 4.2 percent, -2.2 percentage points, and –1.3 percentage
points, respectively.
It is always difficult to interpret residual estimates of the type presented in Table 3. But
combined with the model-based estimates, we believe that these results strongly indicate the
probability that the policy changes implemented between 1995 and 1998 had a significant
impact on outcomes among less skilled women. Even with demographic and economic
controls, and in comparison to changes among more skilled women, we find that less skilled
women experienced greater declines in welfare use, greater increases in earnings and income,
and greater reductions in poverty. 15

8. DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS
The results in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that the welfare reforms of the 1990s had significant and
positive effects on economic outcomes among less-skilled women. Popular discussions of these

15 An alternative intepretation of the data is that the economic boom is having much greater effects on less skilled women than

on more skilled women, a reasonable expectation given that the least skilled are more likely to be unemployed or out of the
labor market. However, we allow for this by interacting our economic controls with the education variables. We also believe
that unemployment rates probably provide a better control for the effects of the boom on economic behavior among less skilled
women (who are more likely to experience unemployment) than among more skilled women. If this is true, the difference
estimators may overcontrol for omitted economic variables and underestimate the true residual effects among less skilled
women.

23

changes, however, often argue that some group of people has become worse off, as public
assistance income has declined and women are forced to rely more and more on labor market
earnings. The only empirical evidence on these distribution effects is provided by Primus, et.
al., (1999) who indicate that single mothers in the bottom quintile of the single mother income
distribution lost income between 1995 and 1997 (although they gained income over the entire
1993-97 period).
We investigate this issue by looking at the distribution of income among women within our
state/year/education/age cells. Tables 2 and 3 indicate that both waivers and the 1996 welfare
reforms produced increases in mean income among less-skilled women. In Table 4 we explore
these results further by investigating the effects of waivers and TANF on the 20th percentile of
the income distribution within each cell, the 50th percentile of the distribution within each cell,
and the 20/50 ratio. Part A uses the same estimation technique as Table 2. The results in Part A
indicate that among women who are high school dropouts, waivers increased income at the 20th
percentile of their cell (9.83 percent) as much as they increased income at the 50th percentile
(8.17 percent). There was no change in the 20/50 ratio due to the implementation of waivers.
In contrast, the implementation of TANF had no significant effect on the 20th percentile of
income among less educated women, even though it significantly increased income at the 50th
percentile (7.64 percent). The result is a significant decline in the 20/50 ratio after the
implementation of TANF, indicating a widening in the 20-50 gap.
Part B of Table 4 shows the difference-in-differences estimates of the residual changes in family
income at different points in the income distribution among more and less skilled women
between 1995 and 1998, similar to the estimates in Table 3. The estimates at the 20th percentile
are negative and substantial, but they are not precisely estimated. Income at the 50th percentile
went up faster among both less and more skilled women, leading to a difference-in-difference
estimate of the impact of the 1996 reform that is positive but relatively small and insignificant.
(The gain at the 50th percentile among less skilled women appears larger when the comparison
group is the middle-educated group rather than the most educated group.) The 20/50 gap
24

widens among both the least educated and the middle-educated, although the estimate is less
precise among women who are high school dropouts.
The results in Table 4 indicate that waivers appear to have had few distribution effects, and the
resultant gains occurred even among poorer women. But the post-1996 reforms seem not to
have benefited less-skilled women at the bottom of the income distribution. The gains from
these policy changes seem concentrated among women at the mean and higher; the 80th
percentile showed gains due to TANF of 2.5 percent (not shown in the tables). This suggests
that the positive impacts of the 1996 welfare reform, in which the AFDC program was replaced
by state-level TANF programs, were not as widespread as were the positive effects of waivers.
This is at least consistent with the fact that TANF programs have included much stricter
sanctions, stronger diversion activities and greater work-first requirements than waiver-related
changes to the AFDC program.

9. CONCLUSIONS
The passage of PRWORA and the implementation of TANF-funded programs constituted the
most significant change in welfare policy in decades. This study examines a wide array of
indicators to evaluate the period of TANF implementation as well as the period of welfare
waivers leading up to the 1996 reforms. Our overall conclusions are that the policy changes of
the 1990s reduced caseloads, but also increased income, reduced poverty, and reduced female
headship. The waivers of the early 1990s also appeared to increase work behavior, and
increased marriage. Changes in other sources of family income were more important than
changes in women’s own earnings in creating overall income increases, an issue that is worthy
of further research attention. The effects of the 1996 welfare reform were less broadly
distributed than were the effects of the waiver policies in the early to mid-1990s.
Among female high school dropouts, we find that waivers caused a decline in welfare
participation of about 1 percentage point (or 10 percent) and a rise in employment of 2
percentage points (or 3.7 percent). Total family earnings increased by almost 9 percent; this
25

increase was due largely to a rise in the earnings of other family members and not the woman in
question. Family income also increased, but by an amount (6 percent) that is somewhat smaller
than the increase in family earnings because welfare income of these women fell. These income
changes appear to have benefited less-skilled women across their income distribution. These
changes translated into a decline in poverty of 2 percentage points (8 percent). At the same time,
we find few important or significant effects among more educated women, who are much less
likely to be influenced by changes in welfare policies. We believe this to be a compelling and
plausible story. Further analysis needs to examine more closely the rise in the earnings of other
family members. This change is most likely related to the observed changes in marital status
and headship that we also observe.
Among female high school dropouts, we also find significant policy effects following the
passage of the 1996 legislation and the implementation of TANF programs. The welfare
participation effects of the 1996 legislation are about twice as large as they are for waivers. This
finding is consistent with evidence based on administrative caseload data (CEA, 1999).
Policies in the post-1995 period appear to have had few effects on work behavior, however,
with ongoing increases in work driven by the economic expansion. But, similar to the effects of
waivers, family earnings and family income increased by about 3 to 6 percent due to the 1996
reforms. In contrast to the effects of waivers, these income gains occurred only among women
in the middle or upper part of the income distribution among less-skilled women. Poverty
appears to have declined by 2 percentage points more than it would have in the absence of
policy changes (an effect similar in size to waiver effects on poverty), and household headship
also declined. These findings are based on two complementary approaches that analyze the
effects of TANF and the 1996 reforms, and lead to similar findings.
The mechanisms through which these TANF programs and state waiver variables affected
behavior is still open to debate. It is possible that the effects we are measuring here are entirely
due to the specific programmatic elements of the reforms, such as expanded work efforts or
increased sanction activity. It is also possible that at least some of these effects occurred more
26

indirectly, through behavioral shifts that were induced by the publicity and attention given to the
fact that states were getting “tough” with welfare recipients. We have replaced the waiver and
TANF variables in our estimates with specific policies, such as sanctions, time limits and work
requirements. The estimates of these policies were quite sensitive to specification and no
consistent patterns emerged. One exception is that full family sanctions appeared to be
associated with lower welfare participation, as was the case in CEA (1999). More micro-level
information on exactly what was implemented, when and how, will be necessary to track the
effectiveness of specific elements of the waivers and the TANF changes.
TANF-funded state programs are still in their infancy. Most of these programs were in
existence for only a year or so by the time our available data ends in 1998. Furthermore, many
of these new state programs involved major changes in administrative procedures, along with
new programs and new program parameters. In many states, TANF-funded programs were in
flux throughout the period of these data, in the process of being created, observed, and refined.
All of this suggests that it is still early to draw definitive conclusions about the impact of these
changes.
Finally, while this study provides evidence about the effects of TANF and welfare waivers on a
number of key indicators, there are many other outcomes that need to be examined. These
indicators include, for example, child education, health, nutrition, abortion, and teen pregnancy.
Information on the impact of policy changes on these other variables will be important in
providing a broader evaluation of welfare reform.

27

References
Bartik, Timothy J., and Randall W. Eberts (1999). “Examining the Effect of Industry Trends
and Structure on Welfare Caseloads,” in Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform, Sheldon H.
Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Bavier, Richard (1999). “An Early Look at the Effects of Welfare Reform,” Office of
Management and Budget, working draft.
Blank, Rebecca M. (1997). “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6343.
Blank, Rebecca M. and David Card (2000, forthcoming). “The Labor Market and Welfare
Reform.” In Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, Rebecca M. Blank and David Card, eds.
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Blank, Rebecca M., David Card and Philip K. Robins (2000, forthcoming). “Financial Incentives
for Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families.” In Finding Jobs: Work and
Welfare Reform, Rebecca M. Blank and David Card, eds. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Brauner, Sarah, and Pamela Loprest (1999). “Where are They Now? What States’ Studies of
People Who Left Welfare Tell Us,” Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
Cancian, Maria, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan, and Barbara Wolfe. (1998). “Post-Exit
Earnings and Benefit Receipt Among Those Who Left AFDC in Wisconsin.” Madison, WI:
Institute for Research on Poverty.
Council of Economic Advisers (1997). “Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt, 1993-1996:
Technical Report,” Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President of the United States.
Council of Economic Advisers (1999). “Economic Expansion, Welfare Reform, and the Decline
in Welfare Caseloads: An Update: Technical Report,” Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of
the President of the United States.
Figlio, David N., and James P. Ziliak (1999). “Welfare Reform, the Business Cycle, and the
Decline in AFDC Caseloads,” in Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform, Sheldon H.
Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Gallagher, L. Jerome, Megan Gallagher, Kevin Perese, Susan Schreiber, and Keith Watson
(1998). “One Year after Federal Welfare Reform: A Description of State Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) Decisions as of October 1997,” Occasional Paper Number 6.
Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute
28

Levine, Phillip B. and Diane M. Whitmore (1998). "The Impact of Welfare Reform on the
AFDC Caseload," National Tax Association Proceedings - 1997. Washington, DC: National
Tax Association, pp. 24-33.
Moffitt, Robert A. (1999). “The Effects of Pre-PRWORA Waivers on AFDC Caseloads and
Female Earnings, Income, and Labor Force Behavior,” Unpublished manuscript, Johns Hopkins
University. May.
Page, Marianne E., Joanne Spetz, and Jane Millar (1999). “Does the Minimum Wage Affect
Welfare Caseloads?” Public Policy Institute of California Working Paper, June.
Primus, Wendell, Lynette Rawlings, Kathy Larin, and Kathryn Porter. (1999). “The Initial
Impacts of Welfare Reform on the Incomes of Single-Mother Families.” Washington, D.C.:
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Rolston, Howard (1999). Testimony Before the House of Representatives Committee on Ways
and Means, Subcommittee on Human Resources. May 27.
Stapelton, David C., Gina Livermore, and Adam Tucker (1998). “Determinants of AFDC
Caseload Growth,” report by the Lewin Group to the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services. July 1997.
Turner, Mark (1999). “The Effects of Minimum Wages on Welfare Recipiency,” Unpublished
manuscript, Urban Institute and Johns Hopkins University. June.
United States Department of Health and Human Services (1999). Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families Program Second Annual Report to Congress. August.
United States General Accounting Office. (1999). “Welfare Reform: Information on Former
Recipients’ Status.” Report number GAO/HEHS-99-48. Washington, D.C.: GAO.
Wallace, Geoffrey, and Rebecca M. Blank (1999). “What Goes Up Must Come Down?
Explaining Recent Changes in Public Assistance Caseloads,” in Economic Conditions and
Welfare Reform, Sheldon H. Danziger, editor. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.
Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly. (1997).
“Accounting for the Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic Growth,”
Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper No. 1151-97, Madison, WI: University of
Wisconsin.

29

Table 1. Indicators of Success Before and After Waivers, Controlling for Labor Market Conditions
All Women 16-54, by Education
Pct on
AFDC

Pct
Weeks
Working Worked

Log
Log Other
Hours Log Own Family
Family
Worked Earnings Earnings Earnings

Log
Family
Income

Pct
Poor

Pct
Married

Pct
Head of
Household

High school dropouts
Waiver states
Pre-waiver
Post-waiver
Difference

0.134
0.109
-0.025*

0.513
0.518
0.005

18.5
18.6
0.2

16.1
16.0
-0.1

8.211
8.183
-0.028

10.192
10.249
0.057 *

9.969
10.045
0.071 *

10.354
10.401
0.047*

0.338
0.318
-0.020 *

0.404
0.397
-0.007

0.248
0.234
-0.014

Non-waiver states
Pre-waiver
Post-waiver
Difference
Difference-in-Difference

0.130
0.132
0.002
-0.027 *

0.508
0.468
-0.040 *
0.045 *

17.9
16.7
-1.2
1.4

15.1
14.8
-0.3
0.3

8.039
8.059
0.020
-0.048

10.108
10.117
0.009
0.048

9.889
9.876
-0.013
0.084

10.296
10.311
0.015
0.032

0.343
0.361
0.018
-0.037 *

0.350
0.355
0.005
-0.012

0.253
0.267
0.013
-0.027

More than high school degree
Waiver states
Pre-waiver
Post-waiver
Difference

0.027
0.025
-0.002

0.849
0.850
0.001

38.1
38.3
0.2

31.0
31.3
0.3

9.867
9.897
0.030

10.902
10.917
0.015

10.438
10.445
0.007

11.003
11.017
0.014

0.070
0.071
0.002

0.591
0.588
-0.003

0.304
0.331
0.028

0.082
0.080
-0.002
0.003

0.596
0.578
-0.018
0.015

0.318
0.361
0.043
-0.015

Non-waiver states
Pre-waiver
0.028
0.847
37.8
31.0
9.815
10.832
10.355
10.941
Post-waiver
0.027
0.843
37.7
31.0
9.882
10.897
10.422
10.998
Difference
-0.001
-0.004
0.0
0.1
0.067
0.065*
0.067*
0.057*
Difference-in-Difference
-0.001
0.005
0.2
0.2
-0.037
-0.050
-0.060
-0.043
Estimates control for current and lagged state unemployment rate and employment growth rate.
*
Indicates statistical significance at the 0.10 level.
Pre- and post-waiver estimates are calculated over two-year periods, and the “waiver” date for the non-waiver states is 1995.

30

Table 2. Effects of TANF and Welfare Waivers
All Women 16-54

Waiver*Educ<12
Waiver*Educ=12
Waiver*Educ>12

TANF*Educ<12
TANF*Educ=12
TANF*Educ>12
Mean of dep variable:
Education<12
Education=12
Education>12

Pct
AFDC
-0.0086*
(0.0038)
0.0020
(0.0031)
0.0003
(0.0025)

Pct
Working
0.0197*
(0.0073)
-0.0046
(0.0060)
-0.0021
(0.0049)

Weeks
Worked
0.732*
(0.355)
-0.175
(0.291)
0.031
(0.239)

Hours
Worked
0.966*
(0.306)
-0.014
(0.251)
-0.018
(0.206)

Log
Own
Earnings
0.0503*
(0.0225)
-0.0060
(0.0184)
-0.0131
(0.0151)

Log
Family
Earnings
0.0873*
(0.0148)
-0.0155
(0.0121)
-0.0165*
(0.0099)

Log Other
Family
Earnings
0.1032*
(0.0192)
-0.0219
(0.0157)
-0.0222*
(0.0129)

Log
Family
Income
0.0607*
(0.0132)
-0.0062
(0.0108)
-0.0114
(0.0089)

Pct
Poor
-0.0236*
(0.0056)
0.0012
(0.0046)
0.0011
(0.0038)

Pct
Married
0.0229*
(0.0073)
-0.0144*
(0.0060)
0.0075
(0.0049)

Pct
Head of
Household
-0.0171*
(0.0070)
0.0052
(0.0058)
-0.0014
(0.0047)

-0.0190*
(0.0088)
-0.0115*
(0.0077)
0.0058
(0.0059)

0.0151
(0.0170)
-0.0041
(0.0149)
-0.0241*
(0.0113)

-0.090
(0.832)
0.300
(0.728)
-0.377
(0.553)

0.011
(0.716)
-0.020
(0.627)
-0.430
(0.476)

0.0654
(0.0526)
0.0277
(0.0260)
-0.0164
(0.0350)

0.0308
(0.0346)
0.0161
(0.0303)
-0.0243
(0.0230)

0.0416
(0.0449)
0.0045
(0.0299)
-0.0283
(0.0299)

0.0313
(0.0310)
0.0217
(0.0271)
-0.0113
(0.0206)

-0.0224*
(0.0131)
-0.0106
(0.0115)
0.0031
(0.0087)

-0.0004
(0.0171)
-0.0161
(0.0150)
0.0034
(0.0114)

-0.0133
(0.0165)
-0.0025
(0.0144)
0.0239*
(0.0110)

0.105
0.046
0.018

0.526
0.752
0.837

18.2
32.2
36.8

16.3
26.6
30.2

8.192
9.320
9.784

10.303
10.611
10.892

10.112
10.275
10.464

10.457
10.709
10.991

0.287
0.126
0.067

0.425
0.645
0.597

0.208
0.223
0.280

All models include current and lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate interacted with each education group, maximum benefit for a family
of three interacted with education groups, age dummies (16-25, 26-34, 35-44, 45-54), education dummies, age dummies interacted with education
dummies, race (Hispanic, non-Hispanic black), year effects, year effects interacted with education dummies, state effects, and state-specific time trends.
Standard errors in parentheses. Means are weighted by population.
*
Indicates statistical significance at the 0.10 level.

31

Table 3. Policy Effects Calculated as the Residual Change from 1995 to 1998
in Each Outcome by Education Level.

Education<12 Years
Education=12 Years
Education>12 Years

Pct Welfare
(1)
(2)
*
-0.050
-0.045*
*
-0.018
-0.015*
-0.013* -0.012*

Pct Work
(1)
(2)
*
0.026
0.006
0.015*
0.009
-0.002
0.002

Weeks Worked
(1)
(2)
*
1.570
0.770*
*
0.979
0.523
0.418
0.534*

Hours Worked
(1)
(2)
*
0.883
0.239
0.792* 0.352
0.241
0.195

Log Own Earnings
(1)
(2)
*
0.145
0.070*
*
0.082
0.055*
0.083*
0.077*

-0.037*
-0.032*
-0.005

-0.033*
-0.030*
-0.003

0.028*
0.011
0.017*

0.004
-0.003
0.007

1.152*
0.591
0.561

0.236
0.247
-0.011

0.642
0.091
0.551

0.044
-0.113
0.157

0.062*
0.063*
-0.001

-0.007
0.015
-0.022

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Difference-in-difference
<12 minus >12
<12 minus =12
=12 minus >12
Include labor market controls?

Column (1): Based on models that include age dummies (16-25, 26-34, 35-44, 45-54), education dummies (<12, =12, >12) age dummies
interacted with education dummies, race (Hispanic, non-Hispanic black), year effects, year effects interacted with education
dummies, state effects.
Column (2): Same as column (1) but including current and one-year lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate, and the
interaction of each of these factors with the education dummies.
Difference-in-difference estimator is the difference between education groups in the change between 1995 and 1998.
* Indicates statistical significance at the 0.10 level.

32

Table 3 (Continued). Policy Effects Calculated as the Residual Change from 1995 to 1998
in Each Outcome by Education Level.

Education<12 Years
Education=12 Years
Education>12 Years

Log Family
Earnings
(1)
(2)
*
0.131
0.087*
*
0.045
0.024
*
0.052*
0.064

Log Other Family
Members' Earnings
(1)
(2)
*
0.136
0.098*
*
0.024
0.006
*
0.049
0.033*

Log Family
Income
(1)
(2)
*
0.101
0.066*
*
0.044
0.026*
0.067* 0.055*

0.067*
0.086*
-0.019

0.035*
0.063*
-0.028

0.087*
0.112*
-0.025

0.065*
0.092*
-0.027

0.034*
0.057*
-0.023

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Pct Head of
Pct Poor
Pct Married
Household
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
*
*
*
*
-0.036 -0.020 -0.018 -0.012 0.027
0.027*
*
*
*
*
0.007 0.013 -0.021 -0.022 0.049
0.048*
-0.005 -0.004 -0.014* -0.019* 0.046 * 0.047 *

Difference-in-difference
<12 minus >12
<12 minus =12
=12 minus >12
Include labor market controls?

0.011 -0.031* -0.016* -0.004
0.040* -0.043* -0.033* 0.003
-0.029* 0.012* 0.017* -0.007
Yes

No

Yes

No

0.007
0.010
-0.003

-0.019* -0.020*
-0.022* -0.021*
0.003
0.001

Yes

Column (1): Based on models that include age dummies (16-25, 26-34, 35-44, 45-54), education dummies (<12, =12, >12) age dummies
interacted with education dummies, race (Hispanic, non-Hispanic black), year effects, year effects interacted with education
dummies, state effects.
Column (2): Same as column (1) but including current and one-year lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate, and the
interaction of each of these factors with the education dummies.
Difference-in-difference estimator is the difference between education groups in the change between 1995 and 1998.
* Indicates statistical significance at the 0.10 level.

33

No

Yes

Table 4. Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform on Family Income
Women 16-54 Years Old

Part 4A: Based on equation 1 (Comparable to estimates in Table 2)

Waiver*Educ<12
Waiver*Educ=12
Waiver*Educ>12

TANF*Educ<12
TANF*Educ=12
TANF*Educ>12

Log 20th
Percentile
0.0983*
(0.0283)
-0.0378
(0.0232)
0.0011
(0.0190)

Log
50th Percentile
0.0817*
(0.0178)
-0.0147
(0.0146)
-0.0163
(0.0112)

20th/50th
0.0018
(0.0093)
-0.0098
(0.0076)
0.0096
(0.0062)

-0.0362
(0.0663)
0.0553
(0.0580)
-0.0138
(0.0441)

0.0764*
(0.0417)
0.0267
(0.0365)
-0.0132
(0.0277)

-0.0388*
(0.0217)
0.0050
(0.0190)
-0.0047
(0.0144)

10.24
10.59
10.85
14074

0.391
0.484
0.516
14074

Mean of dep. variable
Education<12
9.25
Education=12
9.84
Education>12
10.17
Number of observations
14054
Includes all variables also included in Table 2.

Part 4B: Based on residual change from 1995 to 1998 (Comparable to estimates in Table 3)

Education<12
Education=12
Education>12
Difference-in-difference
<12 minus >12
<12 minus =12
=12 minus >12
Number of observations

Log 20th
Percentile
-0.0209
(0.0355)
-0.0283
(0.0277)
0.0305
(0.0217)

Log 50th
Percentile
0.0485*
(0.0225)
0.0118
(0.0175)
0.0369*
(0.0137)

20th/50th
-0.0164
(0.0115)
-0.0164*
(0.0090)
-0.0027
(0.0071)

-0.0426
0.0074
-0.0588*
14054

0.0116
0.0367
-0.0251
14074

-0.0137
-0.0001
-0.0136
14074

Includes all variables also included in Table 3.
Standard errors in parentheses.
* Indicates statistical significance at the 0.10 level.

34

Table A1. Dates of TANF Implementation and Major Welfare Waivers
Date of First Major Waiver
Approval
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
DC
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Implementation

May-95
April-94
October-92

November-95
July-94
December-92

August-94
May-95

January-96
October-95

June-96
November-93
June-94
August-96
November-93
December-94
August-93

November-93
May-95
October-93

June-96
August-95
August-95
August-92

March-96
November-95
October-92

September-95
April-95
April-95
February-95

October-95
June-95
February-96
October-95

June-96
July-92

October-92

February-96

July-96

March-96

July-96

July-92

February-93

May-96
March-94
July-96
March-96
October-92
April-93
July-95
September-95

June-94
September-96
June-96
January-93
July-94
July-95
January-96

June-94

January-96

January-94
February-97

35

TANF Implementation
Actual, if Different
Official
from Official
November-96
July-97
October-96
July-97
November-96
July-97
October-96
March-97
March-97
October-96
January-97
July-97
July-97
July-97
October-96
January-97
October-96
October-96
January-97
November-96
December-96
September-96
September-96
July-97
October-96
December-96
February-97
December-96
December-96
October-96
February-97
July-97
December-96
January-97
July-97
October-96
October-96
October-96
March-97
May-97
October-96
December-96
October-96
November-96
October-96
September-96
February-97
January-97
January-97
September-96
January-97

January-98

July-97

July-97
November-97

September-97

Table A2. Indicators of Success Before and After Waivers, With and Without Controlling for Labor Market Conditions
Female High School Dropouts 16-54 Years Old

Simple Pre-/Post-Waiver Comparison
Pct on
Pct
Pct
AFDC
Working
Poor
Waiver states
Pre-waiver
Post-waiver
Difference

0.130
0.116
-0.014 *

0.525
0.517
-0.008

Unemployment
Rate

0.324
0.318
0.006

6.26
6.55
0.29*

Controlling for Labor Market Conditionsa
Pct on
Pct
Pct
AFDC
Working
Poor
0.134
0.109
-0.025 *

Non-waiver states
Pre-waiver
0.149
0.493
0.360
6.85
0.130
Post-waiver
0.131
0.492
0.347
5.81
0.132
Difference
-0.018 *
0.001
-0.013
-1.04 *
0.002
Difference-in-Difference
0.004
-0.009
0.019
1.33 *
-0.027 *
a
Estimates control for current and lagged state unemployment rate and employment growth rate.
*
Indicates statistical significance at the 0.10 level.
Pre- and post-waiver estimates are calculated over two-year periods, and the “waiver” date for the non-waiver states is 1994.

36

0.513
0.518
0.005

0.338
0.318
-0.020 *

0.508
0.468
-0.040 *
0.045 *

0.343
0.361
0.018
-0.037 *

Figure 1. Welfare Recipients as a Percent of Total Population: 1960-1999
6.0%

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.0%

PRWORA
Enacted

1.0%

37

96

98
19

94

Source: DHHS Administration for Children & Families. 1999 estimate is for June.

19

90

88

86

84

82

80

92

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

76

74

72

70

68

66

64

62

78

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

60

0.0%

Figure 2. Work Participation and Weeks Worked Among Unmarried Female
Family Heads with Dependent Children: 1979-1998
100

40

95

38

90

36

85

34

80

32
Mean Weeks
(right axis)

75

30

70

28

65

26
Percent Working
(left axis)

60

24

38

98

97

19

96

19

95

19

94

19

93

19

92

19

91

19

90

Source: Blank, Card, Robins (2000

19

89

19

88

19

87

19

86

19

85

19

84

19

83

19

19

19

19

19

19

82

20

81

50

80

22

79

55

Figure 3. Poverty Rate and Average Earnings Among Unmarried Female Family
Heads With Dependent Children: 1979-1998
60

16000
15000

Poverty rate
(left axis)

14000

50
13000
12000
40

11000
Average earnings
(right axis)

10000
9000

30
8000
7000

Source: Blank, Card, Robins (2000).

39

97

96

95

94

93

92

91

98
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

89

88

87

90
19

19

19

19

85

84

83

82

81

86
19

19

19

19

19

19

19

19

80

6000

79

20

Figure 4. Share of Women 16-54 Participating in AFDC Last Year
Who Were Employed Last Week: 1977-1999
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

40

99

98

19

97

19

96

19

95

19

94

19

93

19

92

19

91

19

90

19

89

Source: Authors' tabulations using the March CPS.

19

88

19

87

19

86

19

85

19

84

19

83

19

82

19

81

19

80

19

79

19

78

19

19

19

77

0

Figure 5a. Welfare Participation Pre- and Post-Waivers
High School Dropouts -- Without Adjusting for Economic Conditions

18
16

States Without Waivers
14
12
States With Waivers

10
8
6
4
2
0
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Years Since Waiver Implementation

Figure 5b. Welfare Participation Pre- and Post-Waivers
High School Dropouts -- Adjusting for Economic Conditions

16
14

States Without Waivers
12
States With Waivers

10
8
6
4
2
0
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Years Since Waiver Implementation
Based on regression that controls for current and lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate.

41

2

Figure 6a. Employment Pre- and Post-Waivers
High School Dropouts -- Without Adjusting for Economic Conditions
58
56
54
States With Waivers

52
50
48

States Without Waivers

46
44
42
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Years Since Waiver Implementation

Figure 6b. Employment Pre- and Post-Waivers
High School Dropouts -- Adjusting for Economic Conditions
56

54

States With Waivers
52

50

States Without Waivers
48

46

44

42
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Years Since Waiver Implementation
Based on regression that controls for current and lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate.

42

2

Figure 7a. Poverty Rates Pre- and Post-Waivers
High School Dropouts -- Without Adjusting for Economic Conditions
40
States Without Waivers
35

30
States With Waivers

25

20

15
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Years Since Waiver Implementation
Figure 7b. Poverty Rates Pre- and Post-Waivers
High School Dropouts -- Adjusting for Economic Conditions
40
States Without Waivers
35

States With Waivers
30

25

20

15
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

Years Since Waiver Implementation
Based on regression that controls for current and lagged unemployment rate and employment growth rate.

43

1

2

44

