                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            USING ELASTICITIES TO DERIVE OPTIMAL INCOME TAX RATES


                                             Emmanuel Saez


                                          Working Paper 7628
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7628

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2000




This paper is based on Chapter 1 of my PH.D. thesis at MIT. I thank Mark Armstrong, Peter Diamond, Esther
Duflo, Roger Guesnerie, Michael Kremer, James Mirrlees, Thomas Piketty, James Poterba, Kevin Roberts,
David Spector, two anonymous referees, the RES 1999 Tour participants and numerous seminar participants
for very helpful comments and discussions. Financial support from the Alfred P Sloan Foundation is
thankfully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and are not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates
Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 7628
March 2000
JEL No. H21


                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper derives optimal income tax formulas using compensated and uncompensated
elasticities of earnings with respect to tax rates. A simple formula for the high income optimal tax
rate is obtained as a function of these elasticities and the thickness of the top tail of the income
distribution. In the general non-linear income tax problem, this method using elasticities shows
precisely how the different economic effects come into play and which are the key relevant
parameters in the optimal income tax formulas of Mirrlees. The optimal non-linear tax rate formulas
are expressed in terms of elasticities and the shape of the income distribution. These formulas are
implemented numerically using empirical earnings distributions and a range of realistic elasticity
parameters.



Emmanuel Saez
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
saez@fas.harvard.edu
1     Introduction

There is a controversial debate about the degree of progressivity that the income tax
should have. This debate is not limited to the economic research area but also attracts
much attention in the political sphere and among the public in general. At the center
of the debate lies the equity-eÆciency trade-o . Progressivity allows the government to
redistribute from rich to poor, but progressive taxation and high marginal tax rates have
eÆciency costs. High rates may a ect the incentives to work and may therefore reduce the
tax base, producing large deadweight losses. The modern setup for analyzing the equity-
eÆciency tradeo using a general nonlinear income tax was built by Mirrlees (1971). Since
then, the theory of optimal income taxation based on the original Mirrlees's framework
has been considerably developed. The implications for policy, however, are limited for
two main reasons.
    First, optimal income tax schedules have few general properties: we know that optimal
rates must lie between 0 and 1 and that they equal zero at the top and the bottom.
These properties are of little practical relevance for tax policy. In particular the zero
marginal rate at the top is a very local result. In addition, numerical simulations show
that tax schedules are very sensitive to the utility functions chosen. Second, optimal
income taxation has interested mostly theorists and has not changed the way applied
public nance economists think about the equity-eÆciency tradeo . Though behavioral
elasticities are the key concept in applied studies, there has been no systematic attempt
to derive results in optimal taxation which could be easily used in applied studies. As a
result, optimal income tax theory is often ignored and tax reform discussions are centered
on the concept of deadweight burden. Thus, most discussions on tax reforms focus only on
the eÆciency aspect of taxation and do not incorporate the equity aspect in the analysis.
    This paper argues that there is a simple link between optimal tax formulas and elas-
ticities of earnings familiar to empirical studies. It shows that using directly elasticities
to derive optimal income tax rates is a useful method to obtain new results in optimal
income taxation. First, a simple formula for the optimal tax rate for high incomes is

                                             2
derived as a function of both substitution and income e ects and the thickness of the top
tail of the income distribution. Second, deriving the general Mirrlees formula for optimal
non-linear tax rates in terms of elasticities provides a clear understanding of the key eco-
nomic e ects underlying the formula. It shows that the shape of the income distribution
plays a critical role in the pattern of optimal tax rates. Third, the optimal tax formulas
derived using elasticities can be easily extended to a heterogeneous population and do
not require the strong homogeneity assumptions about preferences usually made in the
optimal income tax literature. Last, because the formulas derived are closely related to
empirical magnitudes, they can be easily implemented numerically using the empirical
income distribution and making realistic assumptions about the elasticity parameters.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the main results of the optimal
income tax literature. Section 3 derives a simple formula for optimal high income tax
rates and relates it to empirical magnitudes. Section 4 considers the general optimal non-
linear income tax problem. The formula of Mirrlees (1971) is derived directly in terms of
elasticities. Section 5 presents numerical simulations of optimal tax schedules and Section
6 concludes.


2     Literature Review

The Mirrlees (1971) model of optimal income taxation captures the key eÆciency-equity
tradeo issue of redistribution: the government has to rely on a distortionary nonlinear
income tax to meet both its revenue requirements and redistribute income. General results
about optimal tax schedules are fairly limited. Tuomala (1990), Chapter 6, presents most
of the formal results.
    Mirrlees (1971) showed that there is no gain from having marginal tax rates above 100
percent because nobody will choose to have such a rate at the margin. Mirrlees (1971)
also showed that optimal marginal rates cannot be negative. Seade (1982) clari ed the
conditions under which this result holds. The most striking and well known result is that


                                             3
the marginal tax rate should be zero at the income level of the top income level when
the income distribution is bounded (Sadka (1976) and Seade (1977)). Numerical simu-
lations have shown, however, that this result is very local (see Tuomala (1990)). This
result is therefore of little practical interest. Mirrlees (1971) did not derive this simple
result because he considered unbounded distributions of skills. He nonetheless presented
precise conjectures about asymptotic optimal rates in the case of utility functions separa-
ble in consumption and labor. Nonetheless, these conjectures have remained practically
unnoticed in the subsequent optimal income tax literature. This can be explained by two
reasons. First, Mirrlees conjectures depend on the unobservable distribution of skills and
on abstract properties of the utility function with no obvious intuitive meaning. Second,
the zero top rate result was probably considered for a long time as the de nitive result
because the empirical income distribution is indeed bounded. The present paper argues
that in fact unbounded distributions are of much more interest than bounded distributions
to address the high income optimal tax rate problem.
   A symmetrical zero rate result has been obtained at the bottom. Seade (1977) showed
that if everybody works (and labor supply is bounded away from zero) then the bottom
rate is zero. However, if there is an atom of non workers then the bottom tax rate
is positive and numerical simulations show that, in this case, the bottom rate can be
substantial (Tuomala (1990)).
   A number of studies have tried to relate optimal income tax formulas to the elasticity
concepts used in applied work. Using the tools of optimal commodity tax theory, Dixit
and Sandmo (1977) expressed the optimal linear income tax rate in terms of elasticities.
However, in the case of the non-linear income tax problem, the attempts have been much
less systematic. Roberts (1999) uses a perturbation method, similar in spirit to what is
done in the present paper, and obtains optimal non-linear income tax formulas expressed
in terms of elasticities.1 He also derives asymptotic formulas that are similar to the
  1 Revesz   (1989) also attempted to express the Mirrlees formulas in terms of elasticities.




                                                     4
ones I obtain.2 Recently, Diamond (1998) analyzed the case of utility functions with no
income e ects and noticed that the Mirrlees formula for optimal rates is considerably
simpler in that case and could be expressed in terms of the labor supply elasticity. He
also obtained simple results about the asymptotic pattern of the marginal rates.3 Piketty
(1997) considered the same quasi-linear utility case and derived Diamond's optimal tax
formulas for the Rawlsian criterion without setting a formal program of maximization. He
considered instead small local changes in marginal rates and used directly the elasticity of
labor supply to derive the behavioral e ects of this small reform. My paper clari es and
generalizes this alternative method of derivation of optimal taxes. Finally, the non-linear
pricing literature, which considers models that are formally very close to optimal income
tax models, has developed a methodology to obtain optimal price formulas based on
demand pro le elasticities that is also close to the method adopted here (Wilson (1993)).
   Another strand of the public economics literature has developed similar elasticity
methods to calculate the marginal costs of public funds. The main purpose of this litera-
ture was to develop tools more sophisticated than simple deadweight burden computations
to evaluate the eÆciency costs of di erent kinds of tax reforms and the optimal provision
of public goods (see e.g., Ballard and Fullerton (1992) and Dahlby (1998)). I will show
that the methods of this literature can be useful to derive results in optimal taxation and
that, in particular, Dahlby (1998) has come close to my results for high income rates.
   Starting with Mirrlees (1971), considerable e ort has gone into simulations of optimal
tax schedules. Following Stern (1976), attention has been paid on a careful calibration of
the elasticity of labor supply. Most simulation results are surveyed in Tuomala (1990). It
has been noticed that the level of inequality of the distribution of skills and the elasticities
of labor supply signi cantly a ect optimal schedules. Most simulations use a log-normal
distribution of skills which matches roughly the single moded empirical distribution but
has also an unrealistically thin top tail which leads to marginal rates converging to zero.
  2 The   link between Roberts (1999) and the present analysis is discussed in detail in Section 4.
  3 Some   of these results had been obtained by Atkinson (1990) in a more specialized situation.


                                                     5
Nobody has tried to use empirical distributions of income to perform simulations because
the link between skills and realized incomes was never investigated in depth.4 The present
study pays careful attention to this issue and presents simulations based on the empirical
earnings distribution.


3      High Income Optimal Tax Rates

I show in this Section that the classic elasticity method of the optimal linear income tax
literature can be used to derive in a simple way an optimal tax rate formula for high
income earners. I will consider that the government sets a at marginal rate                     above a
given (high) income level z and then derive the welfare and tax revenue e ects of a small
increase in         using elasticities. The optimal tax rate        is obtained when a small change
in tax rates has no rst order e ects on total social welfare.5


3.1      Elasticity concepts


I consider a standard two good model. Each taxpayer maximizes a well-behaved individual
utility function u = u(c; z ) which depends positively on consumption c and negatively on
earnings z . Individual skills or ability are embodied in the individual utility function.
Assuming that the individual faces a linear budget constraint c = z (1                 ) + R,   where   

is the marginal tax rate and R is virtual (non-labor) income. The rst order condition of
the individual maximization program, (1              )uc + uz   = 0, de nes implicitly a Marshallian
    4 However,   Kanbur and Tuomala (1994) realized that it is important to distinguish between the skill
distribution and the income distribution when calibrating the distribution of skills. Their work improved
signi cantly upon previous simulations. I come back to their contribution in Section 5.
   5 Dahlby (1998) considered piecewise linear tax schedules and used the same kind of methodology to

compute the e ects of a general tax rate reform on taxes paid by a \representative" individual in each
tax bracket. By specializing his results to a reform a ecting only the tax rate of the top bracket, he
derived a formula for the tax rate maximizing taxes paid by the \representative" individual of the top
bracket that is a special case of the one obtained here.



                                                     6
(uncompensated) earnings supply function z = z (1                               ; R).   The uncompensated elasticity
is de ned such that,

                                                      1               @z
                                         u   =                                  :                                    (1)
                                                          z       @ (1      )
Income e ects are captured by the parameter,

                                                                       @z
                                                 = (1            )        :                                         (2)
                                                                       @R
The Hicksian (compensated) earnings function is the earnings level which minimizes cost
c     z   needed to reach a given utility level               u       for a given tax rate            and is denoted by
zc   = z c (1   ; u).   The compensated elasticity of earnings is de ned by,

                                                  1                  @z
                                       c   =
                                                      z       @ (1         )
                                                                                ju :                                  (3)

The two elasticity concepts and the income e ects parameter are related by the Slutsky
equation,


                                                  c      = u         :                                             (4)

     The compensated elasticity is always non-negative and                                  is non positive if leisure is
not an inferior good, an assumption I make from now on.


3.2       Deriving the high income optimal tax rate


The government sets a constant linear rate                           of taxation above a given (high) level of
income z. I normalize without loss of generality the population with income above z to
one and I note h(z ) the density of the earnings distribution. To obtain the optimal  , I
consider a small increase d in the top tax rate  for incomes above z as depicted on Figure
1. This tax change has two e ects on tax revenue. First, there is a mechanical e ect,
which is the change in tax revenue if there were no behavioral responses, and second,


                                                              7
there is a reduction in tax revenue due to reduced earnings through behavioral responses.
Let us examine these two e ects successively.
        Mechanical e ect
       The mechanical e ect (denoted by                M)   represents the increase in tax receipts if there
were no behavioral responses. A taxpayer with income z (above z) would pay (z                                       z)d

additional taxes. Therefore, summing over the population above z and denoting the mean
of incomes above z by zm , the total mechanical e ect M is equal to,


                                                  M    = [ zm        z]d:                                           (5)

        Behavioral Response
       As shown in Figure 1, the tax change can be decomposed into two parts; rst, an
overall uncompensated increase              d    in marginal rates (starting from 0 and not just from
z),   second, an overall increase in virtual income dR = zd . Therefore, an individual with
income z changes its earnings by,

                                        @z                 @z                                d
                            dz   =                d   +        dR   = ( u z        z)         ;                   (6)
                                     @ (1    )           1 
                                                           @R
where we have used de nitions (1) and (2). The reduction in income                                    dz   displayed in
equation (6) implies a reduction in tax receipts equal to                            dz .   The total reduction in
tax receipts due to the behavioral responses is simply the sum of the terms                                 dz   over all
individuals earning more than z,

                                                                              d
                                            B   = (u zm    ;       z)                (7)
                                                       1 
           R
where u = z1 (uz) zh(z )dz=zm is a weighted average of the uncompensated elasticity. The
elasticity term      inside the integral represents the average elasticity over individuals
                   (uz )
                                   R
earning income z . Similarly,  = z1 (z) h(z )dz is the average income e ect. Note that 
and u are not averaged with the same weights. It is not necessary to assume that people



                                                                8
earning the same income have the same elasticity; the relevant parameters are simply the
average elasticities at given income levels.
   In order to obtain the optimal tax rate, we must equalize the revenue e ect obtained
by summing (5) and (7) to the welfare e ect due to the small tax reform. To obtain
the welfare e ect, let us consider g which is the ratio of social marginal utility for the
top bracket taxpayers to the marginal value of public funds for the government. In other
words, g is de ned such that the government is indi erent between g more dollars of
public funds and one more dollar consumed by the taxpayers with income above z. The
smaller g, the less the government values marginal consumption of high incomes. Thus g
is a parameter re ecting the redistributive goals of the government.
   As we saw, the small tax reform      d   induces behavioral changes   dz .   However, these
behavioral changes in earnings lead only to second order e ects on welfare (this is the
usual consequence of the envelope theorem). Therefore, welfare e ects are due uniquely to
the mechanical increase in tax liability. Each additional dollar raised by the government
because of the tax reform reduces social welfare of people in the top bracket by g. Thus
the total welfare loss due to the tax reform is equal to gM . Consequently, the government
sets the rate  such that, (1   )M
                                g     + B = 0. Thus, using (5) and (7), the optimal rate is
such that,

                                          (1     )(zm =z 1)
                                                  g
                                       =                      :                    (8)
                               1                zm =z 
                                                 u


   Equation (8) gives a strikingly simple answer to the problem of the optimal marginal
rate for high income earners. Note that this formula does not require identical elasticities
among taxpayers and thus applies to populations with heterogeneous preferences or elas-
ticities. The only relevant behavioral parameters are the average elasticity u and average
income e ects  for taxpayers with income above z. Unsurprisingly, the optimal rate        

is a decreasing function of the social weight g put on high income taxpayers, the average
elasticity u, and the absolute size of income e ects . Interestingly, the optimal rate
is an increasing function of zm =z. The ratio zm =z is a key parameter for the high income

                                                 9
optimal tax problem. This parameter depends on the shape of the income distribution
and has not been studied in the optimal tax literature.
    If the distribution of income is bounded, then, when z is close to the top, the ratio
zm =z tends   to one and thus, from (8), we deduce that the top rate must be equal to zero.
This is the classical zero top rate result derived by Sadka (1976) and Seade (1977). The
intuition for the result is straightforward. As can be seen comparing (5) and (7), close
to the top, the mechanical e ect        M   is negligible relative to the behavioral response       B

implying that the optimal rate must be close to zero.


3.3        Empirical earnings distributions and optimal top rate


To assess whether the zero top result is actually relevant, it is useful to examine the
ratio zm =z using empirical earnings distributions. Figure 2 plots the values of the ratios
zm =z computed     using annual wage income reported on tax return data for years 1992 and
1993 in the US.6 On Figure 2, the ratios zm =z are reported as a function of z for incomes
between $0 to $500,000 in the left panel and for incomes between $10,000 to $30 million in
the right panel (using a semi-log scale). Figure 2 shows that the ratio is strikingly stable
(and around 2) over the tail of the income distribution.7 As discussed above, the ratio
must be equal to one at the level of the highest income. However, Figure 2 shows that
even at income level $30 million, the ratio is still around 2. For example, if the second
top income taxpayer earns half as much as the top taxpayer then the ratio is equal to 2
at the level of the second top earner. Thus the ratio might well come to one only in the
vicinity of the top income earner. Consequently, the zero top result only applies to the
   6 The   public use tax les prepared yearly by the Internal Revenue Service have been used for this
exercise. This data is particularly tted for this type of computations because it oversamples high
income taxpayers. As many as one third of the highest income earners in the US are included in the
sample. The ratios have been computed using the amounts reported on the line Wages, Salaries and Tips
of Form 1040. The sample has been restricted to married taxpayers only.
   7 The ratio becomes noisy above $10 million because the number of taxpayers above that level is very

small and crossing only one taxpayer has a non trivial discrete e ect on the curves.


                                                   10
very highest taxpayer and is therefore of no practical interest.
   From $150,000 to close to the very top, the ratio                      zm =z   is roughly constant around
2. This means that formula (8) can be applied by replacing                         zm =z   by 2 for any z above
$150,000. Distributions with constant ratio zm =z are exactly Pareto distributions. There-
fore, the tails of empirical earnings distributions can be remarkably well approximated by
Pareto distributions.8 More precisely, a Pareto distribution with parameter a > 1 is such
that   P rob(Income > z )      =   C=z a   for some constant         C.    For a Pareto distribution,       zm =z

is constant and equal to       a=(a        1). The higher a, the thinner is the tail of the income
distribution. For the U.S. wage income distribution, the ratio zm =z is around 2 and thus
the parameter a is approximately equal to 2.
   Assuming that the elasticity u and income e ects  converge as z increases, and
assuming that the ratio zm =z converges (to a limit denoted by a=(a 1)), the optimal tax
rate (8) converges. Using the Slutsky equation (4), the limiting tax rate can be written
in terms of the limiting values of the elasticities u and c and the Pareto parameter a,

                                                      1 g
                                         =            :                            (9)
                                  1              g +  u + c (a
                                                      
                                                     1)
   In that case, the government wants to set approximately the same linear rate  above
any large income level and thus  is indeed the optimal non-linear asymptotic rate of the
Mirrlees problem.9
   The top rate  depends negatively of the thinness of the top tail distribution mea-
sured by the Pareto parameter a. This is an intuitive result, if the distribution is thin
then raising the top rate for high income earners will raise little additional revenue. In-
terestingly, for a given compensated elasticity c, the precise division into income e ects
and uncompensated rate e ects matters. The higher are absolute income e ects ( )
relative to uncompensated e ects (u), the higher is the asymptotic tax rate . Put in
other words, what matters most for optimal taxation is whether taxpayers continue to
  8 Pareto   discovered this empirical regularity more than a century ago (see Pareto (1965)).
  9 This   point is con rmed in Section 4.


                                                      11
work when tax rates increase (without utility compensation). In particular, though c is
a suÆcient statistic to approximate the deadweight loss of taxation, same values of c can
lead to very di erent optimal tax rates.
   The case g = 0 corresponds to the situation where the government does not value the
marginal consumption of high income earners and sets the top rate so as to extract as
much tax revenue as possible from high incomes (soak the rich). Formula (9) specialized
to the case g = 0 is the high income tax rate maximizing tax revenue. In the case with
no income e ects (c = u), this \La er" rate is equal to  = 1=(1 + a) with a around
2 for the US. This formula is a simple generalization of the well known formula for the
 at tax rate maximizing tax revenue, 1=(1 + ), where  is the average elasticity over all
taxpayers.
   I show in Section 4 that, in the Mirrlees model, the parameter a is independent of  as
long as  < 1 which implies that formula (9) can be applied using directly the empirical
value of a. The intuition is the following. When elasticities are constant, changing the
tax rate has the same multiplicative e ect on the incomes of each high income taxpayer
and therefore the ratio      zm =z   is unchanged. Empirically, in the US,        a   does not seem to
vary systematically with the level of the top rate.10
   There is little consensus in the empirical literature on behavioral responses to taxation
about the size of high income elasticities. Some studies have found estimates in excess
of 1 while others have found elasticities very close to zero. Gruber and Saez (2000)
summarize the empirical literature based on US tax reforms and discuss the reasons for
discrepancies.11 They nd elasticity estimates around 0.25 for gross income. It is unlikely,
though not impossible, that the long-term compensated elasticity are bigger than 0.5. The
uncompensated elasticity is probably even smaller.
   Table 1 presents optimal asymptotic rates using formula (9) for a range of realistic
values for the Pareto parameter of the income distribution, u and c, (the asymptotic
 10 See   Saez (1999a) for an empirical examination.
 11 The   recent volume of Slemrod (2000) also provides a number of elasticity estimates for high incomes.


                                                    12
elasticities) and g. Except in the cases of high elasticities, the optimal rates are fairly
high. Comparing the rows in Table 1 shows that the Pareto parameter has a big impact
on the optimal rate. Pareto parameters for income distributions vary across countries,
the parameter is low in the US compared to most European countries or Canada. A
thorough investigation of Pareto parameters across countries would be relatively simple to
carry out and would provide an important piece of information for tax policy discussions.
Comparing columns (2), (5) and (7) (or columns (3), (6), (8)), we see also that, at xed
compensated elasticity, the optimal rate is very sensitive to the size of income e ects.


4        Optimal Non-Linear Income Tax Rates

Last section considered only the problem of optimal tax rates at the high income end. In
this Section, I investigate the issue of optimal rates at any income level using the same
elasticity method. In order to contrast my approach to the original Mirrlees approach, I
    rst present brie y the Mirrlees (1971) model.


4.1      The Mirrlees model


In the model, all individuals have the same utility function which depends positively on
consumption c and negatively on labor supply l and is noted u(c; l). Individuals di er only
in their skill level (denoted by n) which measures their marginal productivity. Earnings
are equal to    z   =   nl.   The population is normalized to one and the distribution of skills
is written    F (n),    with density f (n) and support in [0; 1).     cn , zn   =   nln ,   and   un   denote
the consumption, earnings and utility level of an individual with skill n. The government
cannot observe skills and thus is restricted to setting taxes as a function only of earnings,
c   =z    T (z ).   The government maximizes a social welfare function,

                                                Z1
                                        W   =        G(un )f (n)dn;                                      (10)
                                                0

where    G   is an increasing and concave function of utility. The government maximizes W

                                                     13
subject to a resource constraint and incentive compatibility constraints. The resource
constraint states that total consumption is less than total earnings minus government
expenditures, E ,

                                 Z1                     Z1
                                   0
                                       cn f (n)dn      0
                                                             zn f (n)dn   E:                               (11)

I note p the multiplier of the budget constraint (11) which represents the marginal value of
public funds. The incentive compatibility constraints state that, for each n, the selected
labor supply ln maximizes utility, given the tax function, u(nl                T (nl); l).   The derivation
of the rst order condition for optimal rates is sketched in appendix. Note that in the
model, redistribution takes place through a guaranteed income level (equal to                         T (0))

that is taxed away as earnings increase. The welfare program is thus fully integrated to
the tax schedule.


4.2    Optimal Marginal Rates


The general rst order condition Mirrlees obtained depends in a complicated way on
the derivatives of the utility function u(c; l) which are not related in any obvious way
to empirical magnitudes (see equation (22) in appendix). Moreover, it is derived using
powerful but blind Hamiltonian optimization. Thus, the optimal taxation literature has
not elucidated the key economic e ects leading to the optimal formula. In this subsection,
I derive a formula for optimal tax rates using elasticities of earnings and show precisely
the key economics e ects behind the optimal tax rate formula. I denote by                         H (z )   the
cumulated income distribution function (the total population is normalized to one) and
by h(z ) the density of the income distribution. I note g (z ) the social marginal value of
consumption for taxpayers with income z expressed in terms of the value of public funds.12
I rst present a simple preliminary result that is also useful to understand the relation
between the income distribution and the distribution of skills in the Mirrlees economy.
 12 This   is G0 (u)uc =p using the notation of the Mirrlees model.



                                                        14
Lemma 1 For any regular tax schedule T (such that T 00 exists) not necessarily optimal,
the earnings function zn is non-decreasing and satis es the following di erential equation,

                                        z_n        1 + (un)              T(00n)
                                              =                 z_n                    (cn) :                           (12)
                                        zn            n               1        T(0n)

If equation (12) leads to z_n < 0 then zn is discontinuous and (12) does not hold.

   The proof, which is routine algebra, is presented in appendix. In the case of a linear
tax (T 00 = 0) the earnings equation (12) simpli es to dz=z = (1 +  u)dn=n. In the general
case, a correction term in T 00 which represents the e ect of the change in marginal rates
is present. By de nition, the income density and the skill density are related through the
equation h(z )z_ = f (n). Consequently, for a given skill distribution and using Lemma 1, we
see that a non-linear tax schedule produces a local deformation of the income distribution
density h(z ).
       In order to simplify the presentation of optimal tax rates formulas, I introduce h (z )
which is the density of incomes that would take place at         if the tax schedule T (:) were
                                                                                          z

replaced by the linear tax schedule tangent to T (:) at level z .13 I call the density h (z ) the
virtual density. Applying Lemma 1 to the linearized schedule, we have z_  =z = (1 +  u)=n
where z_  is the derivative of earnings with respect to n when the linearized schedule is in
place. By de nition, we also have h (z )z_  = f (n). Thus h and h are related through the
following equation:

                                        h ( z )                      h(z )
                                                      =              :                 (13)
                               1 T 0 (z ) 1 T 0 (z ) +  czT 00 (z )
       Of course, the virtual density h is not identical to the actual density h. However,
because the density           h   at the optimum tax schedule is endogenous (changes in the tax
schedule a ect the income distribution through behavioral responses), there is very little
inconvenience in using h rather than h. Using h is a way to get rid of the deformation
  13 This      linearized tax schedule is characterized by rate              = T 0 (z ) and virtual income   R   =z   T (z )

z (1     ).



                                                               15
component induced by the non-linearity in the tax schedule. In that sense and as evi-
denced by Lemma 1, h is more closely related than h to the underlying skill distribution
which represents intrinsic inequality.
    The following proposition presents the optimal tax formula expressed in terms of the
behavioral elasticities (same notations as in the previous section) and the shape of the
income distribution using the concept of virtual density h .14

Proposition 1 The rst order condition for the optimal tax rate at income level z can
be written as follows,

                                                   !Z 1                    2Z                           3
       T 0 (
            z)            1         1      H (
                                              z)                              z                 (uz 0 ) dz 0
                                                                                                           h(z )
                   =                                        (1 g (z )) exp 4 (1                      ) 05           dz: (14)
   1     T 0 (
              z)          c
                         (
                           z)           zh (
                                              z)     z                            z
                                                                                                 c
                                                                                                (z ) z 0 1 H (z )

Alternatively, using the notations of the Mirrlees model, this equation can be rewritten as,

                                                          T 0 (zn )
                                                                        = A(n)B (n);                                                (15)
                                                    1       T 0 (zn )
where                                                 0           1                         !
                                                        1 + (un)
                                               A(n) = @           A 1               F (n)
                                                                                                    ;                               (16)
                                                           c
                                                                 (n)            nf (n)

                              Z1                                 !        2Z                                3
                                               G0 (um )u(cm)                 m          (us) dzs                   f (m)
                 B (n)   =                1                           exp 4 (1                  )           5                 dm:   (17)
                                n                    p                       n          (cs)       zs          1     F (n)

    In equations (16) and (17), sub or superscripts (n) mean that the parameter is com-
puted at the skill level n.
    Obtaining (15) in the context of the Mirrlees model is possible using the Mirrlees
 rst order condition. This derivation is presented in appendix.15 This rearrangement
of terms of the Mirrlees formula is a generalization of the one developed by Diamond
  14 The proof of the proposition makes clear why introducing h is a useful simpli cation
  15 Revesz (1989) has also attempted to express the optimal non-linear tax formula of Mirrlees in terms

of elasticities. His derivation is similar in spirit to the one presented in appendix but there are a number
of mistakes in his computations and results.

                                                                        16
(1998) in the case of quasi-linear utility functions. This method, however, does not show
the economic e ects which lead to formula (14). Formula (14) can, however, be fruitfully
derived directly in terms of elasticities using a similar method as in Section 3. The formula
is commented in the light of this direct derivation just after the proof.

       Direct Proof of Proposition 1
       I consider the e ect of the following small tax reform perturbation around the optimal
tax schedule. As depicted on Figure 3, marginal rates are increased by an amount d for
incomes between z and z + dz. I also assume that d is second order compared to dz so
that bunching (and inversely gaps in the income distribution) around z or z + dz induced
by the discontinuous change in marginal rates are negligible. This tax reform has three
e ects on tax receipts: a mechanical e ect, an elasticity e ect for taxpayers with income
between z and z + dz, and an income e ect for taxpayers with income above z.

        Mechanical E ect net of Welfare Loss
       As shown in Figure 3, every taxpayer with income                 z   above z pays   d dz   additional
taxes which are valued (1         g (z ))d dz by     the government therefore the overall mechanical
e ect M net of welfare loss is equal to,16

                                                  Z1
                                   M   = d dz         (1    g (z )) h(z )dz:
                                                  z



        Elastic E ect
       The increase d for a taxpayer with income z between z and z + dz has an elastic e ect
which produces a small change in income (denoted by dz ). This change is the consequence
of two e ects. First, there is a direct compensated e ect due to the exogenous increase
d .   The compensated elasticity is the relevant one here because the change d takes place
at level z just below z . Second, there is an indirect e ect due to the shift of the taxpayer
  16 The   tax reform has also an e ect on h(z ) but this is a second order e ect in the computation of M .



                                                         17
on the tax schedule by dz which induces an endogenous additional change in marginal
rates equal to dT 0 = T 00 dz . Therefore, the behavioral equation can be written as follows,

                                                                 d+ dT 0
                                            dz   =       c z            ;
                                                                  1 T0
which implies,

                                                                      d
                                       dz   =       c z                         :
                                               1                 T 0 +  c zT 00
It easy to see that 1 T 0 +  czT 00 > 0 if and only if the curvature of the indi erence curve
at the individual optimum bundle is larger than the curvature of the schedule                        z   T (z ),

or equivalently, if and only if, the individual second order condition is strictly satis ed.
Mirrlees (1971) showed that bunching of types occurs when this condition fails. I assume
here that 1 T 0 +  czT 00 > 0. Note that this condition is always satis ed at points where
T 00 (
      z)    0.
Introducing the virtual density h (z ) and using equation (13), the overall e ect on tax
receipts (denoted by E ) can be simply written as,

                                                            T0
                                      E   =       c
                                                 (  
                                                   z) z            0 h (
                                                                         z )d dz;
                                                 1               T
where       c
           (
             z)   is the compensated elasticity at income level z. The use of the virtual density
h is useful because it allows to get rid of the complication due to the endogenous change

in marginal rate dT 0 = T 00 dz . In other words, one can derive the above expression for E
without taking into account the endogenous change in marginal rates by just replacing h
by h .

     Income E ect
    A taxpayer with income z above z pays                       dR    = d dz additional taxes. So, taxpayers
above the small band [z ; z + dz] are induced to work more through income e ects which
reinforce the mechanical e ect. The income response dz is again due to two e ects. First,
there is the direct income e ect (equal to  dR=(1 T 0 )). Second, there is an indirect

                                                            18
elastic e ect due to the change in marginal rates                                      dT 0     =        T 00 dz   induced by the shift              dz

along the tax schedule. Therefore,

                                                                  T 00 dz               d dz
                                           dz   =         cz                                       ;
                                                                  1     T0             1        T0
which implies,

                                                                           d dz
                                               dz    =  :                        (18)
                                       1 T 0 + z cT 00
Introducing again the virtual density h (z ) to get rid of the endogenous rate change
component and summing (18) over all taxpayers with income larger than z, I obtain the
total tax revenue e ect due to income e ects responses,

                                                         Z1                     T0
                                      I   = d dz                    (z )             0 h (z )dz:
                                          1              z                           T
Any small tax reform around the optimum schedule has no rst order e ect on welfare.
Thus the sum of the three e ects M , E and I must be zero which implies,

                                     ! "Z 1                                                          Z1                                          #
      T0         1    1      H (
                                z)                                            h(z )                                        T0        h (z )
             =                                  (1       g (z ))                           dz   +                                             dz :
  1     T0       c       zh (
                                z)        z                           1       H (
                                                                                  z)                      z           1    T0   1     H (
                                                                                                                                          z)
                                                                                                                                                (19)
      Equation (19) can be considered as a rst order linear di erential equation and can
be integrated (see appendix) using the standard method to obtain equation (14) of the
proposition.
Changing variables from z to n, and using the fact that, by Lemma 1, zh (z )(1 +  u) =
nf (n),    it is straightforward to obtain equation (15) of Proposition 1. When changing
variables from z to n, an additional term 1+  u appears on the right hand side to form the
term A(n) of equation (15). This counterintuitive term (higher uncompensated elasticity
should not lead to higher marginal rates) should be incorporated into the skill distribution
ratio (1 F )=(nf ) to lead to the income distribution ratio (1 H )=(z h ). This shows that


                                                                      19
expressing optimal tax formulas in terms of the skill distribution instead of the income
distribution can be misleading.            k
     Interpretation of Proposition 1
     In the light of this direct proof, let us analyze the decomposition of optimal tax rates
presented in Proposition 1. Analyzing equation (14), it appears that three elements
determine optimal income tax rates: elasticity (and income) e ects, the shape of the
income (or skill) distribution and social marginal weights.

      Shape of Income Distribution
     The shape of the income distribution a ects the optimal rate at level z mainly through
the term (1      H (
                    z ))=(
                          z h(
                              z )).        The elastic distortion at z induced by a marginal rate
increase at that level is proportional to income at that level times number of people at
that income level (z h(z )) while the gain in tax receipts is proportional to the number of
people above z (i.e., 1        H (
                                   z )).       Therefore, the government should apply high marginal
rates at levels where the density of taxpayers is low compared to the number of taxpayers
with higher income. This is obviously the case at the bottom of the income distribution
because zh(z ) is close to zero while 1             H (
                                                         z)   is close to one. At the top, for a Pareto
distribution with parameter a, the ratio (1              H )=(
                                                              z h)   is constant and equal to 1=a. From
the evidence displayed in Section 3, we expect the ratio to converge to a constant close to
0:5 (remember that       a   is around 2) for large z. Figure 4 presents the graphs of the ratio
(1    H (z ))=(zh(z ))   for years 1992 and 1993 as a function of z . These graphs are based
on the same data and samples as the graphs of Figure 2. The ratios are U-shaped. The
hazard ratio is very high for low incomes, it decreases until income level $80,000 and then
increases until $200,000. Above $200,000, the ratio is indeed approximately constant,
around 0.5, showing that the Pareto approximation is adequate. The fact that the ratio
increases from $80,000 to $200,000 suggests that, with constant elasticities, optimal rates
should be increasing in that range.



                                                        20
     Of course, the ratio (1         H )=(
                                          z h)   is endogenous (because of behavioral responses,
changing the tax schedule may change the income distribution). Nevertheless, using
directly the income distribution allows a better understanding of the optimal tax rate
formula. In the numerical simulations presented in the following section, the endogeneity
issue is solved by computing an exogenous skill distribution based on the actual income
distribution.

      Elastic and Income e ects
     Behavioral e ects enter the formula for optimal rates in two ways. First, increas-
ing marginal rates at level z induces a compensated response from taxpayers earning z.
Therefore,       c
                (
                  z)   enters negatively the optimal tax rate at income level z. Second, this
marginal rate change increases the tax burden of all taxpayers with income above z. This
e ect induces these taxpayers to work more through income e ects which is good for tax
receipts. Therefore, this income e ect leads to higher marginal rates (everything else be-
ing equal) through the exponential term in (14) which is bigger than one. Note that this
term is identically equal to one when there are no income e ects (this case was studied
by Diamond (1998)).17

      Social Marginal Welfare Weights
     The social marginal weights g (z ) enter the optimal tax formula through the term
(1    g (z ))   inside the integral. Social marginal weights represent the relative value for the
government of an additional dollar of consumption at each income level. More precisely,
the government is indi erent between giving 1=g (z1 ) additional dollars to a taxpayer
with income       z1   or giving 1=g (z2) dollars to a taxpayer with income        z2 .   These weights
  17 The   heuristic proof shows clearly why negative tax rates are never optimal. If the tax rate were
negative in some range then increasing it a little bit in that range would decrease earnings of taxpayers
in that range (because of the substitution e ect) but this behavioral response would increase tax receipts
because the tax rate is negative in that range. Therefore, this small tax reform would unambiguously
increase welfare.



                                                    21
summarize in a transparent way the distributive objectives of the government. If the
government has redistributive tastes, then these weights are decreasing in income. In
that case, expression (1          g (z ))   in equation (14) is increasing in z . Therefore, taste for
redistribution is unsurprisingly an element tending to make the tax schedule progressive.
If the government had no redistributive goals, then it would choose the same marginal
welfare weights for everybody and thus equation (14) can also be applied in the case with
no redistributive concerns. The shape of the income distribution and the size of both
substitution and income e ects would still matter for the optimal income tax.

   The original Mirrlees derivation relies heavily on the fact that there is a unidimensional
skill parameter which characterizes each taxpayer. As a result, that derivation gives no
clue about how to extend the non-linear tax formula to a heterogeneous population in a
simple way. The direct proof using elasticities shows that there is no need to introduce
an exogenous skill distribution. Formula (14) is valid for any heterogeneous population as
long as (uz) and (cz) are considered as average elasticities at income level z .18 Therefore, the
skill distribution in the Mirrlees model should not be considered as a real economic element
(which could be measured empirically) but rather as a simpli cation device to perform
computations and numerical simulations. The skill distribution should simply be chosen
so that the resulting income distribution is close to the empirical income distribution.
This route is followed in Section 5.
   Mirrlees (1986) tried to extend the model to heterogeneous populations where indi-
viduals are characterized by a multidimensional parameter instead of a single dimensional
skill parameter. He adopted the same approach as he used in his original 1971 study and
derived rst order conditions for the optimal tax schedule. However, these conditions were
even more complicated than in the unidimensional case and thus it proved impossible to
obtain results or interpret the rst order conditions in that general case. It is nonetheless
possible to manipulate the rst order conditions of the general case considered in Mirrlees
  18 Equation   (13) linking the virtual density h to the actual density h can be generalized to the case of
heterogeneous populations.


                                                      22
(1986) in order to recover formula (14). Therefore, the elasticity method is a powerful
tool to understand the economics of optimal income taxation and is certainly a necessary
step to take to extend in a fruitful way the model to heterogeneous populations. The
rigorous analysis of the multi-dimensional case is out of the scope of the present paper
and is left for future research.
    Formula (14) could also be used to pursue a positive analysis of actual tax schedules.
Considering the actual tax schedule T (:) and the actual income distribution                   H (:),   and
making assumptions about the patterns of elasticities (uz) and (cz) , it is also possible to use
equation (14) to infer the marginal social weights g (z ). Even if the government does not
explicitly maximize welfare, it may be interesting to know what are the implicit weights
that the government is using. For example, if some of the weights appear to be negative
then the tax schedule is not second-best Pareto eÆcient.19

    Link with Previous Studies
    As discussed in Section 2, Roberts (1999) has obtained a formula equivalent to (19)
using also a perturbation approach. His perturbation induces all taxpayers in a small
band of income to bunch at the upper end of the band. His derivation is perhaps less
transparent than the present one because it is obtained using Taylor expansions and does
not decompose the tax revenue changes into income and substitution e ects. Moreover,
his approach relies on the assumption that there is only one type of individual at each
income level as in the Mirrlees (1971) model.
    The derivation presented here is also close to the demand pro le approach used in
the literature on optimal nonlinear pricing for a regulated monopoly (see Wilson (1993)).
The nonlinear price problem is formally equivalent to the optimal income tax problem
with constant welfare weights g (z ). Moreover, the non-linear pricing literature generally
assumes away income e ects. In that particular case, the non-linear pricing literature
  19 This   analysis has been used frequently in the commodity taxation literature where it is known as the
inverse optimum problem (see e.g. Ahmad and Stern (1984)).



                                                     23
has been able to derive optimal pricing formulas directly in terms of demand pro les
and express optimal pricing formulas as a simple inverse elasticity rule that is formally
equivalent to formula (14) with no income e ects and constant weights g (z ). In the
income tax case, the demand pro le elasticity becomes the elasticity of the number of
taxpayers above a given income level z (i.e. 1 H (z )) with respect to (one minus) the
marginal rate at z (i.e. 1 T 0 (z )).20 In the case of the income tax, it is more convenient
to express optimal tax formulas in terms of standard labor supply elasticities rather than
the \demand pro le" elasticity. Nonetheless, it is perhaps surprising that the optimal
income tax literature before Diamond (1998) did not consider more seriously the case
with no income e ect which is standard in the nonlinear pricing literature because it is
very convenient to solve and analyze.

    Optimal Asymptotic Rates
   It is possible to recover the high income optimal tax formula (9) from Section 3 using
equation (14) for large z.21 With large z , g (z ) tends to g, and the ratio (1 H )=(zh )
tends to 1=a when the tail is Paretian. Assuming that elasticities converge, the exponential
                                                         u =c
term in (14) is approximately equal to (z=z)1      and thus the fact that h(z ) is Paretian
implies that the integral term in (14) tends to (1 g)a=[a (1 u =c)]. Putting together
these results, one can obtain (9).
    Diamond (1998) obtained this formula in the case with no income e ects but expressed
the formula in terms of the Pareto parameter of the skill distribution instead of the income
distribution.22 Using Lemma 1, it can be shown that the Pareto parameter of the income
distribution is equal to the Pareto parameter of the skill distribution divided by 1 + u.
This shows that, as discussed in Section 3, the Pareto parameter                 a   is independent of
the limiting tax rate in the Mirrlees model. Roberts (1999) also obtained an asymptotic
  20 See   Saez (1999b) for more details.
  21 Saez   (1999a) discusses this point in detail.
  22 That    is why his table of high income optimal tax rates is not directly comparable to the results
presented in Table 1. He also confused a and 1 + a when selecting examples.


                                                    24
formula that is close to equation (9). However, the basic methodology of Section 3 is a
much easier way to obtain the same optimal tax rate result for high incomes than going
through the asymptotics of the general formula.


5        Numerical simulations

5.1          Methodology


As we saw in the previous section, there are three key elements that determin optimal
tax rates: elasticities, the shape of the income distribution and redistributive tastes of
the government. In the simulations, careful attention is paid to the calibration of each of
these parameters.
      Simulations are presented using utility functions with constant compensated elastic-
ity    c.   This provides a useful benchmark because the compensated elasticity is the key
parameter empirical studies. Even though there is empirical evidence showing that elas-
ticities may be higher at the low end and the high end of the income distribution (see e.g.,
Blundell (1992) and Gruber and Saez (2000)), it is useful to start with the case of constant
elasticities in order to see how optimal tax rates should be set in that benchmark case. It
is fairly simple to adapt the simulation methodology to the case of varying elasticities.23
      As we saw, for a given compensated elasticity, varying income e ects a ects optimal
rates. Therefore, in the simulations, I use two types of utility functions with constant
elasticities. With utility functions of Type I,

                                                          l1+k
                                           u   = log(c
                                                   );                            (20)
                                               1+k
there are no income e ects. The elasticity (uncompensated and compensated) is equal to
1=k. This case was examined theoretically by Atkinson (1990) and Diamond (1998).
  23 This    is attempted by Gruber and Saez (2000) in a simpler four-bracket optimal income tax setting.




                                                     25
   Type II utility functions are such that,
                                                           l1+k
                                  u   = log(c)   log(1 +          ):                      (21)
                                                           1+k
The compensated elasticity is equal to 1=k but there are income e ects. The uncompen-
sated elasticity  u can be shown to tend to zero when n tends to in nity.
   It is important to keep in mind that the utility functions should be chosen so as to
replicate the empirical elasticities and that l does not necessarily represent hours of work.
As a result, Type I utility function, where l tends to in nity for large n, is clearly not
realistic when l represents hours of work but is nevertheless appropriate if we think that
income e ects are much smaller than substitution e ects.
   As discussed in Section 3, there is controversy in the empirical literature about the size
of the elasticity. I chose two values for the compensated elasticity parameters    c   = 0:25
and   c   = 0:5. These values fall within the middle range of empirical estimates. There is
also some controversy in the literature about the size of income e ects. In most but not
all studies, income e ects are of modest size (see Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)).
   I use the earnings distribution of year 1992 from tax return data to perform numerical
simulations. Formula (14) cannot be directly applied using the empirical income distri-
bution because the income distribution is a ected by taxation. Therefore, it is useful to
come back to the Mirrlees formulation and use an exogenous skill distribution to perform
numerical simulations. The main innovation is that the skill distribution is calibrated
such that, given the utility function chosen and the actual tax schedule, the resulting
income distribution replicates the empirical earnings distribution. Previous simulations
almost always used log-normal skill distributions which match globally unimodal empir-
ical distributions but approximate very poorly empirical distributions at the tails (both
top and bottom tails). Moreover, changing the elasticity parameter without changing the
skill distribution, as usually done in numerical simulations, might be misleading because
changing the elasticities modi es the resulting income distribution and thus might a ect
optimal rates also through this indirect e ect.

                                                 26
     Optimal rates simulations are performed using two di erent social welfare criteria,
Utilitarian and Rawlsian. Because for both types of utility functions,                uc    ! 0 as n !
1,    
      g   is always equal to zero and thus the asymptotic rates are the same with both
welfare criteria. In the case of the Utilitarian criterion, social marginal weights g (z ) are
proportional to uc which is approximately decreasing at the rate 1=c. Optimal rates are
computed such that the ratio of government spending E to aggregate production is equal
to 0.25. The original Mirrlees (1971) method of computation is used and the details are
presented in appendix.


5.2        Results


Optimal marginal rates are plotted on Figure 5 for yearly wage incomes between $0 and
$300,000. The curves represent the optimal non-linear marginal rates and the dashed
horizontal lines represent the optimal linear rates (see below). As expected, the level
of the optimal rates depends on the level of elasticities and on the type of the utility
function. In all four cases, however, the optimal rates are clearly U-shaped.24 Optimal
rates are decreasing from $0 to $75,000 and then increase until income level $200,000.
Above $200,000, the optimal rates are close to their asymptotic level. This U-shape
pattern is strikingly close to many actual tax schedules. The high rates at the bottom
obtained in the simulations correspond to the phasing-out of the guaranteed income level.
As in actual systems, the simulations suggest that the government should apply high
rates at the bottom in order to target welfare only to low incomes. In most countries,
rates drop signi cantly once welfare programs are phased-out and tax rates are in general
increasing at high income levels because most income tax systems are progressive. In the
simulations presented, tax rates increase at high income levels because of the shape of
the income distribution (as discussed above) and because of the redistributive tastes of
the government. Note that the increasing pattern of tax rates due to U-shape pattern of
  24 The   rate at the bottom is not zero because labor supply tends to zero as the skill   n   tends to zero,
violating one of the assumptions of Seade (1977).


                                                    27
the ratio (1      H )=(zh)   cannot be obtained with a log-normal skill distribution because in
that case, the ratio (1       H )=(zh)   is always decreasing. The increasing pattern of marginal
rates at the high end depends of course on the assumption of constant elasticities and
might be reversed if elasticities are increasing with income (Gruber and Saez (2000)).
   As expected, the Rawlsian criterion leads to higher marginal rates. The di erence in
rates between the two welfare criteria is larger at low incomes and decreases smoothly
toward 0 (the asymptotic rates are the same).
   I have also reported in dashed lines on Figure 5, the optimal linear rates computed
for the same utility functions, welfare criteria and skill distribution (the upper one corre-
sponding to      c   = 0:25 and the lower one to      c   = 0:5). The optimal linear rates are also
computed so that government spending over total earnings be equal to 0.25. Table 2 re-
ports the optimal average marginal rates weighted by income in the non-linear case along
with the optimal linear rate.25 The guaranteed consumption levels of people with skill
zero (who supply zero labor and thus earn zero income) in terms of average income are
also reported. As average incomes di er in the linear and non-linear cases, I also report
(in parentheses) the ratio of the guaranteed income for the linear case to the guaranteed
income for the non-linear case: this ratio allows a simple comparison between the absolute
levels of consumption of the poorest individuals in the linear and non-linear case.
   The average marginal rates are substantially lower in the non-linear cases than in the
linear cases. The guaranteed levels of consumption are slightly higher in relative terms
in the linear cases (than in the non-linear cases) but as average earnings are lower in the
linear cases, the absolute levels are similar. Therefore, non-linear taxation is signi cantly
more eÆcient than linear taxation to redistribute income. In particular, it is better from
an eÆciency point of view to have high marginal rates at the bottom (which corresponds
to the phasing out of the guaranteed income level).
   Mirrlees (1971) found much smaller optimal marginal rates in the simulations he pre-
sented. Rates were slightly decreasing along the income distribution and the levels around
  25 The   asymptotic rate in the non-linear case is reported in parentheses.


                                                     28
20% to 30%. The smaller rates he found were the consequence of two e ects. First, the
utility function he chose (u = log(c) + log(1        l))   implies high elasticities. Income e ects
are constant with  = 0:5 and compensated elasticities are large with  c decreasing from
around 1 (at the bottom decile) to 0.5 (at the top decile). These high elasticities lead
to low optimal tax rates. Second, the log-normal distribution for skills implies that the
hazard ration (1    H (z ))=(zh(z ))   is decreasing over the income distribution and tends to
zero as income tends to in nity. This implied a decreasing pattern of optimal rates.
    Subsequently, Tuomala (1990) presented simulations of optimal rates using utility
functions with smaller elasticities. As in Stern (1976) for the linear tax case, Tuomala
(1990) used the concept of elasticity of substitution between consumption and leisure to
calibrate utility functions. This concept does not map in any simple way into the concepts
of income e ects and elasticities used in the present paper. Tuomala's utility function
implies that compensated elasticity are around 0.5 but income e ects are unrealistically
large (   '   1) implying negative uncompensated elasticities. Unsurprisingly, he found
higher tax rates but the pattern of optimal rates was still regressive, from around 60% at
the bottom to around 25% at 99th percentile because of the shape of the skill distribution.
Kanbur and Tuomala (1994) noticed that it is important to calibrate the log-normal skill
distribution indirectly so that the income distribution inferred from the skill distribution
matches the actual distribution. They obtained optimal tax rates substantially higher
than previous simulations and closer to those presented here.


6     Conclusion

Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates is a fruitful method for a number of
reasons. First, it is straightforward to obtain an optimal tax formula for high incomes.
The literature following Mirrlees (1971) on optimal income taxation had not been able
to obtain this simple formula. Using elasticity estimates from the empirical literature,
the formula for asymptotic top rates suggests that marginal rates for labor income should


                                                29
not be lower than 50% and may be as high as 80%. Second, the elasticity method has
the advantage of showing precisely how the di erent economic e ects come into play
and which are the relevant parameters for optimal taxation. The original maximization
method of Mirrlees (1971) was much more complicated and did not allow such a simple
economic interpretation. Third, because optimal tax formulas are expressed in terms of
parameters that can be observed or estimated, numerical simulations can be performed
and calibrated using the empirical income distribution.
   My analysis can be extended in several ways. First, the ratios zm =z and (1   H (z ))=(zh)

introduced in Sections 3 and 4 are closely linked to optimal pattern of marginal rates and
can be fruitfully examined using empirical income distributions. It would be interesting to
compute these ratios for other years and countries to see whether the U-shape pattern is
universal or speci c to the US. Second, the general framework under which the approach
used here to derive optimal tax rates is valid, needs still to be worked out precisely.
Last, it might be fruitful to apply the same methodology to other tax and redistribution
problems. In particular, the issue of optimal tax rates at the bottom of income distribution
deserves more attention in order to cast light on the important problem of designing
income maintenance programs.




                                            30
                                                                 APPENDIX
     Deriving the Mirrlees optimal tax formula
     Each individual chooses l to maximize u(nl                                       T (nl); l),     which implies, n(1              T 0 (zn ))uc +

ul   = 0. Di erentiating un with respect to n, we have du=dn =                                                   lul =n.   Following Mirrlees
(1971), in the maximization program of the government,                                                    un     is regarded as the state
variable,      ln   as the control variable while                           cn   is determined implicitly as a function of                       un

and    ln   from the equation                   un   = u(cn; ln ). The government maximizes equation (10) by
choosing       ln   and    un   subject to equation (11) and                             du=dn        =        lul =n.     Denoting by      p   and
(n)   the corresponding multipliers, we obtain (see Mirrlees (1971), equation (33)),
                      0        1                                       Z1                                 !
                                                                                             G0 (um )
                           (n)                                   (n)
                          ul
                      @n + (n) A f (n) =                                          1
                                                                 l
                                                                                  ( m)
                                                                                                              Tnm f (m)dm;                      (22)
                                    uc                           n      n        uc               p
                                R m ls ucl (cs ;ls )
where Tnm = exp[                    n     suc (cs ;ls )
                                                          ds].         is de ned such that (u; l) =                      lul (c; l)   where c is a
function of (u; l) such that u = u(c; l). An superscript (n) means that the corresponding
function is estimated at (cn ; ln; un ).

     Proof of Lemma 1
     z_n =zn   = (ln + nl_n )=(nln ) and                = l(wn ; Rn ) where wn = n(1 T 0 ) is the net-of-tax
                                                            ln

wage rate and Rn = nln                        T (nln ) nln (1 T 0 ) is the virtual income of an individual with

skill n. I note l(w; R) the uncompensated labor supply function. Therefore,

                                     @l                                                      @l
                          l_n   =          [1        T0      n(nl_n     + ln )T 00 ] +            (nl_n + ln )(nln T 00 );
                                    @w                                                    @R
and rearranging,

                                         wn @l l                       @l        wn @l        nln T 00
                            l_n =                         + [wn                          ]                    [ln + nl_n ]:
                                          l @w n                     @R          l @w n(1             T 0)
Using the de nitions (1) and (2) along with the Slutsky equation (4),



                                                                             31
                                                           ln            ln T 00
                                              l_n   = u          z_n               c:
                                                           n            1     T0
and therefore,

                                   z_n       nl_n   + ln        1 + u                T 00
                                         =                 =                   z_n            c;
                                   zn           nln   1 T0        n
which is exactly (12). The second order condition for individual maximization is z_n  0.
Therefore, if (12) leads to z_n < 0, this means that T 0 decreases too fast producing a
discontinuity in the income distribution.                   k
     Proof of Proposition 1
     In order to rewrite equation (22) in terms of elasticities, I rst derive formulas for  u,
c   and      as a function of the utility function                 u   and its derivatives. The uncompensated
labor supply l(w; R) is obtained implicitly from the rst order condition of the individual
maximization program,             wuc    + ul = 0. Di erentiating this condition with respect to           l; w

and R leads to,


                [uccw2 + 2ucl w + ull ]dl + [uc + uccwl + ucl l]dw + [uccw + ulc]dR = 0:

Replacing w by         ul =uc ,   the following formulas for  u and  are obtained,

                                             ul =l  (ul =uc)2 ucc + (ul =uc)ucl
                                   u    =                                      ;                          (23)
                                             ull + (ul =uc )2 ucc 2(ul =uc )ucl


                                    (ul =uc)2 ucc + (ul =uc)ucl
                                        =                       ;
                              ull + (ul =uc )2 ucc 2(ul =uc )ucl
and using the Slutsky equation (4),

                                                                  ul =l
                                    c   =                     :                     (24)
                                    + (ul =uc) cc 2(ul =uc)ucl
                                             ull                 2u

The rst order condition of the individual n(1 T 0 )uc + ul = 0 implies n + ul =uc = nT 0 =
 (ul =uc)T 0 =(1 T 0 ). Therefore (22) can rst be rewritten as follows,

                                                                32
                                                 !Z 1                                                                                    !
            T0               l     1     F (n)                    G0 (um )u(cm) u(cn)                                      f ( m)
                    =                                       [1                              ]           Tnm                                  dm:   (25)
        1      T0          ul          nf (n)           n                     p                  ( m)
                                                                                                uc                    1        F (n)

      The rst part of (25) is equal to A(n) i                                      l =ul   = (1 +  u)= c.                    is de ned such that
    (u; l) =        lul (c; l)   where    c   is a function of (c; l) such that                           u    = u(c; l). Therefore, using
(23) and (24), simple algebra shows that                                  l =ul     = (1 +  u )= c:
      The integral term of (25) is equal to B (n) if it is shown that,

                                                 u(cn)
                                                                      Zm                   (us) z_s
                                          Tnm (m)           = exp[            (1                 )      ds]:
                                             uc                           n                (cs) zs

      By de nition of Tnm and expressing u(cn) =u(cm) as an integral,

                                                                 Zm           d log(u(cs) )              ls ucl
                                                                                                               ( s)
                                 Tnm u(cn) =u(cm)   = exp[            (                                        (s)
                                                                                                                      )ds]:                        (26)
                                                                  n                   ds                 suc
I note J (s) = (du(cs) =ds + lsu(cls) =s)=u(cs) the expression in (26) inside the integral. Now,
u(cs) = uc (cs ; ls ), therefore du(cs) =ds = u(ccs) c_s + ucl l_s . From du=dn = lul =n, I obtain
                                                            (s)


        + u(l s) l_s = u_ s = ls u(l s) =s. Substituting c_s from the latter into former, I obtain
u(cs) c_s

du(cs) =ds = [sl_s + ls ]ul ucc =(suc ) + ucl l_s . Substituting this expression for du(cs) =ds in J (s)

and using again the expressions (23) and (24), we have nally,
                                                                                          !                                !
                                                    2                         ls   + sl_s                c           u       z_s
                          J (s)    = [lul ucc=uc            lucl =uc ]                           =                                   ;
                                                                                   sls                         c              zs
which nishes the proof. Note that on bunching intervals included in (n; m), z_s = c_s = 0,
J (s)   = 0, and all the preceding equations remain true, and thus the proof goes through.
k
      Derivation of the formula for optimal rates (14) from formula (19)
      I note,

                                                            Z1                T0
                                              K (z )    =                               h (z 0 )dz 0 :
                                                             z            1         T0


                                                                      33
Equation (19) can be considered as a rst order di erential equation in K (z ), K 0 (z ) =
                                        R1    M S (z )
D (
   z )[C (
          z ) + K (
                   z )], where C (
                                  z ) = z [1   p
                                                       ]h(z )dz and D(z ) = =(z  c). Routine
integration using the method of the variation of the constant and taking into account
that K (1) = 0, leads to,

                                     Z1                                      Zz
                       K (
                          z)   =                D (z )C (z ) exp[                    D (z 0 )dz 0 ]dz:
                                         z                                     z

Integration by parts leads to,

                                    Z1                           Zz
                     K (
                        z)   =                C 0 (z ) exp[               D (z 0 )dz 0 ]dz            C (
                                                                                                         z ):           (27)
                                    z                               z

Di erentiation of (27) leads directly to (14).                 k
   Numerical Simulations.
   Separability of the utility function in labor and consumption simpli es the computa-
tions. Therefore, for Type I utility, I use u = c                         lk+1 =(k + 1),          and G(u) = log(u) (in the
utilitarian case). For Type II utilities,            u    = log(c)              log[1 + lk+1 =(k + 1)] and       G(u)   =   u

(in the utilitarian case). For both types of utility functions, optimal rates are computed
by solving a system of two di erential equations in u(n) and vr(n) = (n + ul=uc)= l . The
system of di erential equations can be written as follows,

                             dvr              vr          nf 0              1            G0 (u)
                                    =              (1 +          )                   +            ;
                               dn              n           f              nuc             pn
and du=dn =     lul =n.

   The system of di erential equations used to solve optimal rates depends on f (n)
through the expression nf 0 (n)=f (n). f (n) is derived from the empirical distribution of
wage income in such a way that the distribution of income z (n) = nl(n) inferred from f (n)
with at taxes (reproducing approximately the real tax schedule) matches the empirical
distribution. I check that the optimal solutions lead to increasing earnings zn which is a
necessary and suÆcient condition for individual second order conditions (Mirrlees (1971)).


                                                           34
REFERENCES
AHMAD, E. and STERN, N. H. (1984), \The Theory of Reform and Indian Indirect
Taxes", Journal of Public Economics, 25, 259-298.
ATKINSON, A. B. (1990), \Public Economics and the Economic Public", European Eco-
nomic Review, 34, 225-248.
BALLARD, C. L. and FULLERTON, D. (1992), \Distortionary Taxes and the Provision
of Public Goods", Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6, 117-131.
BLUNDELL, R. (1992), \Labour Supply and Taxation: A Survey", Fiscal Studies, 13,
15-40.
BLUNDELL, R. and MACURDY, T. (1999), \Labor Supply: A Review and Alterna-
tive Approaches", in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics
(Amsterdam: North-Holland), Volume 3A.
DALHBY, B. (1998), \Progressive Taxation and the Social Marginal Cost of Public
Funds", Journal of Public Economics, 67, 105-122.
DIAMOND, P. (1998), \Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern
of Optimal Marginal Tax Rates", American Economic Review, 88, 83-95.
DIXIT, A. K. and SANDMO, A. (1977), \Some Simpli ed Formulae for Optimal Income
Taxation", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 79, 417-423.
GRUBER, J. and SAEZ, E. (2000), \The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and
Implications", NBER Working Paper No. 7512.
KANBUR, R. and TUOMALA, M. (1994), \Inherent Inequality and the Optimal Grad-
uation of Marginal Tax Rates", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 96, 275-282.
MIRRLEES, J. A. (1971), \An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation",
Review of Economic studies, 38, 175-208.
MIRRLEES, J. A. (1986), \The Theory of Optimal Taxation" in K.J. Arrow and M.D.
Intrilligator (eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Economics (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
PARETO, V. (1965) Ecrits sur la Courbe de la Repartition de la Richesse (Geneve: Li-
brairie Droz).


                                           35
PIKETTY, T. (1997), \La Redistribution Fiscale face au Ch^omage", Revue Francaise
d'Economie, 12, 157-201.
REVESZ, J.T. (1989), \The Optimal Taxation of Labour Income", Public Finance, 44,
453-475.
ROBERTS, K. (1999), \A Reconsideration of the Optimal Income Tax", Unpublished
NuÆeld College mimeograph.
SADKA, E. (1976), \On Income Distribution, Incentive E ects and Optimal Income
Taxation", Review of Economic Studies, 42, 261-268.
SAEZ, E. (1999a), \Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates", Chapter 1,
MIT Ph.D. Thesis.
SAEZ, E. (1999b), \A Characterization of the Income Tax Schedule Minimizing Dead-
weight Burden", Chapter 2, MIT Ph.D. Thesis.
SEADE, J. K. (1977), \On the Shape of Optimal Tax Schedules", Journal of Public
Economics, 7, 203-236.
SEADE, J. K. (1982), \On the Sign of the Optimum Marginal Income Tax", Review of
Economic Studies, 49, 637-643.
SLEMROD, J. (2000) Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich
(Cambridge University Press), forthcoming.
STERN, N. H. (1976), \On the Speci cation of Models of Optimal Taxation", Journal of
Public Economics, 6, 123-162.
TUOMALA, M. (1990) Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution (Oxford: Clarendon
Press).
WILSON, R. B. (1993) Nonlinear Pricing (Oxford: Oxford University Press).




                                         36
                                     FIGURE 1 − High Income Tax Rate Perturbation

                          Before Reform Schedule
                          After Reform Schedule




                                                                         slope 1−τ
After Tax Income z−T(z)




                                                                            slope 1−τ−dτ
                                                                   − dτ
                                                                dR=z
                                                                         Uncompensated Change




                                                            −
                                                            z
                     0
                                                   Before Tax Income z
                    FIGURE 2 − Ratio mean income above z divided by z, zm/z, years 1992 and 1993

             5                                                           5
                                          year 1992                                                      year 1992
                                          year 1993                                                      year 1993
             4                                                           4
Coefficient zm/z




                                                            Coefficient zm/z
             3                                                           3


             2                                                           2


             1                                                           1
                   $0   $100K $200K $300K $400K $500K                          $10K   $100K    $1,000K     $10,000K
                             Wage Income z                                              Wage Income z
                                     FIGURE 3 − Local Marginal Tax Rate Perturbation


                          Before Reform Schedule
                          After Reform Schedule




                                                                                  − dτ
                                                                                 dz
After Tax Income z−T(z)




                                                   slope 1−τ


                                                   slope 1−τ−dτ




                                                   Substitution     Income
                                                   Effect           Effect




                                              z−                  − −
                                                                  z+dz
                                                       Before Tax Income z
                                      FIGURE 4 − Hazard Ratio (1−H(z))/(zh(z)), years 1992 and 1993

                                1
                                                                                               year 1992
                                                                                               year 1993
                               0.9


                               0.8
Coefficient (1−H(z))/(zh(z))




                               0.7


                               0.6


                               0.5


                               0.4


                               0.3


                               0.2


                               0.1


                                0
                                 $0        $100,000     $200,000      $300,000      $400,000      $500,000
                                                             Wage Income z
                                             FIGURE 5 − Optimal Tax Simulations
                           Utilitarian Criterion, Utility type I                                     Utilitarian Criterion, Utility type II
                     1                                                                         1

                    0.8                                                                       0.8                               ζc=0.25
Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                          Marginal Tax Rate
                                                      c
                                                     ζ =0.25
                    0.6                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                ζc=0.5
                    0.4                              ζc=0.5                                   0.4

                    0.2                                                                       0.2

                     0                                                                         0
                      $0       $100,000    $200,000            $300,000                         $0        $100,000    $200,000            $300,000
                                    Wage Income z                                                              Wage Income z

                           Rawlsian Criterion, Utility type I                                        Rawlsian Criterion, Utility type II
                     1                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                ζc=0.25
                    0.8                                                                       0.8
Marginal Tax Rate




                                                                          Marginal Tax Rate




                                                      c
                                                     ζ =0.25
                                                                                                                                 c
                    0.6                                                                       0.6                               ζ =0.5


                    0.4                              ζc=0.5                                   0.4

                    0.2                                                                       0.2

                     0                                                                         0
                      $0       $100,000    $200,000            $300,000                         $0        $100,000    $200,000            $300,000
                                    Wage Income z                                                              Wage Income z
                      TABLE 1 -       Optimal Tax Rates for High Income Earners

              Uncompensated Elasticity = 0           Uncompensated Elasticity = 0.2          Uncompensated Elasticity = 0.5

                 Compensated Elasticity                  Compensated Elasticity                  Compensated Elasticity
                0.2         0.5         0.8              0.2         0.5        0.8                0.5              0.8
                (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)                (7)              (8)
Panel A: social marginal utility with infinite income g = 0
Pareto
Parameter
    1.5         91        80           71             77             69         63                  57              53
     2          83        67           56             71             59         50                  50              43
    2.5         77        57           45             67             51         42                  44              37

Panel B: social marginal utility with infinite income g = 0.25
Pareto
Parameter
    1.5         88          75          65               71          63         56                  50              45
     2          80          60          48               65          52         43                  43              37
    2.5         71          50          38               60          44         32                  38              31

g is the ratio of social marginal utility with infinite income over marginal value of public funds. The Pareto parameter
of the income distribution takes values 1.5, 2, 2.5. Optimal rates are computed according to formula (9).
                                                TABLE 2 - Numerical Simulations of Optimal Taxes




                                              Utilitarian Criterion                               Rawlsian Criterion
                                             Compensated Elasticity                              Compensated Elasticity
                                            0.25                 0.5                           0.25                  0.5
                                 Non-linear     Linear    Non-linear   Linear       Non-linear     Linear    Non-linear    Linear
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)             (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

Panel A: Utility Type I (no income effects)

Optimal Average Rate                0.51        0.61         0.38      0.51            0.68         0.80        0.52       0.67
(Asymptotic Rate)                  (0.68)                   (0.51)                    (0.68)                   (0.51)

Guaranteed Income Level            0.33          0.36        0.21       0.26           0.55         0.55        0.42        0.42
(linear over non-linear level)                  (1.03)                 (1.09)                      (0.92)                  (0.87)

Panel B: Utility Type II (income effects)

Optimal Average Rate                0.59        0.67         0.48      0.60            0.77         0.88        0.65       0.82
(Asymptotic Rate)                  (0.81)                   (0.69)                    (0.81)                   (0.69)

Guaranteed Income Level            0.40          0.42        0.31       0.35           0.60         0.63        0.50        0.57
(linear over non-linear level)                  (1.00)                 (1.01)                      (0.92)                  (0.92)


In the non-linear case, optimal rates are averaged with income weights; asymptotic rates are reported in parentheses below average
rates. The guaranteed income level is expressed in percentage of average income. The ratio of the absolute guranteed level in the
linear case over the absolute guaranteed level in the non-linear case is reported in parentheses.
