                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE MEANING OF PATENT CITATIONS:
                           REPORT ON THE NBER/CASE-WESTERN
                             RESERVE SURVEY OF PATENTEES


                                           Adam B. Jaffe
                                          Manuel Trajtenberg
                                          Michael S. Fogarty


                                          Working Paper 7631
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7631

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




Helpful comments from Sam Kortum (including the suggestion to describe the “control” patent in the survey
as a “placebo”) are gratefully acknowledged. Financial support was provided by the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, via the Project on Industrial Technology and Productivity at the NBER. The views expressed,
and responsibility for all errors, lie with the authors.

© 2000 by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg and Michael S. Fogarty. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Meaning of Patent Citations: Report on the NBER/Case-Western
Reserve Survey of Patentees
Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Michael S. Fogarty
NBER Working Paper No. 7631
April 2000
JEL No. O3


                                            ABSTRACT

       A survey of recent patentees was conducted to elicit their perceptions regarding the
importance of their inventions, the extent of their communication with other inventors, and the
relationship of both importance and communication to observed patent citations. A cohort of 1993
patentees were asked specifically about 2 patents that they had cited, and a third “placebo” patent
that was similar but which they did not cite. One of the two cited inventors was also surveyed. We
find that inventors report significant communication, at least some of which is in forms that suggests
spillovers from the cited inventor to the citing inventor. The perception of such communication was
substantively and statistically significantly greater for the cited patents than for the placebos. There
is, however, a large amount of noise in citations data; it appears that something like one-half of all
citations do not correspond to any perceived communication, or even necessarily to a perceptible
technological relationship between the inventions. We also find a significant correlation between
the number of citations a patent received and its importance (both economic and technological) as
perceived by the inventor.

Adam B. Jaffe                                          Manuel Trajtenberg
Brandeis University                                    Tel Aviv University
Waltham, MA 02454-9110                                 Tel Aviv 69978
and NBER                                               ISRAEL
ajaffe@brandeis.edu                                    and NBER
                                                       manuel@ccsg.tau.ac.il

Michael S. Fogarty
Center for Regional Economic Issues
Case-Western Reserve University
Cleveland, OH 44106
mfogart@ibm.net
modes of their communication with earlier inventors, and about the extent to which the
appearance of citations in their patents is indicative of this communication. The results
suggest that such communication is important, and that patent citations do provide an
indication of communication, albeit one that also carries a fair amount of noise.


    2.   Survey Design
         The idea for the survey emerged from a series of interviews with patent attorneys,
R&D directors, and inventors for a project on commercialization of federal lab
technology.3 We quickly learned that each brought a different perspective and a different
willingness to discuss patent citations.         Patent attorneys were least willing to share
information about citations; R&D directors represented the organization’s broader
strategic perspective; and the inventor clearly had the best knowledge of R&D spillover
mechanisms. These discussions suggested to us that patent citations are a noisy but
potentially valuable indicator of both the importance of the technology as well as the
extent of knowledge spillovers. But it also became clear that the inventors were an
under-exploited source of insight into these issues. Given that the inventors are all
identified on the computerized patent records, we decided to undertake a systematic
survey of inventors to learn their views about knowledge flows, patent citations, and the
relationship between them.


          We began by first developing questions to explore the validity of patent citations
for analyzing the technological and commercial importance of patents as well as their use
in evaluating knowledge spillovers (The surveys for citing and cited inventors are
reproduced in the Appendix.) After developing draft questions, we tested the survey on a


2
  A partial exception is Jaffe, Fogarty and Banks (1998), in which a limited number of interviews with
    inventors were used to shed light on the relationship between citations and knowledge flows.
3
  These interviews were conducted by two of the authors during 1996. See Adam B. Jaffe, Michael S.
    Fogarty, and Bruce A. Banks, “Evidence from Patents and Patent Citations on the Impact of NASA and
    other Federal Labs on Commercial Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, V. XLVI (June 1998),
    No. 2, 183-205. The interviews included: the Electro-Physics Branch (EPB)chief, EPB personnel,
    selected firms working with EPB, NASA-Lewis’ patent attorney, TRW’s patent attorney, BF Goodrich’s
    director of Corporate Technology (Specialty Chemicals Division), Picker, International’s patent
    attorney, Picker’s Director of Technology Marketing, Owens-Corning’s R&D Director, Owens-
    Corning’s patent attorney, and a former R&D director of GE’s engine division.


                                                       2
sample of inventors. The test group consisted of twenty inventors drawn from four types
of institutions: universities, government labs, research hospitals, and industry. The draft
survey was then revised to incorporate the inventors’ numerous comments and
suggestions.

       A. Selection Criteria and Qualifying 1993 Patents
       Our goals for the survey were to learn about the mechanisms and pathways by
which inventors learn of previous work, and to test or measure the extent to which
citations are a useful proxy for knowledge flows and/or the technological significance of
patents. We surveyed two groups, one in which we asked inventors about citations made
in their patents to previous patents (the “citing inventor” survey), and one in which we
asked inventors about citations received by their patents from subsequent patents (the
“cited inventor” survey). Our expectation, based on the interviews we had conducted
with a small number of inventors and other research personnel, was that citing inventors
would be inclined to understate their reliance on the work of prior inventors, while cited
inventors would tend to overstate the extent to which they had influenced those who
came after. By surveying both groups, we hoped to “triangulate” (Helper, 2000) and get
a more robust picture of the knowledge flows.


       Since communication or knowledge flows are inherently difficult to measure
quantitatively, the best we could hope to get from inventors was qualitative rankings on a
Likert scale.    This means that, whatever answers we got about the extent of
communication, it would be hard to say whether the reported communication between
citing and cited inventors was significant or not.      To overcome this problem, we
introduced into the “citing” inventor surveys “placebo” patents.       That is, we asked
inventors about their communication with the inventors of several previous patents, some
of which were cited by the surveyed inventor’s patent, and some of which were not. Of
course, the citing inventors were not told that any of the previous patents were
“placebos.” All of the previous patents were referred to in the survey as “cited patents.”
The “placebo” patents were chosen to match the cited patents by technology class and
date. Our basic strategy then is to compare the rankings of the citation and placebo



                                                3
patents, and look for statistically and economically significant differences between the
responses for the citations and the responses for the placebo patents.


           Because tens of thousands of patents are granted to American inventors every
year, there is a large universe from which to pick a sample for a survey of patentees.
From this universe, we selected samples of citing and cited inventors. The samples were
designed to be unbiased along the important dimensions, while taking into account cost
constraints, as well as a desire to focus on inventions recent enough that the inventors
would have good recall of the events surrounding them. At the same time, we wanted
patents that were old enough so that there would be significant citation information
related to them. In balancing these considerations, we chose 1993 patents for the citing
inventor survey. For the cited inventor survey, we identified patents cited by 1993
patents, which were issued in 1985 or later. In order to allow the citing inventor survey
to cover also older citations, we included there questions about other citations going back
to 1975.


      To select the patents for the citing inventor survey, we began by identifying all U.S.
patents granted in 1993 that meet the following criteria:
           1) The principal (first listed) inventor should have a U.S. address.4
           2) The patents should contain 3 or more citations made to patents issued 1985 or
              later, which themselves meet the following criteria:
              a) There should be no inventor on a cited patent that is the same as the
                 inventor on the 1993 citing patent.
              b) The assignee on the cited patent should not be the same as the assignee on
                 the 1993 citing patent.
           3) In addition to the 3 post-1985 citations, patents should have 1 or more
              additional citations to patents issued 1975 or later.


           The selection criteria produced 14,762 “citing” patents. Based on desired sample
size, expected response rates and resource constraints, we decided on an initial stratified
target sample of approximately 600 citing inventors to be surveyed. A stratified sample


4
    This requirement was meant to maximize the chances of actually finding the inventor.


                                                          4
was called for because we believe that the patterns of knowledge flows (as well as
inventors’ ability to recall) might be different for more “important” patents,      and we
know from previous research that most patents are relatively “unimportant” (at least as
measured by citation counts). Thus, the sample was designed so as to oversample from
more highly cited (and hence presumably more important) patents. First, we included all
of the 100 most cited 1993 patents that otherwise met our criteria. (Each of these had at
least 10 citations.) In addition, we drew a random sample of those patents with 4 or more
citations, and a separate random sample of those that received 1-3 citations. We did not
survey any patents that themselves received zero citations.


       Each of the citing inventors was queried about 3 earlier patents, two actual
citations that appeared on their patent (one granted after 1985, and the other after 1975)
and a “placebo” that does not appear among the citations on their patent, but that matches
the second cited patent by technology class and grant year. For the cited inventor survey,
we identified the primary inventor of the first citation about which the citing inventor was
queried (the cited patent granted after 1985). This inventor was queried about her patent,
the citing patent, and the relationship between the two (that is, there were no “placebos”
in the cited inventor surveys.)


       We then undertook the time-consuming task of searching for addresses and
telephone numbers, both in internet directories (Yahoo, Excite, Lycos), and in other
sources such as the 1998 edition of CD ROM 88 Million.Phone Book. In the end, 1306
surveys were mailed to inventors, approximately equally divided between citing and cited
inventors. Of these, 165 were returned as undeliverable. After the initial mailing, a
reminder postcard was sent; inventors who had not responded within about two months
were sent a second copy of the survey. In addition, about 150 inventors who had not
responded, but whose counterpart citing/cited inventor had responded, were contacted by
telephone to encourage their participation. Based on these calls, we estimate that at least
10% of the remaining possible respondents never received copies of the survey.
Therefore, the actual number of possible respondents came down to slightly over 1,000.




                                                 5
           In the end, we have 166 partial or complete responses to the citing survey, and
214 partial or complete responses to the cited inventor survey. Of these, 72 represent
matched pairs. The combined gross return rate is about 30%, while the return rate
adjusted for the likely undelivered surveys is about 37%.


           The mailing included a cover letter describing the purpose of the survey, the
survey questionnaire, and abstracts of the relevant patents. Each abstract and associated
information was copied from the USPTO and Community of Science web sites. These
were then combined with the standard questionnaire format.5 The citing inventors were
thus sent information on 4 patents (theirs plus the 2 citations and the placebo), whereas
the cited inventor was sent information on two patents (theirs and the citing patent).


           As can be seen in the Appendix, the questions asked fall into 3 broad categories.
First are questions that ask each inventor about her patent, without regard to its
relationship to other patents (questions 1-6 both in the citing and cited inventor surveys).
Second are the group of questions that focus on the extent, timing, and nature of any
learning that the citing inventor may have gotten from the cited invention (questions 7-10
in the citing inventor survey and 7-9 in the cited inventor survey). Finally, we asked two
questions about the technological relationship between the cited and citing inventions
(questions 11-12 in the citing inventor survey and 10-11 in the cited inventor survey).
Despite their placement at the end of the survey, we begin by examining the answers
regarding the technological relationship between the inventions. We then turn to the
communication questions, including the issue of whether the citing and cited inventors
differ in their assessment of the extent of communication that may have occurred.
Finally, we examine for all of the surveyed inventors whether their perceptions regarding
the economic and technological significance of their inventions is correlated with the
number of citations the patents received.




5
    A number of inventors said that patent claims would have provided more useful information on the patent
      than the abstract. Consequently, any future survey should probably include also the patent claims.


                                                          6
3. Citations and the Technological Relationship Between Inventions
       The decision by the patent examiner that patent X must cite patent Y is supposed
to indicate that patent Y represents prior art upon which patent X builds. Based on
conversations with inventors and patent attorneys, it seemed to us that the nature of the
technological relationship that this represents could take one or both of two generic
forms. It could be that patent X represents an alternative way of doing something that
patent Y did before. (For example, you built a better mousetrap by using titanium in the
spring; I built a better mousetrap by using zirconium in the spring.) Alternatively, it
could be that patent X does something different than what patent Y does, but utilizes a
similar method to that used by patent Y, albeit for a different purpose. (You built a better
mousetrap by putting titanium in the spring; I built a better Jack-in-the-Box by putting
titanium in the spring.)6 We refer to the first of these possibilities as “similarity of
application” and the second as “similarity of technology.” As a first indication of the
meaning of citations, we explore the extent to which the inventors perceive that patents
linked by citation are related along these two dimensions.


           Figure 1 shows the distribution of responses for the citing inventors (combining
their answers to the two patents that they cited), and for the cited inventors. The top
panel presents the perceived relatedness in technology, and the bottom panel the
perceived relatedness in application. Overall, 44% of the citations did not rank above 2
on either relatedness dimension. This suggests a fair amount of noise in the citations, a
theme that will recur throughout this paper. At the other extreme, only 14% of the
citations were rated at 4 or greater on either relatedness dimension. In addition, the two
dimensions of relatedness are highly correlated, with a correlation coefficient of 0.62.


           As expected, the cited inventors tend to see a much higher degree of relatedness
between the citing and cited patents than do the citing inventors. From their perspective,
only 25% of the pairs score at 2 or less on both relatedness dimensions, while 37% score
4 or more on at least one dimension. Overall, the mean relatedness in application is 2.6


6
    In principle, the case where X does the same thing as Y, and does it in the same way, should not be
      observed, as in that case X is not novel and should not be patentable.


                                                            7
as perceived by the citing inventors and 3.3 as perceived by the cited inventors; the
corresponding means for relatedness of technology are 2.6 and 3.2. Further, for the 56
citation pairs where these questions were answered by both the citing and cited inventors,
the correlation between the different inventors’ answers is not very high (.14 for
application and .33 for technology). Indeed, the correlation between the citing inventor’s
rating on relatedness of technology and the cited inventor’s rating on relatedness in
application is higher (.37) than the correlation of their answers to the same questions.
This, combined with the high correlation across questions for a given respondent leads us
to believe that the respondents were not quite able to distinguish clearly between these
two dimensions. For this reason, we combined the two answers to form a composite
relatedness score that runs from 2 to 10.        Figure 2 shows the distribution of this
composite score for the cited patents (using the answers of both the citing and cited
inventors) and for the placebo patents. Despite the apparent ambiguity in the meaning of
the questions, and the relatively low consistency of answers for the matched pairs, it does
seem that the citations are clearly different from the placebos. Fully two-thirds of the
placebos were judged unrelated) on both dimensions (composite Likert score=2), and
only 10% merited a composite score of 5 or more, compared to 50% of the citations
meriting composite scores of 5 or more, even as judged by the citing inventors.


       The conclusion that we draw from these questions is that a cited patent is
significantly more likely to be perceived as related by technology and application than a
contemporaneous uncited patent in the same technology field. It does appear, however,
that a significant fraction of citations are to patents judged by the inventors themselves to
be unrelated, even if the judgment is made by the cited inventor. Further, the concepts of
relatedness in application and relatedness in technology do not seem to have been
successfully distinguished by the questionnaires. It is unclear whether this is because
they are not really effectively distinct concepts, or because the questionnaires were not
sufficiently clear about the distinction between them.




                                                 8
4. Results Regarding Extent, Timing and Nature of Communication

         I. General responses on sources of invention
         Question 6 in both surveys asked the inventors to check off one or two
“significant influences on the development of your invention.” Figure 3 shows the
fraction of respondents who selected each of the named influences. Not surprisingly, by
far the most frequently noted influence is “awareness of commercial opportunity,” noted
by almost 60% of all respondents.          “Technological opportunity,” in the form of
availability of computing power or new analytical tools, is cited by perhaps one-fifth of
the inventors.7 Influences that bear some connection to spillovers or communication are
also frequently noted: word of mouth, personal interaction or viewing a presentation or
demonstration (about 25%), joint work with others (about 10%) and technical or patent
literature (about 20%). The distribution of responses for the citing and cited inventors are
generally similar, although the cited inventors (patents granted between 1985 and 1992)
more often noted technical literature, new analytical tools and computing power than did
the citing inventors (patents granted in 1993).       Overall, the answers are generally
consistent with expectations, including a confirmation of a significant role for spillovers
in the process.

         B. Citing Inventor Responses
         Figures 4-7 show the distribution of responses of the citing inventors to questions
7-10 regarding their communication with the “cited” inventors. The actual wording of
each of these questions is shown in the Appendix. Figure 4 gives responses on a 5-point
Likert scale to a question regarding the overall degree of familiarity of the citing inventor
with the cited invention. For the patents that were in fact cited, 28% of the responses
indicated a 4 or 5 on the Likert scale, indicating high familiarity; just under half of the
respondents rated their familiarity at the low end of the scale. In contrast, over 80% of
the respondents rated their familiarity with the “placebo” patent at the lowest possible
level.




                                                 9
         Figure 5 indicates the inventors’ responses to a question regarding when they
learned about the “cited” invention.8 For the “true” citations, about 38% of respondents
indicated that they had learned about the cited invention either before or during the
development of their own invention. About one-third indicated that they had learned
about it after essentially completing their invention. Based partially on the responses to
the next question, we believe that this includes a significant number of cases where they
learned about the cited invention during the preparation of their own patent application.
A little less than one-third indicated that, despite the presence of the patent citation, they
had not learned about the cited invention before receiving our survey. This is not
surprising, because citations to inventions unknown to the inventor can be generated by
the inventor’s patent attorney or the patent office examiner.


         Figure 6 relates to a question regarding the mode of knowledge spillover. Even
for the “true” citations, only about 18% indicated that they had had either direct
communication or had been exposed to some kind of presentation or demonstration of the
cited invention. Another 18% indicated that they learned through “word of mouth” or
had read the patent document itself. Consistent with the answers regarding timing,
almost 40% indicated that it was the process of their own patent application that had
caused them to learn of the previous invention.


         Figure 7 presents the distribution of answers to a question that, perhaps
ambitiously, tried to get at the issue of the nature of assistance that the citing inventor
may have received from the cited invention. Respondents were given a set of choices
that we thought possible, and also invited to “write in” their own responses. About 60%
of the respondents indicated some specific way in which they had benefited from the
“cited” invention; the single most common response was that the cited invention
represented a concept that could be improved upon. The “other” responses stated by the


7
  A majority of the comments supplied in the “other” category also pertained to specific technical
    developments that facilitated the invention.
8
  Specifically, the question asks about when the inventor learned about the “research or work underlying
    the patented invention,” in order to include the possibility that the inventor knew about this work
    without being familiar with the specific embodiment of that work that is captured in the cited patent.


                                                         10
inventors provide some insight into the nature of possible interactions.                             Examples
include:
           “The technology from patent 1 was incorporated in the product which used my
           invention.”

           “new market for our new technology!”

           “The other patents gave credibility to our idea- they showed our ideas were
           'feasible' to the people not intimately involved in our idea.”

           Other explanations confirmed that many citations derive from the patent process
and probably are not related to any spillover:9
           “did not learn of patents before filing - therefore these patents were not a factor in
           our work”

           “a patent cited by the patent examiner with no direct ties to my patent”

           Assuming that these responses can be taken at face value (an issue we return to
below), they suggest that a significant, but not preponderant, fraction of the “links”
indicated by a patent citation correspond to some kind of spillover. Across the different
aspects captured by each of these questions, typically one-quarter of the responses
correspond to a fairly clear spillover; perhaps one-half of the answers indicate no
spillover, and the remaining quarter indicate some possibility of a spillover. It appears
that addition of citations by the inventor’s patent lawyer or the patent examiner is the
primary reason for citations to patents unknown to the inventor.


           Figures 4-7 suggest strongly that the extent of perceived spillover is greater for
the cited patents than for the placebos.                 In order to explore this issue further, we
constructed a composite spillover index for each “cited” patent, using the answers to all 4
questions. This index was constructed by consolidating the possible answers to each
question to produce a score of 0, 1 or 2, and then adding these scores across the 4
questions. The distribution of this composite spillover index for both the true citations



9
    All of the quoted comments relate to the “true” citations. Interestingly, several of the inventors told us
      that the “placebo” patent—which we had described as a citation in order not to bias their responses—
      was a mistake, i.e. that they had not cited it. It is not possible for us to know if they knew this from
      memory, or if they took the trouble to go back and check their actual patent document.


                                                            11
and the placebos is shown in Figure 8. Not surprisingly, the distribution of the composite
index is more skewed than that of the individual questions. Figure 8 confirms the general
pattern that the upper tail of the distribution for the true citations is much thicker than for
the placebos, and that about half of the citations are not distinguishable from the
placebos.


       Table 1 presents the results of an ordered probit analysis of this score, using as
regressors variables that would seem likely to foster communication between the cited
and citing inventors, variables that might foster the inventor’s remembering that
communication occurred, other controls, and a dummy variable for whether the score
pertains to a “true” citation as opposed to a placebo. Columns 1 and 2 include the
combined sample of citations and placebos. Column 3 looks only at the placebos, and
columns 4 and 5 only at the citations.


       Overall, the results confirm that citations can be interpreted as providing a (noisy)
signal of spillovers. The difference in spillover score between the citations and placebos
is quantitatively and statistically significant. The other variables generally have plausible
and often significant effects. Overall, the spillover score is higher if the “cited” patent is
more recent. Interestingly, columns 4 and 5 show that this combined effect mixes a
significantly positive effect for the citations with a significantly negative effect for the
placebos. For the citations, this is consistent with more recent patents being more useful,
and older citations being more likely to be non-spillovers included by the lawyer or
examiner. It could also reflect the possibility that the inventor’s memory of actual
communication is better with respect to more recent technology. Conversely, for the
placebos, the spillover index is lower the more recent the “cited” invention. Since these
represent patents that were not cited, there should not have been communication. Thus
the negative coefficient for the placebos is consistent with the inventors’ giving more
accurate answers with respect to more recent patents, and more often “mistakenly”
indicating communication with respect to older patents.




                                                 12
       We included the (log of) total citations received by the “cited” patent to control
for the overall “importance” of that patent. Its positive effect means that more important
patents are perceived to have generated greater spillovers, either because the spillovers
are truly greater or because these patents are more likely to be remembered by the
respondent. Similarly, cited patents whose inventors reside in the same state are
perceived to have generated greater spillovers. We interpret the lack of a significant
effect for these two variables when looking only at the placebos as further confirming
that citations are meaningful, in the sense that the perceived extent of spillovers is
correlated with variables that ought to be linked with spillovers for the true citations, but
is uncorrelated with these same variables for the placebos. We also included the total
number of citations made by the citing (i.e. responding) patent, to control for the
possibility that the inventor would have difficulty remembering or sorting out the effect
of any one cited patent, if there were many cited. And indeed, citations made has the
predicted negative effect.


       The effects for technology fields are reasonably large, and statistically significant
within the citations group. There are two slightly different interpretations of this result:
One is that spillovers are simply greater, on average, in Chemicals and Drugs, and less in
Electronics and Computers and Communications (C&C), with the Mechanical and Other
group being intermediate. A slightly different interpretation is that what varies by field is
the extent to which patent citations are a good indicator of spillovers. Under this latter
interpretation, the results would be consistent with the conventional wisdom that the
general importance or centrality of patents in the innovation system is highest in
Chemicals and Drugs and lowest in Electronics and C&C.


       Finally, columns 3 and 6 add to the regressors the inventors’ perceptions
regarding the “relatedness” of the patent pair, as reflected in the answers to questions 11
and 12 discussed above. Both of these have a significant positive association with the
perceived extent of spillovers, whether looked at in the combined sample or for the




                                                 13
citations alone.10 Again, there are two possible interpretations to this result. One is that
related patents are more likely to generate spillovers. The other is that these concepts are
not clearly distinguished in the respondents’ minds, or their memories are hazy, so that
they are more likely to indicate the presence of spillovers if the inventions are related, or
more likely to indicate relatedness if they remember communication.



           C. Comparison of Citing and Cited Inventors’ Perceptions
           By definition, the acknowledgement of a spillover from a cited inventor to a citing
inventor diminishes to some extent the perceived accomplishment of the latter and
augments the accomplishment of the former. For this reason, we would expect that the
citing inventors would tend to underestimate the extent of spillovers and the cited
inventors would tend to overestimate it. By asking both the citing and cited inventors to
evaluate the likelihood of spillover, we hoped to probe the extent to which the citing
inventors’ “admissions” of spillover might understate their true dependence on the cited
inventions.


           Overall, the results for the cited inventors do suggest indeed a greater degree of
perceived spillovers. In particular, Question 9 of the cited inventor survey (“What is the
likelihood that the citing inventors were aware of or relied upon knowledge of your
work”) is qualitatively symmetric to Question 7 in the citing inventor survey (“indicate
the degree to which you were familiar with the research being conducted by [the cited
research lab]”). As expected, the mean Likert response by the cited inventors was 3.2,
compared to 2.5 for the citing inventor responses shown in Figure 4. Of course, it is
impossible to determine the extent to which the difference is due to understatement by the
citing inventors or overstatement by the cited inventors, or possibly connected to the
slightly different wording of the two questions.


           In addition to comparing the means, we can examine the correlation between the
evaluations of the cited and citing inventors for those cases where both responded with

10
     These variables are also significant within the placebo group (results not reported).


                                                            14
respect to a given citation link. Unfortunately, we have only 72 such matched pairs, and
only 61 of these contain responses to all of the questions discussed in this section. For
these pairs, the correlation between the cited inventor’s answer to Question 9 with the
citing inventor’s answers to the various spillover questions is typically about .25. While
this correlation is high enough to suggest that the survey responses are “consistent” at
least in this sense, it reminds us that the responses are themselves only noisy indicators of
the “true” underlying process.


       Two other questions in the cited inventor survey provide some insight into the
extent of spillovers, as perceived by their presumed “source”.. Question 7 asks about the
cited inventors’ knowledge of the research of the citing inventors. About 14% of the
cited inventors indicated that they knew that the citing inventor was engaged in this kind
of research. About 10% either knew that research of this sort was underway but didn’t
know who was doing it, or knew of the citing inventor but not that they were working on
the citing invention. Approximately three-fourths indicated knowledge of the citing
inventors or their research. Question 8 asks about memory of communication with the
citing inventor. About 80% of the cited inventors indicated that they had no knowledge
of communication with the citing inventor; 9% did remember communication and 9%
were not sure.


       In comparing these responses to those of the citing inventors, there are
presumably two offsetting effects.     While the cited inventors may have generally a
greater tendency to indicate communication than the citing inventors, some forms of
communication (e.g. reading the cited inventor’s papers) occur without the knowledge of
the cited inventor.     In Figure 6, about 6% of citing inventors reported “direct
communication” with the cited inventor, and another 12% indicated that they had viewed
a presentation or a demonstration.       Assuming that the citing inventor’s viewing a
demonstration or presentation might or might not be something that the cited inventor
would know about, this seems quite consistent with both the 14% of cited inventors who
knew the citing inventors and their work, and the range of 9-18% for the fraction of cited
inventors who believe that communication occurred.



                                                15
5. Citations and Perceived Importance
       In addition to the use of individual citation “links” as possible evidence of
knowledge flow, a number of authors have utilized the total number of citations received
by a patent as an indicator of the relative significance of patents.11 Both our citing and
cited inventor surveys asked the inventors to rate the “technological significance” and the
“economic importance” of the inventions, and also asked whether the patent had been
licensed and whether it had been commercialized. Table 2 examines the extent to which
each of these different concepts of importance are associated with highly cited patents.
In addition, we constructed a composite index of importance by adding up scores on each
of these 4 questions in a manner similar to what was described above for the spillover
questions.


       Each column reports the regression of the log of total citations received on a
particular indicator of importance. For this purpose, the citing and cited responses were
combined into one dataset. In order to control for variations in citation practice by field
and changes in propensity to cite and extent of truncation over time, all regressions
include technology field and grant year dummy variables. In addition, based on the
findings of Lanjouw and Schankerman (1999), we also included the log of the number of
claims made by each patent, to allow for the possibility that patents that contain more
claims are more highly cited.


       The results do provide some evidence that citations are correlated with
significance or importance as perceived by the inventors themselves.          Each of the
indicators is positively correlated with log citations, with the coefficients achieving t-
statistics that vary from just below to just above 2, depending on the question. Not
surprisingly, use of the composite index increases the significance of the correlation
slightly. There is no particular indication as to whether citations are more associated with
technological versus economic significance. The claims variable is strongly significant,




                                                16
though its elasticity of about .25 suggests strong “diminishing returns” to increasing the
number of claims, as distinct from the constant returns relationship suggested by
Lanjouw and Schankerman. If claims is excluded from the regression (column 6), the
effect of the perceived importance variable increases, suggesting that importance, as
perceived by the inventor, reflects both the “size” of the patent as indicated by the
number of claims, and the importance or significance of each of the claims.
6. Concluding Remarks
          Many of the important concepts in the economics of technological change are
fundamentally unobservable. We routinely rely, therefore, on proxies or indicators for
the concepts of interest. Often, our only test of the validity of these measures is the
extent to which the correlation of the proxies with other variables matches the pattern of
correlations predicted by theory. In this paper, we provide an additional kind of evidence
about the unobservable process of knowledge flow, and the relationship of patent
citations to that process. While survey evidence has its own limitations, including small
sample sizes and the biases of the survey respondents, it allows us to get “inside the black
box” and potentially achieve a richer and deeper understanding of the processes that we
are studying.


          The results suggest a “half-full cup” with respect to the validity of patent citations
as indicators of knowledge spillovers. Taking the responses at face value, the likelihood
of knowledge spillover, conditional on the observation of a patent citation, is significantly
greater (in both the statistical and quantitative senses) than the unconditional likelihood.
Nonetheless, a large fraction of citations, perhaps something like one half, do not
correspond to any apparent spillover. We believe that these results are consistent with
the notion of citations as a noisy signal of the presence of spillovers. This implies that
aggregate citation flows can be used as proxies for knowledge spillover intensity, for
example between categories of organizations or between geographic regions. Further




11
     See, for example, Trajtenberg (1990) and Henderson, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1998). For a discussion of
     citations as one of several indicators of patent importance, see Lanjouw and Schankerman (1999).


                                                         17
work is needed, however, to refine our understanding of the mechanisms by which these
flows move and the relationship of those mechanisms to the citation process.


       More generally, the results provide some context for the widely-held view that
invention is a cumulative process where inventors build in important ways on the work
that came before them. They suggest a possibly significant role for direct communication
between inventors as part of this cumulative process. Clearly, more work is needed in
this area, both to assess the importance of communication and to understand its
determinants. In particular, our survey says nothing about what attributes of inventors or
technologies influence the extent to which different kinds of communication are used or
are effective.   For future work, consideration should be given to collecting more
information about the inventors themselves, so that these relationships could begin to be
explored.




                                               18
                                         References


Griliches, Zvi, 1979, “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of R&D to Productivity
       Growth,” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol.10, pp92-116

Helper, Susan, 2000, "Economists and Field Research: ‘You Can Observe a Lot Just by
       Watching’," American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings,
       forthcoming

Henderson, Rebecca, Adam B. Jaffe and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1998, “Universities as a
      Source of Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting,
      1965-1988,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 80, pp. 119-127

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg and Rebecca Henderson, 1993, “Geographic
       Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp. 577-598

Jaffe, Adam B., Michael S. Fogarty and Bruce A. Banks, 1998, “Evidence from Patent
        Citations on the Impact of NASA and Other Federal Labs on Commercial
        Innovation,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 46, pp. 183-206

Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Schankerman, 1999, “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring
      Innovation with Multiple Indicators,” National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper No. 7345

Trajtenberg, Manuel, 1990, “A Penny for your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
       Innovations,” Rand Journal of Economics Vol. 21, pp. 172-187




                                             19
                                                   Table 1
                                       Ordered Probit for Spillover Index
                                        All                   All              Placebos          True Citations       True Citations
                                     Answers                Answers             Only                 Only                 Only


True Cited Patent                                  0.861              0.511
                                              **
                                                   (.145)           **(.160)


"Cited" Grant Year                                 0.016              0.008            -0.048                0.036                0.028
                                               (.012)                (.013)            *(.024)           **(.014)                (.014)


Log of Total Citations                             0.187              0.104             0.202                0.186                 0.08
 Received by Cited Patent                     **(.071)               (.076)            (.153)               *(.081)              (.087)


Same State                                         0.414              0.418             0.196                 0.43                0.421
                                               *(.189)              *(.201)            (.461)               *(.210)              (.219)


Total Citations Made by                       -0.0086               -0.0072            -0.019               -0.007               -0.006
 Citing Patent                                *(.0040)              (.0042)            (.012)               (.004)               (.005)


Chemicals and Drugs                                0.258              0.375            -0.208                0.383                0.465
                                               (.169)               *(.177)            (.370)               *(.194)              (.202)


Electronics, Computers                         -0.503                -0.451            -0.288               -0.558               -0.508
 and Communication                            **(.128)              **(.135)           (.265)            **(.147)                (.154)


Technology-                                                           0.174                                                       0.141
  Relatedness                                                       **(.061)                                                     *(.064)


Application-                                                          0.264                                                       0.248
 Relatedness                                                        **(.056)                                                  **(.059)



Dependent Mean                                      1.68               1.77               0.53                2.21                  2.3


No. of Observations                                  467                429               148                  319                  297


 Note: excluded technology group is Mechanical and Other.
                                                         Table 2
                                      Citations Received as a Function of Inventors'
                                                Perception of "Importance"
                                                                               3
                               Technological Economic               Licensed       Commercialized4       Composite       Composite
                               Significance1 Importance2                                                   Index           Index

Importance Indicator                     0.073             0.076        0.098                   0.089          0.041             0.05
                                         (.038)           *(.035)       (.051)                  (.051)        *(.019)         *(.020)

Log of Claims                            0.241             0.239        0.243                 0.251              0.25
                                       **(.054)        **(0.054)      **(.053)              **(.053)         **(.052)


No. of Observations                        367               364          368                     344              380             380

R2                                       0.237              0.24        0.237                   0.262          0.242           0.195

Indicator Mean                              3.6               3.3        0.86                     2.3              4.8             4.8



Notes: Dependent variable is log of citations received.
    All Equations also include dummies for each year and technology field (6 fields) dummies.


1
  Likert scale (5 point)
2
  Likert scale (5 point)
3
   "no"=0; "maybe"=1 and "yes"=2
4
  "not incorporated in any product or process"=0; "incorporated in commercially unsuccessful product or process"=1
    "incorporated in product or process, too soon to tell if successful"=2;
     "incorporated in a commercially successful product or process"=3
                                                            Figure 1a
                               Perceived Similarity of Technology Between Citing and Cited Patents
                        0.35
                                                         Cited Perception
                         0.3                             Citing Perception

                        0.25
Fraction of Responses




                         0.2


                        0.15


                         0.1


                        0.05


                          0
                               1                 2                  3                 4               5
                                                               Likert Score




                                                             Figure 1b
                               Perceived Similarity of Application Between Citing and Cited Patents

                        0.35

                                                         Cited Perception
                         0.3                             Citing Perception


                        0.25
Fraction of Responses




                         0.2



                        0.15



                         0.1



                        0.05



                          0
                               1                 2                  3                 4               5
                                                               Likert Score
                                                          Figure 2
                                       Distribution of Composite "Relatedness" Index
                        0.80


                        0.70


                        0.60
                                                                    cited perception
                                                                    citing perception
Fraction of Responses




                        0.50                                        controls


                        0.40


                        0.30


                        0.20


                        0.10


                        0.00
                               2   3        4        5          6          7            8   9   10
                                                         Composite Score
                                                     Figure 3
                             Significant Influences on the Development of Inventions
                   presentations or
                   demonstrations

                word of mouth or
               personal interaction                                                  Citing
                                                                                     Cited
              joint work with others


                    patent literature
Category




                 technical literature

                 availability of new
                   analtyical tool

           availability of computing
                     power

           awareness of commercial
                 opportunity

                               other


                                    0.00   0.10     0.20       0.30      0.40        0.50     0.60   0.70
                                                           Fraction of Respondents
                               Figure 4
Distribution of Answers to: Degree of Familiarity with Previous Invention


                  Likert=5




                  Likert=4

                                                           citations
   Likert Scale




                                                           controls
                  Likert=3




                  Likert=2




                  Likert=1



                             0   20       40          60               80   100
                                      Percentage of Responses
                                       Figure 5
      Distribution of Answers to: When did you learn about the previous invention


before working on the
      invention




 while working on the
       invention                                              citations

                                                              controls


after the development
process was complete




    never before now




                        0      20           40           60               80        100
                                        Percentage of Responses
                                        Figure 6
           Distribution of Answers to: How did you learn about previous patent


 direct communication
    with the inventor



viewed presentation or
    demonstration                                              citations

                                                               controls

       word of mouth



 became aware during
  patent application
       process



     never before now



                         0       20          40           60               80    100
                                         Percentage of Responses
                                       Figure 7
       Distribution of Answers to: What did you learn from the previous invention



      info useful for
    development of my                                citations
         invention
                                                     controls
   a promising area for
       development


a concept that could be
      improved



    technical feasibility



    didn't learn about it
        before now

                            0     20          40            60         80           100

                                          Percentage of Responses
                                                        Figure 8
                                       Distribution of Composite Spillover Score
                         90%


                         80%


                         70%
                                                                controls
Percent of Respondents




                         60%                                    citations

                         50%


                         40%


                         30%


                         20%


                         10%


                         0%
                               0   1    2        3        4        5        6      7   8
                                                        Score
                            SURVEY OF
                       PATENTS AND INOVATION
                                1998
                   CITING INVENTORS QUESTIONNAIRE


                                      Instructions
       •    Please answer all questions.
       •   Refer to the enclosed abstract of one of your patents, as well as the abstracts
           of three other patents cited by your patent.
       •    You may consult with a co-inventor if you choose.
       •    If you are not sure of an answer, please make an educated guess or write
            “Don’t know.”
       •    We welcome any comments at the end of the survey that would explain your
            answers or improve the questionnaire.


                                Pledge of Confidentially
Information obtained will be released in aggregate form so that responses of
individuals cannot be identified.




Please return the completed survey in the enclosed addressed envelope within one week
of the date of receipt. The ID number on the label is the number assigned to you for
confidentially and reference. If you have any questions regarding the survey or the
completion date, please call the Center for Regional Economic Issues at 216-368-5539 or
contact REI by e-mail at rca4@guinness.som.cwru.edu.
                       Questions 1 through 6 refer only to your patent.




1. Rank the technological significance of your invention relative to other patented
   inventions in the same area as yours. Check one.


                1                  2                   3            4                 5
         not significant                                                  highly significant


2. Rank the economic importance of your invention relative to other patented inventions
   in the same area as yours. Check one.


                1                  2                   3            4                 5
          not important                                                    highly important


3. Has your invention been licensed?


          no                               not sure                             yes


4. Which of the following most accurately describes the commercialization of your
   invention? Check one.


       (a) not yet incorporated in any product
           or process

       (b) incorporated in a commercially
           unsuccessful product or process

       (c) incorporated in a product or process,
           but it is too soon to judge if it will be
           commercially successful

       (d) incorporated in a successful
           commercial product or process

       (e) do not know

5. Very briefly describe the source of the most important core idea leading to the
   development of your invention (e.g., recognition of a problem, serendipity, or some
   commercial product).
   _____________________________________________________________________
   _____________________________________________________________________
   _____________________________________________________________________
   _____________________________________________________________________



6. Which of the following had a significant influence on the development of your
   invention? Check the one or two most significant statements.


      (a) recent availability of enhanced
          computing power

      (b) awareness of commercial opportunity

      (c) work carried out jointly with a
          consultant, contractor, or other outside
         organization

      (d) availability of a new analytical tool
          or technique

      (e) technical literature

      (f) word of mouth or personal interaction

      (g) patent literature

      (h) presentations or demonstrations

      (i) other (please specify): _____________
         _____________________________________________________________________
         _____________________________________________________________________
         _____________________________________________________________________
              Questions 7 through 12 address the possible relationship
              between your patent and the cited patents. Please respond to
              these questions separately for each of the three patents.




7. Indicate the degree to which you were familiar with the research being conducted by
   the assignee (or inventor, if there is no assignee) in the general area of each patent you
   cited. Check one for each patent.

        for patent # 1

        for patent # 2

       for patent # 3

                               1          2                3           4              5
                not familiar                                                              very familiar

8. When did you learn about the research or work underlying the inventions in the patents
   you cited? Check one statement for each patent.

                                                                       for patent #
                                                       1           2                       3

        (a) before I began working seriously on
            the idea underlying this invention

        (b) during the time period when I was
          actively working on this invention

        (c) after the development process was
           essentially complete

        (d) never before now
9. How did you learn about the technology underlying each patent you cited? Check the
   one or two most important statements that apply.


                                                              for patent #
                                                    1               2             3

       (a) word of mouth

       (b) direct communication with the
           inventor(s) on the cited
           patent

       (c) presentation(s) or paper(s) by
           the inventor(s) on the cited
           patent

       (d) demonstration or viewing of a
         product or prototype

       (e) read the cited patent

       (f) became aware of cited patent
           during the patent application
           process

       (g) did not learn about the cited
           patent before now

       (h) other (please specify): __________
           ____________________________________________________________________
           ____________________________________________________________________
           ____________________________________________________________________
10. What did you learn from the technology underlying each patent you cited? Check the
    one statement that best applies.

                                                               for patent #
                                                       1              2                3

        (a) information useful for the
            development of my invention

        (b) about a promising area for
            development

        (c) a concept which could be
            improved

      (d) about the technical feasibility
          of a process or approach

      (e) did not learn about the cited
          patent before now

        (f) other (please specify):_____________
           ____________________________________________________________________
           ____________________________________________________________________
           ____________________________________________________________________



11. Indicate the degree to which you believe your invention is related by common
    technology or method to the invention in the patents you cited. Check one box for
    each patent.

       for patent # 1

       for patent # 2

       for patent # 3

                              1           2        3       4        5
               not related                                                    closely related
12. Indicate the degree to which you believe the application or use of your invention is
    related to that of the invention in the patents you cited. Check one box for each
    patent.

       for patent # 1

       for patent # 2

       for patent # 3

                             1         2        3        4        5
               not related                                                    closely related
Thank you very much for your cooperation. We would like to express our appreciation by
sending you a copy of the survey results and data analysis when they become available. To
receive a copy, please print your name and address below.



Name __________________________________________________________________

Address ________________________________________________________________

City ______________________________ State _______ Zip ___________________



When you have completed the survey, please return it in the enclosed addressed
envelope. If you have any questions, please contact:

       Case Western Reserve University
       Center for Regional Economic Issues                  Phone: 216-368-5539
       10900 Euclid Ave.                                    Fax:   216-368-5542
       Cleveland, OH 44106-7208          E-mail:         rca4@guinness.som.cwru.edu


Please add any comments on ways to improve the survey or amplify your answers to
offer a better understanding of how the patent system promotes the advancement of
technology.

______________________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________________
                                       SURVEY OF
                          PATENTS AND INOVATION
                                             1998
                       CITED INVENTORS QUESTIONNAIRE



                                         Instructions
       •  Please answer all questions.
       • Refer to the enclosed abstract of one of your patents and the abstract of a
         patent that subsequently cited your patent.
       • You may consult with a co-inventor if you choose.
       • If you are not sure of an answer, please make an educated guess or write “don’t
          know.”
       • We welcome any comments at the end of the survey that would explain your answers
          or improve the questionnaire.


                                   Pledge of Confidentially
Information obtained will be released in aggregate form so that responses of individuals
cannot be identified.




Please return the completed survey in the enclosed addressed envelope within one week of the
date of receipt. The ID number on the label is the number assigned to you for confidentially and
reference. If you have any questions regarding the survey or the completion date, please call the
Center for Regional Economic Issues at 216-368-5539 or contact REI by e-mail at
rca4@guinness.som.cwru.edu.
                             Questions 1 through 6 refer only to your patent.




1. Rank the technological significance of your invention relative to other patented inventions in
   the same area as yours. Check one.



                1                2                  3             4                5
         not significant                                                  highly significant


2. Rank the economic importance of your invention relative to other patented inventions in the
   same area as yours. Check one.



                1                2                  3             4                5
         not important                                                    highly important


3. Has your invention been licensed?


          no                               not sure                              yes


4. Which of the following most accurately describes the commercialization of your invention?
   Check one.

       (a) not yet incorporated in any product
           or process

       (b) incorporated in a commercially
           unsuccessful product or process

       (c) incorporated in a product or process,
           but it is too soon to judge if it will
           be commercially successful

       (d) incorporated in a successful commercial
           product or process

       (e) do not know
5. Very briefly describe the source of the most important core idea leading to the development of
   your invention (e.g., recognition of a problem, serendipity, or some commercial product).

       __________________________________________________________________________________
       __________________________________________________________________________________
       __________________________________________________________________________________
       __________________________________________________________________________________
       __________________________________________________________________________________




6. Which of the following had a significant influence on the development of your
   invention? Check the one or two most significant statements.

       (a) recent availability of enhanced
           computing power

       (b) awareness of commercial opportunity

       (c) work carried out jointly with a
           consultant, contractor, or other outside
          organization

       (d) availability of a new analytical tool
          or technique

       (e) technical literature

       (f) word of mouth or personal interaction

       (g) patent literature

        (h) presentations or demonstrations

      (i) other (please specify): ______________
           __________________________________________________________________________
           __________________________________________________________________________
          __________________________________________________________________________
                      Questions 7 through 11 address the possible relationship between your
                      invention and the invention disclosed in the patent citing your patent.




7. Which of the following best describes your (or your co-inventor's) awareness of the research
   leading to the invention in the citing patent? Check one.

        (a) have no knowledge of the research leading
            to the invention disclosed in the citing patent
            nor of the inventor(s)

        (b) know of the research leading to the invention
            disclosed in the citing patent but was not aware
            of who did it

        (c) know the inventor(s) but not of the research
            leading to the invention disclosed in the citing
            patent

        (d) know of the research leading to the invention
            disclosed in the citing patent and know who did it


8. Did you or any of your co-inventors ever have any direct communication concerning the
   technology underlying your invention with any of the inventors credited with the citing patent?
   Check one.



          no                                   not sure                              yes



9. What is the likelihood the citing inventor(s) were aware of or relied upon knowledge of your
   work when they developed their invention. Rely upon your best judgment even if you have no
   direct knowledge. Check one.




               1                    2                3                4                 5
         not likely                                                              very likely
10. Indicate the degree to which you believe your invention is related by common technology or
    method to the invention in the citing patent. Check one.




               1                 2              3               4               5
         not related                                                   closely related



11. Indicate the degree to which you believe the application or use of your invention is related to
    that of the invention in the citing patent. Check one.




                1                2              3               4               5
         not related                                                   closely related
Thank you very much for your cooperation. We would like to express our appreciation
by sending you a copy of the survey results and data analysis when they become
available. To receive a copy, please print your name and address below.



Name __________________________________________________________________

Address ________________________________________________________________

City ______________________________ State _______ Zip ___________________



When you have completed the survey, please return it in the enclosed addressed envelope.
If you have any questions, please contact:

Case Western Reserve University
Center for Regional Economic Issues        Phone: 216-368-5539
10900 Euclid Ave.                          Fax:    216-368-5542
 Cleveland, OH 44106-7208                  E-mail: rca4@guinness.som.cwru.edu


Please add any comments on ways to improve the survey or amplify your answers to offer a
better understanding of how the patent system promotes the advancement of technology.

______________________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________________

______________________________________________________________________________________
