                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               GROWTH AND BUSINESS CYCLES


                                           Larry E. Jones
                                         Rodolfo E. Manuelli
                                            Henry E. Siu


                                         Working Paper 7633
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7633

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2000




We thank Larry Christiano, Ed Prescott and Craig Burnside for their help, and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Larry E. Jones, Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Henry E. Siu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Growth and Business Cycles
Larry E. Jones, Rodolfo E. Manuelli, and Henry E. Siu
NBER Working Paper No. 7633
April 2000
JEL No. D92, E32


                                           ABSTRACT

       Our purpose in this paper is to present a class of convex endogenous growth models, and to
analyze their performance in terms of both growth and business cycle criteria. The models we study
have close analogs in the real business cycle literature. In fact, we interpret the exogenous growth
rate of productivity as an endogenous growth rate of human capital. This perspective allows us to
compare the strengths of both classes of models.
       In order to highlight the mechanism that gives endogenous growth models the ability to
improve upon their exogenous growth relatives, we study models that are symmetric in terms of
human and physical capital formation -- our two engines of growth. More precisely, we analyze
models in which the technology used to produce human capital is identical to the technologies used
to produce consumption and investment goods, and in which the technology shocks in the two
sectors are perfectly correlated.
       We find that endogenous growth models can generate levels of labor volatility close to those
observed in the data, as well as positively correlated growth rates of output. We also find that these
models outperform a related exogenous growth version in most dimensions.


Larry Jones                                                           Rody Manuelli
Department of Economics                                               Department of Economics
University of Minnesota                                               University of Wisconsin
Minneapolis, MN, 55455                                                Madison, WI, 53706
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and NBER                          and NBER
lej@econ.umn.edu                                                      manuelli@ssc.wisc.edu

Henry Siu
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, 60208
hankman@nwu.edu
