                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CONTRACTIBILITY AND ASSET OWNERSHIP:
            ON-BOARD COMPUTERS AND GOVERNANCE IN U.S. TRUCKING


                                         George P. Baker
                                        Thomas N. Hubbard


                                        Working Paper 7634
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w7634

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2000




We would like to thank Oliver Hart, Francine Lafontaine, Brian Silverman, Margaret Slade, Jerry
Zimmerman, and seminar participants at Carnegie-Mellon, Chicago, Duke, Harvard, Michigan,
NBER Summer Institute, Rochester, and Stanford for comments. We also thank Michael Crum and
several dispatchers and drivers for useful discussions. We gratefully acknowledge support from NSF
grant SES-9975413 and the Harvard Business School Division of Research. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by George P. Baker and Thomas N. Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board Computers
and Governance in U.S. Trucking
George P. Baker and Thomas N. Hubbard
NBER Working Paper No. 7634
April 2000
JEL No. L14, L22, L92, D23


                                             ABSTRACT

         We investigate how the contractibility of actions affecting the value of an asset affects asset
ownership. We examine this by testing how on-board computer (OBC) adoption affects truck
ownership. We develop and test the proposition that adoption should lead to less ownership by
drivers, particularly for hauls where drivers have the greatest incentive to drive in non-optimal ways
or engage in rent-seeking behavior. We find evidence in favor: OBC adoption leads to less driver
ownership, especially for long hauls and hauls that use specialized trailers. We also find that non-
owner drivers with OBCs drive better than those without them. These results suggest that
technology-enabled increases in contractibility may lead to less independent contracting and larger
firms.


George P. Baker                                         Thomas N. Hubbard
Professor of Business Administration                    Assistant Professor of Economics and Strategy
Harvard University                                      University of Chicago
Soldiers Field                                          1101 E. 58th Street
Boston, MA 02163                                        Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                and NBER
gbaker@hbs.edu                                          thomas.hubbard@gsb.uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

         What determines who owns assets in the economy? This question, essential to determining
the boundary of the firm, goes back at least to Coase (1937), who argued that firms will choose to
coordinate activities internally rather than through markets when the cost of transacting in markets is
higher than the cost of internal coordination. Transacting in markets is costly, according to
Williamson (1975), when contractual incompleteness invites opportunistic behavior. A natural
implication of this line of analysis is that improvements in contracting should lead to greater reliance
on markets as institutions for mediating economic activity.
         Grossman and Hart (1986) caution, however, that the link between improved contracting and
increased reliance on market-mediated transactions may not hold. They reinforce the connection
between contractual incompleteness and asset ownership by arguing that asset ownership defines the
allocation of decision rights that are not specified in existing contracts.1 Optimal asset ownership
therefore is determined by who most efficiently will hold the residual rights of control. An
implication of their theory is that any change in contractibility will induce a new set of non-
contractible decision rights, which in turn will force a reevaluation of who should best hold the
residual rights of control. How contractibility affects asset ownership and the boundary of the firm
thus depends on the details of what becomes contractible, and what remains in the set of residual
rights. In this paper, we examine this issue using data from the United States trucking industry.
         Nickerson and Silverman (1999) point out that several organizational theorists have cited
trucks as "prototypical user-owned assets."2 Yet most trucks in the United States, and almost all
short-haul trucks, are not owned by their drivers. They are operated by "company drivers"—
individuals who do not own the trucks they drive—rather than "owner-operators." We argue that
ownership patterns in trucking result from the non-contractibility of two sets of decision rights. The
importance of each of these sets determines the optimal ownership of trucks. One set of non-

1 . There are several possible reasons for contractual incompleteness. Contingencies may be too numerous or
uncertain for the parties to specify them ex ante, or outcomes may be too complex or subtle for a third party to verify
them ex post. We, along with most papers in this literature, assume that specifying and verifying a particular aspect
of a contract is either costless or infinitely costly. In truth, of course, these costs vary over a wide range, and the
degree of contractual incompleteness is a choice variable for the parties.

2. Alchian and Demsetz (1972) and Milgrom and Roberts (1992). The latter actually remark in a footnote that
monitoring devices have reduced the benefits of driver ownership.

                                                          1
contractible decision rights is the degree to which drivers engage in rent-seeking activities such as
searching for hauls other than those prearranged by carriers. The other set of non-contractible
decision rights, at least until the late 1980s, is how drivers operate trucks—in particular, whether
they drive trucks in ways that maintain trucks' value.
       In the late 1980s, an important technological innovation expanded the set of variables upon
which carriers and drivers could contract. The development of on-board computers (OBCs), devices
that continuously record various operating parameters of trucks (e.g., their speed), allowed carriers to
construct better performance measures of how drivers operate trucks. Our hypothesis is that this
change in the contractibility of key decisions should change the optimal ownership of trucks. We
propose that it should increase the use of company drivers, especially for hauls where drivers have
the greatest incentive to drive in suboptimal ways and engage in rent-seeking behavior.
       We test this proposition using cross-sectional data from 1987 and 1992. These data contain
truck-level information on OBC adoption and truck ownership. We find that OBC adoption leads to
increased use of company drivers, particularly for hauls for which contracting problems are greatest:
long hauls and hauls that use specialized trailers. This evidence supports the proposition and is our
main empirical result.
       We also examine relationships between trucks' fuel economy and OBC use. This provides a
test for whether increased contractibility affects how drivers drive. We find that controlling for
trucks' characteristics, how they are used, and where they are maintained, trucks with OBCs get
better fuel economy than trucks without them. The fuel economy difference between company
drivers with and without OBCs is greater than the difference between owner-operators with and
without them. Furthermore, this is true only for long-haul drivers. The evidence thus supports our
characterization of how OBCs affect drivers' behavior.
       These results help to understand relationships between current waves of information
technology (IT) diffusion and changes in firms' boundaries. As Hubbard (2000) points out, recent
applications of IT—particularly networking applications—offer enhanced monitoring capabilities.
These can increase contractibility. Our results indicate that when subcontracting decisions hinge on
trade-offs between motivating care for productive assets and discouraging rent-seeking behavior,
technology-enabled increases in contractibility will tend to lead to less outsourcing. If firms'


                                                   2
boundaries are defined by asset ownership, then monitoring technologies that improve incentives
will lead to larger firms.
        This paper extends several strains of the empirical literature on organizations. Our emphasis
on relationships between contractibility and ownership is similar to work that examines how outlet
characteristics influence contractual form in franchising (Brickley and Dark (1987), Lafontaine
(1992), Shepard (1993)). We are able to construct more powerful empirical tests than these earlier
papers because we can base them on relationships between informational and organizational changes
rather than levels. Our general result that monitoring and ownership are substitutes is consistent with
findings from this literature. This paper is also related to a growing empirical literature that examines
relationships between IT adoption and organizational form. (See Brynjolffson and Hitt (1997) and its
citations.) Finally, the paper is related to recent work that investigates organizational issues in
trucking (Hubbard (1999), Nickerson and Silverman (1999)), some of which focuses on
technological issues (Chakraborty and Kazarosian (1999), Hubbard (2000)).
        An outline of the rest of the paper follows. In section 2, we describe contracting problems in
trucking, and how asset ownership and OBCs affect them. In section 3, we build a formal model that
generates the hypotheses to be tested. In section 4, we describe the empirical framework. In section
5, we describe the data, present simple statistics that confirm the general patterns in the data, and
show that data censoring problems are unlikely to drive estimation results. In section 6, we present
and interpret the estimation results. In section 7, we conclude.

2. Production, Contractibility, and Asset Ownership in Trucking
        Carriers (for-hire trucking firms and trucking divisions of firms that are not trucking
specialists, so-called "private fleets") haul goods for shippers (firms or divisions that want cargo
moved from one place to another). When carriers receive orders, their dispatchers assign trucks and
drivers to hauls. They may use company trucks and company drivers, or they may use owner-
operators. In either case, they face several incentive problems in their agency relationship with their
drivers. One is motivating drivers to complete hauls in a timely fashion; another is inducing them to
drive in ways that neither cause undue wear and tear on trucks and their engines nor lead to higher
than optimal accident rates. Arriving on time and driving in an optimal way are costly for drivers
because they require effort and restrict drivers' ability to work at their own pace.

                                                   3
         Motivating drivers (whether company drivers or owner-operators) to arrive on time is
relatively straightforward. Performance incentives work well. Carriers can obtain verified
information regarding arrival times at low cost and reward drivers accordingly. Shippers generally
notify carriers when trucks arrive unexpectedly late. Carriers reward drivers who consistently arrive
on time with bonuses or good job assignments and punish those who consistently arrive late by firing
them (if a company driver) or not hiring them again (if an owner-operator). Although factors outside
of drivers' control affect whether drivers arrive on time, carriers often can verify whether traffic or
delays in loading or unloading trucks cause trucks to be late. Agency costs associated with late
arrivals are thus not large.3
         Motivating company drivers to drive in an optimal fashion is more difficult because
performance incentives are less efficient. Conditional on arriving on time, the cost of a haul is lower
when drivers drive at a consistent rate than at a variable rate. Costs are increasing and convex in
speed, both because of higher fuel consumption and greater depreciation of trucks' engines. Drivers
may prefer to drive quickly then take longer breaks because it allows them to rest longer, visit
friends, etc., and still arrive on time. Their ability to do so is particularly high on hauls with
infrequent scheduled stops because there is more opportunity to make up time. Although one can
base performance incentives on fuel use, trucks' condition, or accident rates, such measures are noisy
indicators of how drivers drive. Fuel use and trucks' condition largely reflect how well trucks are
maintained and accidents are rare events that are often caused by other drivers. Traditionally, how
drivers drive has been non-contractible.
         Asset ownership can motivate drivers to drive well. Owner-operators are residual claimants
on the value of their truck and are responsible for maintenance and fuel purchases. They therefore
internalize most of the costs associated with how they drive.
         On the basis of the above description, it would seem that most hauls, especially long hauls,
should be completed by owner-operators. However, another contracting problem plagues the agency
relationship between carriers and drivers, and leads to high levels of company ownership of trucks,
even for long hauls. Drivers must be motivated to accept hauls, and owner-operators have a greater

3. An exception to this is when contract enforcement issues inhibit carriers from punishing poor-performing
drivers. Carriers sometimes allege this to be the case for union drivers. We do not emphasize such issues because the
analysis is based primarily on the “truckload” sector, which is mostly not unionized.

                                                          4
ability to hold up carriers and engage in rent-seeking behavior than do company drivers.
        Hauls vary in their desirability to drivers. Those that take drivers into congested or dangerous
areas are less desirable than those that do not. Hauls that involve layovers or empty ("deadhead")
miles can be undesirable to long-haul drivers, whose compensation is generally output-based.4
Carriers negotiate with drivers to induce them to accept undesirable hauls. This negotiation usually
involves a combination of moral suasion, promises to assign drivers desirable hauls in the future, and
pecuniary compensation. Negotiation is pervasive because the timing of demand and availability of
capacity are extremely difficult to forecast precisely outside of very short horizons. Carriers usually
are not able to specify the exact hauls they will offer drivers more than a few hours in advance.
Although arrangements between carriers and drivers usually extend over multiple periods, they are
incomplete with respect to the specific hauls they cover.
        Company drivers and owner-operators differ both in their leverage with carriers and in the
extent they can improve their bargaining position. Company drivers can quit, but doing so leaves
them with no equipment and whatever prospect they have for finding alternative employment.
Owner-operators, on the other hand, have their trucks: they can access the spot market for hauls that
exist in many regions. These markets, usually mediated by brokers, offer owner-operators and
carriers access to hauls and play an important role in helping them fill long "backhauls" when return
trips are not prearranged. Spot markets are generally thicker for hauls that use non-specialized
equipment, and thinner for hauls that use specialized equipment. Accessing hauls for specialized
equipment usually requires more costly search.
        Truck ownership gives owner-operators the ability to access, and the incentive to explore,
alternative shipments even while they are completing hauls for a particular carrier. Identifying
alternative hauls improves their bargaining position with the carrier, and promises better terms for
the hauls that they accept.
        This description of carriers' relationship with their company drivers and owner-operators is
consistent with characterizations related to us in interviews. Dispatchers often claim that they have
more difficulty inducing owner-operators to accept hauls than company drivers. Unlike company


4. Long-haul drivers' compensation is generally based on based on either miles, loaded miles, or a fraction of the
haul’s revenues. This is true for both company drivers and owner-operators.

                                                         5
drivers, owner-operators are considered to have the right to refuse hauls. Owner-operators are more
"difficult to control" as a consequence. This is a frequently cited advantage of company ownership of
trucks over driver ownership.5
         The implication with respect to ownership patterns is the following: using owner-operators is
costly in situations where they have incentives to invest in bargaining positions for subsequent
hauls—that is, search for alternative hauls. Driver ownership of trucks mitigates incentive problems
with how trucks are driven, but induces drivers to engage in rent-seeking behavior.

Regulatory Issues and Control Rights Over Trucks
         Economic regulation of the trucking industry decreased dramatically during the late 1970s
and early 1980s. It did not vanish, however. One provision that remains is that firms must obtain
operating authority from the Federal government in order to legally haul goods between states. The
cost of obtaining operating authority is not prohibitive but is high enough so that not all truck owners
obtain it. Many owner-operators do not have operating authority, and therefore must operate under
the authority of a carrier that does.6 Federal law requires owner-operators who operate under another
carrier’s authority to formally transfer control rights over their truck to the carrier during the period
in which they are doing so. This is accomplished by an owner-operator lease. Some of these leases
nominally cover long periods; six-month or one-year leases are not uncommon. In practice, most are
open-ended.
         On their face, long-term owner-operator leases appear to limit owner-operators' incentives for
rent-seeking behavior: drivers cannot threaten to serve other customers if carriers have control rights
over their truck. But the formal lease terms are misleading. Carriers do not deny owner-operators
access to their trucks, even when drivers unilaterally terminate leases prematurely. The control right
provisions in owner-operator leases are, for our intents and purposes, a legal fiction. They do not
change the depiction of incentive conflicts above.7

5.   See Maister (1980), Ouelett (1994), for example.

6. Most owner-operators have continuing relationships with one or more large carriers through whom they obtain
hauls. Those without authority are required to formalize such relationships.

7. Thanks to Francine Lafontaine for useful discussions about owner-operator leases. See CFR 376.11 for the
relevant regulations.

                                                        6
         This discussion gives rise to a more general contractual question: why do owner-operators
have the right to take their truck with them whenever they quit? Contractual arrangements in which
owner-operators agree not to use the truck for hauls other than the carrier’s would lower drivers' rent-
seeking incentives while retaining their incentive to drive well. However, such arrangements would
create new incentive problems: carriers could appropriate rents associated with the truck. One way
they could do so is by offering drivers only hauls that are undesirable for the reasons given above.
Not surprisingly, arrangements that give drivers residual claimancy but no control rights over their
trucks are not optimal.

On-Board Computers
         On-board computers (OBCs) appeared on the market during the mid-to-late 1980s.8 There are
two classes of OBCs: trip recorders and electronic vehicle management systems (EVMS). As of
1992, trip recorders cost about $500. EVMS hardware cost $3,000-$4,000 to buy or about
$150/month to lease.
         Trip recorders collect information about trucks' operation. They record when trucks are
turned on and off, their speed over time, acceleration and deceleration patterns, fuel use, and
variables related to engine performance. Dispatchers receive the information trip recorders collect
when drivers return to their base; drivers give dispatchers a chart, floppy disk, or data cartridge with
the data. These data are useful for two reasons. First, they provide carriers better measures of how
drivers operate trucks. For example, carriers can tell when drivers speed or take long breaks. Second,
they provide mechanics better information about trucks' engines. This enables them to diagnose and
fix problems better.9
         EVMS contain all trip recorders' capabilities, but have several additional features. First, they
record trucks' location, sometimes via links to global positioning services. Second, they can transmit
the information they collect to dispatchers in close to real time. Third, they allow dispatchers and
drivers to send short text messages to each other. This feature enables dispatchers to initiate contact
with drivers even when they are outside of radio range. Without EVMS, dispatchers generally have

8.   See Hubbard (2000) for more details.

9. "On-Board Computers Enhance Driver Performance," Fleet Equipment, January 1989, describes in detail how
carriers use trip recorders to monitor drivers and improve maintenance.

                                                     7
to wait for long-haul drivers to call in to communicate with them. EVMS' additional capabilities
make them useful for improving resource allocation (scheduling) decisions as well as incentives and
maintenance. This distinction is emphasized in Hubbard (2000), which uses differences in adoption
patterns to distinguish between situations where OBCs primarily improve incentives and primarily
improve resource allocation decisions.
        This paper investigates the organizational impact of the capabilities the two technologies
share. Both technologies make how drivers operate trucks more contractible. Carriers using these
technologies can observe not just arrival times, but whether drivers reach their destination by driving
their trucks at a consistent pace. The next section presents a model of organizational form that we
will then take to the data.

3. Model
        We use a multi-tasking approach to model the choice of organizational form in trucking.
There are two parties: a driver and a carrier. The driver faces effort choices on two tasks: driving
well and rent seeking. The carrier has an order to haul cargo, and wants to induce a driver to drive a
truck to fulfill the order. The value of the haul to the carrier is V, and the cost of the haul is M. M
includes the wear-and-tear on the truck, and is a function of how well the driver drives. M is not
contractible, since the amount of wear-and-tear due to any one haul is not evident. The profitability
of the haul to the carrier is thus:


(1)=                                     π = V - M(e1),

where V is the revenue from the haul, e1 is the non-contractible effort expended by the driver on
good driving, and M(e1) is the cost of the haul; M'=-g1.
        We will refer to g1, the marginal effect of driver effort on cost, as the "scope for good
driving." When g1 is large (for instance, on long hauls), the driver can do a lot to affect the cost of the
haul, conditional on arriving on time; when g1 is small (for instance, on short hauls) he has little
scope to affect the cost of the haul.
        Drivers can also search for alternative hauls. The value of an alternative haul lined up by the
driver is P(e2). e2 is the effort expended by the driver lining up alternatives: P'=g2. We assume that V
is always greater than P, so it is always efficient to accept the carrier's haul. But the presence of an

                                                    8
alternative haul will give the driver more bargaining power with the carrier when it comes to
haggling over the price on the backhaul. We refer to g2, the marginal product of driver effort on P, as
the "scope for rent seeking." g2 is large when the driver can greatly affect the value of his outside
opportunities.
         Both types of driver effort are costly. Driving well (e1) is costly for two reasons: it demands
more attention and it forces the driver to forgo opportunities for on-the-job consumption. Searching
for outside opportunities (e2) is costly because it requires time and energy. The driver's cost of effort
is:

                                                         e12 + e 22
(2)                                        C(e1, e2) =
                                                             2

         Conditional on an ownership structure, the driver chooses e1 and e2 to maximize his utility.
We examine driver incentives under each ownership structure separately, then compare the surpluses
that result to see which structure is more efficient.
         Under company ownership of the truck, the driver bears none of the (non-contractible) wear-
and-tear costs of his driving, and so devotes no effort to good driving. e1 = 0. Furthermore, since he
cannot capture any rents from lining up an alternative haul (since he does not have the right to use
the truck) he will devote no effort to rent-seeking: e2 = 0.
         Under driver ownership, however, the driver both bears the costs of his poor driving and has
an incentive to engage in rent seeking. We assume that he bargains with the carrier, receiving half of
the difference between what the haul is worth to the carrier and his alternative bid.10 He thus stands
to receive:

                                            V + P(e2 )
(3)                                                    − M(e1 )
                                                2


Driver utility is equal to his monetary reward, minus his cost of effort. Maximizing utility with
respect to both e1 and e2 yields:


10. We do not model the bargain between the driver and the carrier under company ownership, because it has no
effect on the driver's incentives. We could assume that the driver receives half of the revenue on each haul, or we
could assume that he receives a fixed wage.

                                                          9
                                             e1 = g1, e2 = g2/2.

Under driver ownership, the driver exerts effort towards both good driving and rent seeking.

Optimal Ownership Under Unobservable Driver Effort
         Under the assumption that it is always efficient to use the truck for the carrier’s haul, total
surplus is the sum of carrier profit and driver utility. Optimal ownership is that which maximizes
total surplus. Surplus under company ownership is:


(4)                                      Sc = V – M(0) – C(0,0),

while surplus under driver ownership is:

                                                                   g2
(5)                                   So = V – M(g1) – C(g1,          ).
                                                                   2

Using the fact that M(e1) and P(e2) are linear in their arguments, it is easy to show that drivers should
own their trucks whenever 2g1 > g2.
         This model yields several predictions about when drivers should own trucks. One is that they
should do so when the scope for good driving is large—that is, when g1 is large. As discussed above,
this is more likely to be the case for long hauls than short hauls, since drivers can drive trucks very
hard for many hours, and then consume the rest of the time it should have taken them however they
choose.
         The model also predicts that carriers should own trucks when the scope for rent-seeking is
large—that is, when g2 is large. This is more likely to be the case when hauls use specialized
equipment, since thick and efficient spot markets for hauls using standard equipment mean that there
is little to be gained by investment in rent seeking by the driver. When the equipment is specialized,
it is more likely that time and effort spent on searching out alternative hauls will yield a higher-
revenue run that will give the driver more bargaining power with the carrier.11 Thus, owner-operators
will be used more when hauls employ non-specialized trailers.



11 . Of course, for very highly specialized equipment there may also be little gain from search, since there is virtually
no chance of finding an alternative haul. We believe that this circumstance is not empirically relevant for our sample.

                                                          10
          This model thus yields the following predictions about truck ownership with non-contractible
effort:

P1:       Driver ownership should be more common in long-haul trucking than short-haul trucking.

P2:       Driver ownership should be more common when hauls use non-specialized equipment (such
          as platforms and dry vans) than specialized equipment (such as tank trucks and refrigerated
          vans).


Contractible Effort
          The model also can be used to analyze how ownership changes once good driving is made
contractible through the use of OBCs. Suppose that the introduction of OBCs makes it possible to
measure driver effort more accurately. This would allow the carrier to write an explicit incentive
contract that leads the driver to drive in a value-maximizing way. Such a contract would peg e1 at (or
near) first-best, g1.
          With OBCs, company ownership generates surplus equal to:


(6)                             S OBC
                                  c   = V – M(g1) – C(g1,0) – d,


where d is the per-period cost of OBC adoption.

          In this model, OBCs generate no benefit when the driver owns the truck. Since owner-
operators already drive optimally, technologies that improve their incentives to drive well yield no
value. The model predicts that OBCs will never be used on driver-owned trucks; the surplus under
driver ownership is the same as that shown in equation (5). Determining whether company drivers
with OBCs will generate greater surplus than owner-operators involves comparing equations (5) and
(6). Such a comparison shows that driver ownership yields greater surplus than company ownership
with OBCs when:


(7)                                       g2 > 2 2d



                                                  11
Comparison of equations (4) and (6) also shows that company-owned trucks will adopt OBCs
when:


(8)                                       g1 > 2d .

These results taken together yield the pattern of adoption and ownership change summarized in
Figure 1. It depicts the ownership patterns the model predicts for 1987 and 1992, before and after
OBCs became available. In 1987, owner-operators are used whenever the scope for good driving is
high relative to the scope for rent-seeking; that is, whenever 2g1 > g2. In 1992, this is no longer the
case. It is optimal to utilize company drivers with OBCs whenever both the scope for good driving
and the scope for rent-seeking are high. In the region where 2g1 > g2 and g2 > 2 2d , the northeast
region in the figure, ownership changes. Hauls both adopt OBCs and move from owner-operators to
company drivers. Ownership does not change in any of the other regions. This leads to our first
proposition about the relationship between adoption and ownership.


P3:     OBC adoption should drive the incidence of driver ownership down.

        The model also predicts where adoption will lead to ownership changes and where it will not.
The model predicts that adoption will only occur when both g1 and g2 are high. But this is because it
focuses exclusively on OBCs' incentive-improving capabilities. Adoption will in fact occur when g1
or g2 are low because OBCs offer benefits other than incentive improvements. But when adoption
takes place for maintenance- or coordination-related reasons, it should not affect truck ownership.
Adoption should only lead to changes in asset ownership in the northeast region of Figure 1.


P4:     OBC adoption should drive the incidence of driver ownership down more for long hauls
        using specialized trailers than for other hauls.


        Testing P3 and P4 requires an empirical framework through which we can identify
relationships between technological and organizational changes. The following section describes
this.


                                                  12
4. Empirical Framework
        Following from above, let Sio represent total surplus of haul i, if a driver owns the truck, and
Sic represent total surplus of haul i, if a carrier owns the truck. Specify these as:

                                      Sio = Xi β o + ε io
(9)
                                      Sic = X iβ c + ε ic

where Xi is a vector depicting haul characteristics and whether OBCs are used. εio and εic capture
how haul characteristics not observed by the econometrician affect surplus when using owner-
operators and company drivers, respectively.
        Assuming that ownership choices are efficient, company drivers will be chosen if and only if
Sic > Sio. Assuming that εio and εco are i.i.d. type I extreme value, the probability the carrier owns the
truck, conditional on Xi, is:


(10)                             e X i ( β c − β o ) = e Xi β = Λ(X β )
                       Pic =
                                1+e Xi ( β c − β o )   1+ e Xi β
                                                                   i


If E(Xiεio) = 0 and E(Xiεic) = 0, β indicates how Xi affects ownership. One then could estimate β
using cross-sectional data. But these orthogonality assumptions are not reasonable a priori because
factors not observed by the econometrician may affect technology choice and truck ownership
independently. For example, trucks used for unobservedly time-sensitive hauls may have OBCs to
improve coordination and be owned by carriers to mitigate rent-seeking by drivers. Correlations
between levels of OBC use and ownership shares therefore do not necessarily imply that adoption
affects asset ownership.
        With panel data, one could address this endogeneity problem by allowing for haul-specific
fixed effects. The panel version of the above model is based on the equations:

                                    S iot = X it β o + φ io + ε iot
(11)
                                    S ict = X it β c + φ ic + ε ict

The likelihood function would be based on the expression:

(12)                                  Pict = Λ(X it β + φ i )


                                                       13
φi would pick up time-invariant factors that affect the efficiency of driver ownership for a particular
haul—for example, the haul’s time-sensitivity. β would be identified by relationships between
changes in Xi (for example, OBC adoption) and changes in governance. This would mitigate the
endogeneity problem described above because if both IT use and ownership are affected by an
omitted time-invariant variable, the fixed effects would account for this.
        The data used in the analysis are not panel data: they are repeated cross-sections. They do not
track individual trucks or hauls from period to period. Therefore, we base our analysis on
observations of cohorts rather than trucks. These cohorts are at the level of product-trailer-distance-
state; for example, an observation is "trucks based in California used to haul food long distances in
refrigerated vans." Cohorts are defined narrowly in order to base them on as similar hauls as
possible, given the data. Although we lose information by aggregating truck-level data up to the
cohort level, doing so enables us to exploit the time dimension of the data and base tests on
relationships between technological and organizational change rather than levels.
        Our specification is a cohort analog of that described above. Let scrt be the share of company
drivers in cohort r at time t. We specify scrt and its analog sort as:

                                     s crt = Λ(X rt β + φ r + φ rt )
(13)
                                   s ort = 1 - Λ(X rt β + φ r + φ rt )

Xrt are cohort means of variables observed by the econometrician. The most important variables in
this vector are OBC adoption rates. The other terms are time-invariant and time-varying fixed
effects. Note that (13) does not follow from aggregating the individual model. Although we use the
same notation, the variables and parameters—in particular, β—are not the same as those in the
individual model.
        From these expressions, we obtain:

(14)                           hrt = ln (s crt /s ort ) = X it β + φ r + φ rt

One can eliminate the cohort-specific fixed effects by taking first differences.

(15)                            hrt - hr ,t −1 = (X it − X i ,t −1 ) β + η rt



                                                          14
Here ηrt = φrt - φr,t-1. (15) is the base specification. The OBC coefficients in the parameter vector β
identify relationships between within-cohort adoption rates and changes in ownership shares. ηrt
picks up omitted variables that affect changes in cohorts' ownership shares. If OBC adoption is
orthogonal to this residual term, simple regression estimates of β identify how adoption affects
ownership. One can use these estimates to test propositions P3 and P4 from the previous section.
        First-difference estimates greatly reduce concerns about endogeneity. But two issues remain.
One is that omitted cohort-specific factors may affect adoption and ownership changes
independently. For example, declines in the strength of local Teamsters unions may have affected
both how much carriers adopted OBCs and how much they moved toward using company drivers
between 1987 and 1992. If union strength declined at different rates across regions, this would
generate cross-sectional correlations between adoption and ownership changes that would not reflect
causal relationships. The other is that errors-in-variables issues arise when aggregating individual
observations up to the cohort level. Deaton (1985) shows that if one estimates the sample analog to
(15), there is an errors-in-variables problem with respect to the cohort-specific fixed effects. First-
differencing does not eliminate this source of error. It is captured in ηrt and may be correlated with
the explanatory variables. We address this issue by estimating the model using instrumental
variables, and discuss this in greater detail in section 6.12
        Equations (14) and (15) are only well-defined if scrt and sort are both greater than zero. When
estimating these equations, one can only use cohorts for which the owner-operator and company
driver shares are positive in both years. This raises the prospect of selection bias. Below we provide
evidence that while selecting cohorts on this basis does mean that the analysis is based on cohorts
with higher-than-average owner-operator shares, it likely does not affect estimates of β.

5. Data
        The data are from the 1987 and 1992 Truck Inventory and Use Surveys (TIUS) (See Bureau
of the Census (1989, 1995), Hubbard (2000).) The TIUS is a survey of the nation’s trucking fleet that
the Census takes every five years. The Census sends forms to the owners of a random sample of


12. We have also estimated the model dropping the smallest cohorts. In a previous version of this paper (Baker and
Hubbard (1999)), we report estimates from specification that use only cohorts with five or more observations in each
year and show that our results are robust.

                                                        15
trucks. The survey asks owners questions about the characteristics and use of their truck.
Characteristics include trucks' physical characteristics such as make and model year. They also
include whether certain aftermarket equipment is installed—including whether and what class of
OBCs are installed. Questions about use yield information on how far from home the truck was
generally operated, the class of trailer to which it was generally attached, the class of products it
generally hauled, and the state in which it was based. The survey also asks whether the truck was
driven by an owner-operator or a company driver.
         This paper uses observations of diesel-powered truck-tractors—the front halves of tractor-
trailer combinations. We eliminate observations of those that haul goods off-road, haul trash, are
driven for less than 500 miles during the year, or have missing values for relevant variables. This
leaves 19,308 observations for 1987 and 35,204 for 1992. The sample is larger for 1992 because the
Census surveyed more trucks.
         Table 1 contains owner-operator shares, by distance and year. In 1987, 14.1% of tractor-
trailers were driven by their owners.13 The share is higher for long hauls than short hauls. This is
consistent with P1. The right part of the table reports owner-operator shares for hauls using
specialized and non-specialized trailers. Here and elsewhere in this paper, "non-specialized trailers"
includes platforms and enclosed, non-refrigerated vans and "specialized trailers" includes all other
trailer types. The most prevalent specialized trailers are refrigerated vans, dump trailers, and tank
trucks. The owner-operator share is slightly higher for hauls using non-specialized trailers. This
provides weak evidence in favor of P2.14 Owner-operators' share fell between 1987 and 1992 from
14.1% to 11.1% overall, decreasing within each distance and trailer category. The percentage point
decline is greater for long hauls than short hauls, and for specialized than non-specialized trailers.
         Table 2 reports OBC adoption rates, by organizational form and distance, for 1992. OBC
adoption is negligible during 1987, and is treated as zero for that year throughout the paper. Table 2
indicates that some owner-operators adopt OBCs, presumably because of their maintenance and

13. Note that the sample contains trucks within both private and for-hire fleets. About half of the nation’s truck-
tractors operate within private fleets. By definition, all trucks within private fleets are driven by company drivers.
Also, the 1992 Survey contains more detailed distance categories than the 1987 Survey. We convert the five 1992
categories to the three 1987 ones when comparing the two years.

14. If one classifies dump trailers as non-specialized, the evidence for P2 is stronger. The difference between the
non-specialized and specialized shares increases to 2.3%.
                                                           16
coordination benefits. Adoption is higher for trucks driven by company drivers, and increases with
how far trucks operate from home. Almost 35% of trucks used for hauls of 500 or more miles and
operated by company drivers had either trip recorders or EVMS installed. Tables 1 and 2 thus
indicate that OBC adoption coincided with ownership changes in the aggregate. Hauls in general
moved from owner-operators to company drivers at the same time OBCs were beginning to diffuse.
Ownership changes and OBC adoption were both greatest for long hauls.
         The first column of Table 3 presents summary statistics for the 3676 cohorts in which at least
one truck was observed in both years.15 Because cohorts are defined narrowly, on the average they
are based on observations of very few trucks. As explained above, the main empirical analysis uses
only cohorts with positive company driver and owner-operator shares in both years. Only 426 of the
3676 cohorts satisfy this criterion. The right two columns report summary statistics for the included
and excluded cohorts. The included cohorts are based on more observations and have higher owner-
operator shares than the excluded ones. The latter is because almost all of the excluded cohorts have
no owner-operators in at least one of the two years. The included cohorts have larger changes in
ownership and higher adoption rates than the excluded cohorts. The main empirical analysis is thus
based on parts of the industry where the largest organizational and technological changes took place.
This is because the included cohort subsample is disproportionately comprised of long haul trucks.
         Table 4 examines relationships between technological and organizational change. We divide
cohorts according to whether their owner-operator share increased, decreased, or stayed the same
between 1987 and 1992 and compare OBC adoption rates for the three groups. The left panel uses all
3676 cohorts. On the average, cohorts where the owner-operator share decreased have an adoption
rate of 0.22. This is greater than the 0.20 adoption rate for those where the owner-operator share
increased. The right panel uses only the included cohorts. The decreases and increases have average
adoption rates of 0.25 and 0.22, respectively. Adoption is thus correlated with changes in asset
ownership. The similarity of this correlation in the two panels is evidence that relationships between




15. All calculations and estimates involving cohorts weight them by the number of observations within the cohort
and weighting factors supplied by the Census that depict differences in sampling rates across states. The formula is
(nr,87*kr,87+nr,92*kr,92)/2, where nr,t is the number of observations in cohort r and kr,t is the average Census weighting
factor in cohort r in year t. The results in section 6 are robust to variations in weighting.

                                                            17
adoption and organizational change for the included cohorts are representative of those of cohorts in
general.
6. Results
         The left panel of Table 5 contains results from estimating (14): the "levels" version of the
model. In it, we report results from eight multivariate regressions. In each, the two dependent
variables are the log-odds ratios: ln(scr,1987/sor,1987) and ln(scr,1992/sor,1992). In the top panel, we include
OBC adoption rates, distance dummies, and ln(trailer density) as explanatory variables. The latter
picks up differences in the thickness of the local trucking market.16 We restrict the coefficients on the
explanatory variables to be the same in each year. OBC adoption rates only appear in the 1992
equation because adoption rates are zero by assumption in 1987. The four columns report the
coefficient on OBC when we estimate the model using all included cohorts, short haul cohorts,
medium haul cohorts, and long haul cohorts, respectively. In the bottom panel we include trip
recorder and EVMS adoption rates separately.
         The results indicate that cohorts with high OBC use also have high company driver shares. In
the first column, the coefficient on OBC is positive and significant. Moving across the table, it is
positive and significant for medium and long hauls, but not for short hauls. In the bottom of the table,
the coefficients on trip recorder and EVMS are both positive and significant for medium and long
hauls. This table indicates relationships between OBC use and ownership, but one is unable to
determine whether this is because adoption caused ownership changes or because adoption took
place for hauls for which company drivers were used in the first place.
         The right panel presents results from analogous models that use 1992 truck-level data rather
than cohorts. These are logits, where the dependent variable equals one if the truck was driven by a
company driver and zero otherwise. Comparing these estimates to those in the left panel, the cross-
sectional relationships between OBC use and organizational form in our cohort sample are similar to
those in the individual data. There is little evidence that selection bias is affecting our estimates of
these relationships.




16. Trailer density is the number of trucks in the state that use the same trailer as the truck at hand, divided by the
state’s urbanized area. See Hubbard (1999) for details.

                                                           18
        Table 6 presents results from estimating equation (15). These are the first difference
estimates. From the top panel, cohorts with high OBC adoption move disproportionately toward
company ownership. Looking at the right side of the table, this is true only for long hauls. The
difference between the long haul and both the short- and medium-haul coefficients is statistically
significant, using a t-test of size 0.05. From the bottom panel, the trip recorder and EVMS
coefficients are almost the same for long hauls. Neither are statistically significant for short or
medium hauls. The estimates support P3 and part of P4: OBC adoption moves hauls toward
company ownership, and does so most for the longest hauls.
        These results produce two interesting contrasts. First, comparing the results in tables 5 and 6,
the medium haul coefficients lose statistical significance; those on OBC and trip recorder change
sign as well. The positive and significant coefficients in table 5 therefore indicated that OBCs were
adopted for medium hauls that used company drivers in the first place. In contrast, the coefficients on
the long haul subsample remain positive and significant. Second, the trip recorder and EVMS
coefficients are almost identical in the long haul specification in table 6. This suggests that there is a
relationship between ownership change and OBCs' incentive-improving features, but not their
coordination-improving features. If OBCs' coordination-improving features influenced ownership,
the coefficient on EVMS would differ from that on trip recorder.
        The estimates suggest that OBC diffusion was an important factor in explaining the 4.5
percentage point decline in the long-haul owner-operator share between 1987 and 1992. The long
haul estimate on OBC corresponds to a probability derivative of 0.13, evaluated at sample means.
The adoption rate of OBCs for long hauls is 0.26 in 1992. If the estimates reflect causal relationships,
the product of the probability derivative and the adoption rate provides an estimate of the change in
the owner-operator share that was due to OBC diffusion: 3.4 percentage points. This is about 75
percent of the decline in the owner-operator share.
        Table 7 presents results when estimating (15) separately for non-specialized and specialized
trailers. The point estimates indicate that the relationships between OBC adoption and organizational
change are strongest for long hauls using specialized trailers. Looking at the right-most column, the
point estimates are positive but not statistically significant for non-specialized trailers. They are
positive, significant, and large for specialized trailers. However, the OBC coefficient is only


                                                   19
statistically significantly larger for non-specialized than specialized trailers if one applies weak tests,
because the standard errors are high. For example, the difference between the OBC coefficients for
long haul trucks is 0.897, with a standard error of 0.645; this is statistically significantly greater than
zero using a t-test of size 0.15, but not of smaller sizes. The estimates thus provide some support for
P4, but this support is not strong.
        In sum, relationships between OBC adoption and changes in truck ownership are strongest
for hauls where the scope for good driving (g1) is high. There is also some evidence that they are
stronger when drivers' incentive to engage in rent-seeking behavior (g2) is high. OBCs are sometimes
adopted where g1 and g2 are low, but there is little evidence that they induce ownership changes in
such circumstances. These results are consistent with the proposition that OBCs affect asset
ownership because they change the set of contractible variables, enabling carriers to encourage good
driving without inviting rent-seeking behavior.

First Differences, Fixed Effects
        We next present results from a series of specifications that add trailer, product, and state
fixed effects in the first difference specifications. We do this for two reasons. First, it allows us to
explore what is driving the results in table 6. If, for example, the parameter estimates become small
and statistically insignificant when including a full set of trailer fixed effects, this would indicate that
the results in table 6 are largely identified by systematic relationships between adoption and
ownership changes at the trailer level. Second, it provides a guide for an identification strategy that
lets us estimate (15) with instrumental variables. For example, if the coefficients on the trailer fixed
effects are not jointly significant, then controlling for adoption rates, there is no evidence that there
exist systematic differences in ownership changes across trailer types. Such a result would provide
evidence in favor of an identification strategy that assumes that the unobserved factors that drove
ownership changes during this period were independent across trailers.
        Table 8 presents results using the long haul subsample from a series of estimates. The first
column repeats the right column of table 6. The next three include trailer, product, and state fixed
effects, respectively. The 12, 14, and 49 fixed effect coefficients in these three specifications are




                                                    20
estimated but not reported.17 The last includes trailer, product, and state fixed effects. From the
second column, the coefficients decrease somewhat when including trailer fixed effects—the trip
recorder coefficient turns insignificant using a t-test of size 0.05—but not much qualitatively
changes. From the third column, they decrease more when including instead product fixed effects.
Both the trip recorder and EVMS coefficients fall by 20-25% and turn insignificant. Part of the
phenomena reported in table 6 is due to trailer and product-level effects, but most is not. From the
fourth column, including state fixed effects makes the trip recorder coefficient fall by half. The trip
recorder coefficient in table 6 is picking up relationships between trip recorder adoption and
ownership changes at the state level. From the final column, including all three sets of fixed effects
makes all the estimates noisy and not statistically significant.
        The bottom of the table reports p-values for the hypothesis test that coefficients on the fixed
effects are jointly equal to zero. One can reject this null only for the last two specifications. The
trailer and product dummies have little explanatory power. In specifications not reported here, we
found that this also was true for specifications that use all distances and medium hauls. (There are
too few short haul observations to perform such tests.) The fact that the state dummies, but not the
trailer and product dummies, have explanatory power indicates that the most compelling alternative
interpretations of table 6 revolve around omitted variables that differ across regions rather than
classes of hauls: for example, changes in local labor market conditions rather than changes in the
time-sensitivity of certain classes of hauls. This makes the trailer and product dummies good
candidates for instruments.

GMM-IV Estimation
        Table 9 presents results from GMM estimation using trailer and product dummies as
instruments. The second column uses only the trailer dummies. The point estimates remain positive,
but all are very noisy—the standard errors are about twice as high as those in OLS estimation
(reported in the first column). The third column uses only the product dummies. The point estimates
on OBC and EVMS increase sharply. The OBC and EVMS coefficients are positive and significant
using t-tests of size 0.05; the trip recorder coefficient is significant using a t-test of size 0.10. The

17. There are actually 20 product categories. We combine several of the least common ones into a miscellaneous
category in these specifications.

                                                       21
fourth column uses both the product and the trailer dummies. The coefficients remain large and
positive and the standard errors become about 20% smaller. The coefficients on OBC and trip
recorder are significant using a test of size 0.05. That on EVMS is nearly the same as in the first
column and is significant using a t-test of size 0.10.
        In specifications not shown, we fail to find any relationship between OBC adoption and
ownership changes for short or medium hauls.
        The GMM-IV estimates provide evidence that the results in table 6 reflect causal
relationships.18 The 1.450 point estimate on OBC in the right column corresponds to a probability
derivative of 0.18. This, in turn, implies that OBC diffusion lowered the owner-operator share by 4.8
percentage points – about equal to the 4.5 percentage point actual decline in the owner-operator
share. While our point estimates of the magnitudes are noisy, they suggest that much of the
movement toward company drivers for long hauls was due to the diffusion of new monitoring
technologies.

Adoption and Driving Patterns
        In this subsection we investigate whether OBC use affects how company drivers drive.
According to our model, one should expect OBC use to lead company drivers to operate trucks at
more consistent speeds. If so, this should be manifested in better fuel economy. This section presents
regression results in which we test whether, controlling for a host of truck characteristics, trucks with
OBCs are more fuel efficient. There are two alternative interpretations if one finds that this is the
case. One is that OBCs affect how drivers drive. The other is that OBCs supply information that
helps mechanics maintain trucks better. To distinguish between these interpretations, we compare the
relationship between OBC use and fuel economy for company drivers and owner-operators.
Assuming that the maintenance value of OBCs is the same for company drivers and owner-operators,
finding that it affects fuel economy more for company drivers is evidence of their incentive-
improving effect.19

18. Furthermore, the fact that the GMM-IV estimates are higher than the OLS estimates suggests that measurement
error biases the OLS estimates toward zero: against finding such relationships.

19. Selection issues work against finding such a relationship. One would expect OBCs to be adopted where agency
costs are the highest. Non-adopting company drivers probably drive better, on the average, than adopting ones would
if they were not monitored.
                                                        22
         We run this regression on 1992 observations of individual trucks. The dependent variable is
the truck's miles per gallon, reported by its owner in the TIUS. The main independent variables are
interactions between dummies that indicate whether drivers own their trucks (one if driver
ownership, zero otherwise) and whether OBCs are installed (one if installed, zero otherwise). We
include many additional variables as controls. Control variables include dummy variables that
indicate the truck's make, model year, engine size, the number of driving axles, and whether it has
aerodynamic features. They also include variables that capture how the truck is used: how far from
home it operates, whether it hauls single, double, or triple trailers, the average weight of the truck
plus cargo, and whether it is attached to a refrigerated or specialized trailer. They include a set of
dummy variables that indicate who maintains the truck: the driver, a garage, a trucking company, an
equipment leasing firm, etc. Finally, we include the log of the truck's odometer reading to capture the
effects of depreciation.
         Table 11 reports results from four regressions. The owner-operator coefficient is negative and
significant for short hauls, and statistically zero for medium and long hauls. There is no evidence that
company drivers without OBCs drive less efficiently than owner-operators for medium and long
hauls, and some evidence that they drive better for short hauls.20 The trip recorder and EVMS
interactions indicate that medium- and long-haul trucks with OBCs get better fuel economy than
those without them. There is no evidence that the trip recorder or EVMS coefficients are larger for
company drivers than owner-operators for medium-haul trucks. But for long-haul trucks, the point
estimate on the trip recorder coefficient for company drivers is more than twice as high as that for
owner-operators. The difference is not significantly different from zero using a t-test of size 0.05, but
is when using a test of size 0.10. (The owner-operator estimate is noisy because so few owner-
operators drive trucks with trip recorders.) On the average across long-haul trucks for which they
were adopted, trip recorders' incentive effect improved fuel economy by at least 0.16 miles per
gallon, assuming that selection biases the parameter estimates downward.21 Our estimates imply that
this is about equal to aerodynamic hoods' effect on fuel economy. There is no difference in the


20. It is not clear, however, that driving better translates into higher fuel economy for short-hauls.

21. For a truck that travels 100,000 miles/year, a 0.16 improvement in MPG translates to a $620 savings per year,
assuming that fuel costs $1/gallon.

                                                           23
coefficients on the EVMS coefficients. The trip recorder contrast provides some evidence that
company drivers with OBCs drive more cost-effectively than those without them. There is no
evidence that EVMS use changes how drivers drive—perhaps because their primary purpose is
improving dispatchers' scheduling decisions, not drivers' incentives.

7. Conclusion
       This paper investigates what determines asset ownership in trucking; in particular, how
contractibility affects whether drivers own the trucks they drive. We find that improved contracting
(through the use of on-board computers) leads to more integrated asset ownership, by changing the
set of decision rights—the residual control rights—that are allocated to the owner of the asset.
Owner-operators are used for hauls where non-contractible decisions that affect trucks' value are
important, but are used less once decisions become more contractible. We also provide evidence on
truck operating performance (in the form of miles per gallon outcomes) that is consistent with the
ownership results. Improvements in performance due to the installation of trip recorders are greater
for company-owned drivers than for owner-operators, reflecting the improved incentives that the
company drivers have after the adoption of OBCs.
       More generally, this paper provides important support for the Grossman and Hart (1986)
model of asset ownership. Owners—by definition—retain residual rights of control, and the
equilibrium allocation of these residual rights is the one that induces the best incentives for
maximizing the value of assets. This simple hypothesis has received little direct empirical testing;
this paper provides such a test. The introduction of trip recorders on trucks does nothing to change
the threat of hold-up, nor to reduce transaction costs among drivers, carriers, and shippers. Trip
recorders are pure monitoring devices, serving only to make contractible a previously unmonitored
set of actions. Indeed, trip recorders are almost irrelevant to the contractual relationship between
carriers and owner-operators. Yet, by changing the efficiency of an alternative governance
arrangement (company ownership), they reduce the relative efficiency of the owner-operator
governance form.
       The analysis in this paper may explain how contractibility affects firm boundaries in other
contexts, especially those in which the care of valuable assets is important. Presumably the
prevalence of independent contractors in the construction trades is importantly influenced by the

                                                24
requirement to provide incentives for proper operation and maintenance of equipment. The results in
this paper suggest that changes in monitoring technology could change the industry structure in this
sector. Such changes could similarly affect the professions. The prevalence of "owner-operators" in
law and medicine is driven to a large degree by the need to vest in professionals the value of their
reputational assets. It appears that changes in the ability of insurance companies and HMOs to
monitor the actions of physicians is causing higher rates of vertical integration in medicine, leading
doctors to become employees rather than independent contractors.
       Innovations in information technology have led economists, technologists, and business
people to theorize about how new informational capabilities will affect the boundaries of the firm.
We test a theory concerning one of its capabilities: expanding the set of contractible variables. We
find that this capability leads to less subcontracting. But changing information technology offers
many other new capabilities, some of which improve resource allocation ("coordination") along with
incentives. In future research, we plan to examine the organizational impact of some of these other
capabilities, in particular how OBCs' coordination-enhancing capabilities affect shippers' make-or-
buy decision. Results of this work will further improve our understanding of how information affects
the organization of firms and markets.




                                                 25
References

Alchian, Armen, and Harold Demsetz (1972). "Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization," American Economic Review, 62, 777-795.

Baker, George, and Thomas N. Hubbard (1999). "Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board
Computers and Governance in the U.S. Trucking Industry," mimeo, July 1999.

Brickley, James A., and Fredrick H. Dark (1987). "The Choice of Organizational Form: The Case of
Franchising," Journal of Financial Economics, 18, 401-420.

Brynjolffson, Erik, and Lorin Hitt (1997). "Information Technology and Organizational Design:
Some Evidence from Micro Data," mimeo, Stanford University.

Bureau of the Census (1989). 1987 Census of Transportation: Truck Inventory and Use Survey.
Washington, DC : Government Printing Office.

Bureau of the Census (1995). 1992 Census of Transportation: Truck Inventory and Use Survey.
Washington, DC : Government Printing Office.

Chakraborty, Atreya and Mark Kazarosian (1999). "Product Differentiation and the Use of
Information Technology: New Evidence from the Trucking Industry," mimeo, Brandeis University.

Coase, Ronald H. (1937). "The Nature of the Firm," Economica, 4, 386-405.

Deaton, Angus (1985). "Panel Data from Time Series of Cross-Sections," Journal of Econometrics,
30, 109-26.

Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart (1986). "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
Vertical and Lateral Integration." Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691-719.

Hubbard, Thomas N. (1999). "How Wide Is the Scope of Hold-Up-Based Theories? Contractual
Form and Market Thickness in Trucking," NBER Working Paper #7347, September 1999.

Hubbard, Thomas N. (2000). "The Demand for Monitoring Technologies: The Case of Trucking,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Lafontaine, Francine (1992). "Agency Theory and Franchising: Some Empirical Results," Rand
Journal of Economics, 23, 263-283.

Maister, David H. (1980). Management of Owner-Operator Fleets. Lexington, MA: Lexington.

Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts (1992). Economics, Organization, and Management. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ : Prentice-Hall.
                                             26
Nickerson, Jack, and Brian S. Silverman (1999). "Why Aren't All Truck Drivers Owner-Operators?
Asset Ownership and the Employment Relationship in Interstate For-Hire Trucking," mimeo,
Harvard Business School.

Ouelett, Lawrence J. (1994). Pedal to the Metal: The Work Lives of Truckers. Philadelphia, PA :
Temple.

Shepard, Andrea (1993). "Contractual Form, Retail Price, and Asset Characteristics in Gasoline
Retailing,"Rand Journal of Economics, 24, 58-77.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New
York: Free Press.




                                              27
Table 1
Owner-Operator Shares, 1987 and 1992
                                                                                          Specialized   Non-Specialized
                                 All Distances   <50 Miles    50-200 Miles   200+ Miles    Trailers        Trailers

Owner-Operator Share, 1987          14.1%          8.6%           11.5%        19.8%        13.8%           14.4%
Owner-Operator Share, 1992          11.1%          4.8%           9.5%         15.3%        10.6%           11.7%

Change in Owner-Operator Share      -3.0%         -3.8%           -2.0%        -4.5%        -3.2%           -2.7%




                                                             28
Table 2
1992 On Board Computer Adoption Rates

                             Distance from Home Base (Miles)

                 <50      50-100        100-200         200-500   500+

OBC

Owner-Operator   3.7%     3.1%           4.0%             7.0%    9.8%
Company Driver   7.1%     12.6%          21.1%           27.4%    34.8%

Trip Recorder

Owner-Operator   1.7%      1.2%          0.9%             2.3%    2.4%
Company Driver   4.3%      7.8%          12.7%           12.0%    8.4%

EVMS

Owner-Operator   2.0%      2.0%           3.1%           4.8%     7.4%
Company Driver   2.8%      4.9%           8.4%           15.4%    26.5%




                                                  29
Table 3
Cohort Summary Statistics

                                                  All                 All Included     All Excluded
                                                Cohorts                 Cohorts          Cohorts

Cohorts                                          3676                     426             3250

Observations/Cohort, 1987                         4.13                   10.61            3.28
Observations/Cohort, 1992                         6.42                   17.80            4.93

Owner-Operator Share, 1987                        0.14                    0.27             0.08
Owner-Operator Share, 1992                        0.10                    0.18             0.06
Change in O/O Share                              -0.04                   -0.09            -0.02

OBC Adoption, 1992                                0.19                    0.24            0.16
Trip Recorder Adoption, 1992                      0.09                    0.10            0.08
EVMS Adoption, 1992                               0.10                    0.14            0.08


Note: "Included" cohorts are those with owner-operator shares between zero and one in 1987 and 1992.
Averages are computing using weights, where weight = (numobs87*expanf87 + numobs92*expanf92)/2




                                                                    30
Table 4
OBC Adoption by Sign of Ownership Share Change
                                                   All Cohorts                             Included Cohorts

                                              Owner-Operator Share                       Owner-Operator Share
                                  Decreases        Increases          Same   Decreases        Increases         Same

N                                   821               683             2172     271               134             21

Mean Owner-Operator Share, 1987     0.33              0.06            0.01     0.31              0.17           0.24
Mean Owner-Operator Share, 1992     0.09              0.25            0.01     0.15              0.27           0.24

Mean OBC Adoption Rates, 1992       0.22              0.20            0.14     0.25              0.22           0.17




                                                                 31
Table 5
Truck Ownership and OBC Adoption -- Levels Estimates

                          Product-Trailer-State-Distance Cohorts                                         Individual Trucks, 1992 Data

                  All Distances       <50 Miles 50-200 Miles 200+ Miles                  All Distances        <50 Miles 50-200 Miles 200+ Miles

Variable

OBC                   1.560            -2.701         1.204        1.698                     1.272              0.029        1.367        1.331
                     (0.189)           (2.018)       (0.389)      (0.228)                   (0.068)            (0.225)      (0.134)      (0.079)


Trip Recorder         1.131             -4.817        1.241        1.435                     1.528              0.114        2.267        1.503
                     (0.298)           (2.140)       (0.511)      (0.367)                   (0.119)            (0.300)      (0.320)      (0.142)

EVMS                  1.851             7.173         1.132        1.850                     1.134              -0.084       0.700        1.253
                     (0.243)           (4.806)       (0.804)      (0.279)                   (0.081)            (0.329)      (0.191)      (0.092)


N                     426                 38          123           265                     33283               7998        11429        11941

Control variables (not shown) are distance from home dummies and ln(trailer density).

The dependent variables in the left panel are ln(company driver share/owner-operator share) in 1987 and 1992. The dependent variable in the right
panel is a dummy variable that equals one if the truck is driven by a company driver and zero otherwise. The right panel uses only 1992 data.




                                                                      32
Table 6
Truck Ownership and OBC Adoption -- First Difference Estimates
Dependent Variable: ln(cd share/o/o share)92 - ln(cd share/o/o share)87
Cells are based on product-trailer-state-distance cohorts.

                                       All Distances                <50 Miles 50-200 Miles 200+ Miles

             Variable

             OBC                           0.630                      -2.697       -0.612    1.024
                                          (0.252)                    (2.199)      (0.517)   (0.320)


             Trip Recorder                 0.181                      -4.465       -0.899    1.082
                                          (0.380)                    (2.377)      (0.648)   (0.484)

             EVMS                          0.956                      0.241        0.150     0.990
                                          (0.325)                    (5.645)      (1.160)   (0.386)


             N                              426                        38           123       265

Control variables (not shown) are distance from home dummies and ln(trailer density).




                                                                      33
Table 7
Truck Ownership and OBC Adoption -- Trailer Subsamples
Dependent Variable: ln(cd share/o/o share)92 - ln(cd share/o/o share)87
Cells are based on product-trailer-state-distance cohorts.

             Variable                  All Distances                <50 Miles 50-200 Miles 200+ Miles

Specialized Trailers Only

             OBC                           0.573                     -2.966       -0.762      1.465
                                          (0.343)                    (2.403)      (0.584)    (0.471)


             Trip Recorder                -0.067                     -4.957       -1.466      1.661
                                          (0.494)                    (2.562)      (0.714)    (0.686)

             EVMS                          1.224                      7.725        1.186      1.317
                                          (0.499)                    (6.321)      (1.301)    (0.604)


             N                              229                        33               76    120


Non-Specialized Trailers Only

             OBC                           0.552                                   0.458      0.567
                                          (0.383)                                 (1.122)    (0.443)


             Trip Recorder                 0.657                                   2.039      0.497
                                          (0.610)                                 (1.473)    (0.699)

             EVMS                          0.499                                  -3.192      0.603
                                          (0.451)                                 (2.512)    (0.523)


             N                              197                         5               47    145

Control variables (not shown) are distance from home dummies and ln(trailer density).
Non-specialized trailers are platforms and enclosed non-refrigerated vans.

                                                                                  34
Table 8
Truck Ownership and OBC Adoption -- Fixed Effects
Long Haul Trucks Only

Dependent Variable: ln(cd share/o/o share)92 - ln(cd share/o/o share)87
Cells are based on product-trailer-state-distance cohorts.

                                                                                          Trailer,
                                                                                          Product
           Fixed Effects:            None                 Trailer    Product     State     State

           Variable

           OBC                       1.024                 1.005      0.799      0.846     0.204
                                    (0.320)               (0.344)    (0.384)    (0.349)   (0.463)

           -LogL                    1809.5                1807.1     1801.5      1770.1   1758.4

           P-values for H0:                                0.964      0.313      0.004     0.020
           Fixed Effects Equal 0


           Trip Recorder             1.082                 0.866      0.888      0.431    -0.271
                                    (0.484)               (0.526)    (0.539)    (0.533)   (0.654)

           EVMS                      0.990                 1.091      0.738      1.106     0.517
                                    (0.386)               (0.422)    (0.466)    (0.431)   (0.553)


           -LogL                    1809.5                1806.9     1801.4      1769.4   1757.7

           P-values for H0:                                0.951      0.301      0.003     0.016
           Fixed Effects Equal 0



Control variables (not shown) are distance from home dummies and ln(trailer density).

                                                                           35
Table 9
Truck Ownership and OBC Adoption -- GMM-IV Estimates
Long Haul Trucks Only

Dependent Variable: ln(cd share/o/o share)92 - ln(cd share/o/o share)87
Cells are based on product-trailer-state-distance cohorts.


           Variable

           OBC                        1.024                      0.755         1.861       1.450
                                     (0.320)                    (0.669)       (0.512)     (0.432)

           Number of OID Conditions:                              11            17          27


           Trip Recorder              1.082                      2.055         1.939       2.232
                                     (0.484)                    (1.153)       (1.064)     (0.824)

           EVMS                       0.990                      0.117         1.774       1.038
                                     (0.386)                    (0.812)       (0.833)     (0.638)

           Number of OID Conditions:                              10            16          26


           Instruments:              None                       Trailers     Products   Trailers and
                                                                                         Products

N = 265.
Control variables (not shown) are distance from home dummies and ln(trailer density).




                                                  36
Table 10
1992: Fuel Economy, Vehicle Ownership, and Distance
Dependent Variable: MPG           All Distances          <50 Miles      50-200 Miles       200+ Miles

    Variable

    Owner-Operator                   -0.042               -0.159           -0.008           -0.015
                                     (0.017)              (0.064)          (0.033)          (0.019)

    TR*Owner-Operator                 0.063                -0.514           0.149            0.127
                                     (0.096)              (0.330)          (0.265)          (0.091)

    TR*Company Driver                 0.186               -0.011            0.108            0.289
                                     (0.019)              (0.067)          (0.033)          (0.021)

    EVMS*Owner-Operator               0.184                0.299            0.346            0.146
                                     (0.064)              (0.343)          (0.165)          (0.059)

    EVMS*Company Driver               0.115               -0.060            0.165            0.126
                                     (0.019)              (0.084)          (0.042)          (0.019)

    R-squared                        0.2102                0.1539           0.2411           0.2516

    N                                 35203                8002             11647            15552

Regressions include controls for: distance from home, who maintains truck, refrigerated/specialized trailer,
driving axles, vehicle make and model year, equipment dummies (such as for aerodynamic features),
average weight, lifetime miles, and engine size.




                                                   37
      Figure 1
      Asset Ownership and OBC Adoption




                                                              g2=2g1


                                         Pre-OBC
                                         Company
                                          driver
                                                   Pre-OBC
  Scope                     Adopt, no               Owner
                                                   operator
for rent                    switch
seeking
    (g2)                                           Adopt and switch
                                                   governance

                                               Will adopt OBC

                                               Will not adopt OBC
            No
            adoption,
            no switch

                                          Scope for good driving (g1)
