                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CONTROLS ON CAPITAL INFLOWS: DO THEY WORK?


                                            José De Gregorio
                                           Sebastian Edwards
                                           Rodrigo O. Valdés


                                          Working Paper 7645
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7645

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the 1998 IASE-NBER Conference. De Gregorio thanks
FONDECYT (Chile) research grant 1990063 for financial support. We thank Carlos dos Reis Carvalho,
Leonardo Hernández, Anne Krueger, Francisco Nadal-De-Simone, a referee, and conference participants for
helpful comments, María Inés Urbina for helpful conversations and the Balance of Payments Department of
the Central Bank of Chile for kindly preparing some data. We also thank Claudio Bravo, Francisco Gallego
and especially Cristóbal Huneeus for very excellent assistance. This paper presents the views of the authors
and does not represent in any way positions or views of the Central Bank of Chile or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2000 by José De Gregorio, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo O. Valdés. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Controls on Capital Inflows: Do they Work?
José De Gregorio, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo O. Valdés
NBER Working Paper No. 7645
April 2000
JEL No. F21, F30, F32, F41


                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper analyzes the effectiveness of capital controls, in particular the Chilean experience
with the use of the unremunerated reserve requirement. We examine the effects on interest rates,
real exchange rate, and the volume and composition of capital inflows. The effects are elusive and
it is difficult to pin down long-run effects. Although after the unremunerated reserve requirement
was introduced there was an increase in the interest rate differential, the econometric evidence does
not show it has a significant long-run effect on interest rate differentials. There are also no effects
on the real exchange rate. However, the more persistent and significant effect is on the composition
of capital inflows, tilting composition toward longer maturity.


José De Gregorio                                       Sebastian Edwards
Universidad de Chile                                   Anderson Graduate School of Business
                                                       UCLA
                                                       110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
                                                       Box 951481
                                                       Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                                       and NBER
                                                       sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu

Rodrigo O. Valdés
Banco Central de Chile
Agustinas 1180
Santiago, Chile
rvaldesx@condor.bcentral.cl
1      Introduction

In the aftermath of the East Asian, Russian and Brazilian currency crises, a number
of authors have argued that capital mobility can be highly destabilizing in emerging
markets. As a consequence, an increasing number of analysts - including senior World
Bank and IMF officials - have argued that, in order to prevent future crises, emerging
markets should restrict capital mobility. In this discussion a distinction has been made
between controls on inflows and outflows, as well as on market-based-restrictions and
quantitative controls (Edwards 1999a,b). Most supporters of imposing some form of
market-based controls on capital inflows have argued that emerging countries should
implement a system similar to that adopted by Chile during most of the 1990s (Stiglitz
1999). In spite of the increasing popularity of controls on inflows, there has been very
limited empirical work on the subject. More specifically, to date there has been no
comprehensive attempt at evaluating the different aspects of Chile’s recent experience
with capital account restrictions.1
    The purpose of this paper is to provide a detailed quantitative evaluation of the of
the Chile’s controls on capital inflows. Our goal is to cover as many angles as possible,
and we concentrate on the effects of the controls on the level and composition of
capital flows, and on real exchange rates. In an attempt to produce robust results we
examine the data, we use traditional econometrics, estimating reduced forms for the
actual flows, and we estimate a series of vector autoregressions (VARs).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the Chilean
macroeconomic experience during the last ten years and reviews some institutional
details related to the Chile’s unremunerated reserve requirements (URR) on capital
inflows. Section 3 discusses and quantifies the interest rate-equivalent cost of the
URR. Section 4 analyzes the impact of the URR on capital flows, its level and com-
position. Section 5 presents evidence on the effect of the URR on interest rates and
real exchnage rates using a semi-structural VAR approach. Finally, section 6 presents
some concluding remarks.
    1 However,there have been several studies examining the effects of the URR using a variety of methods. A partial
list includes Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1996, 1998), Budnevich and Le Fort (1997), Le Fort and Sanhueza (1997),
Laurens and Cardoso (1998), Soto (1998). Some of this work is reviewed in detail in Nadal-De-Simone and Sorsa
(1999), and more recently Gallego, Hernández and Schmidt-Hebbel (1999) revisit some of the issues we examine in
this paper.




                                                         1
2   Overview

Between 1987 and 1997 the Chilean economy experienced a stellar performance, with
GDP growing in excess of 7.5% per year. This was the result of a combination of
a high rate of capital accumulation and fast productivity growth. Fixed investment
reached levels above 30% in 1995,and labor productivity grew at an average of 4.5%
per year during that period. These figures have no precedent in Chile’s economic
performance in the postwar period.
    One of the major achievements during this period has been the reduction of infla-
tion to one-digit levels, quite a success in a country historically prone to very high
inflationary inertia. This result has been the combination of both monetary and fiscal
policies. On the money side the Central Bank – which has been independent since
1989 – has implemented tight monetary policy, via high interest rates, whenever sig-
nals of inflationary pressures appear. On the public finance side there has been a
permanent surplus in the budget between 1987 and 1998.
    Since (at least) the mid 1980s Chile’s growth strategy has relied on a rapid expan-
sion of exports. This, in turn, has been the result of both Chile’s trade liberalization
strategy and the authorities’ efforts to maintain a depreciated real exchange rate (see
figure 1). During the early 1990s, however, Chile’s currency began to strengthened
in real terms. This was the result of a combination of factors, including the surge of
capital inflows into emerging markets in general, and Chile in particular; a positive
international environment; and the rapid growth in producticity (the Ricardo-Balassa
effect). The real exchange rate appreciated at average rates between 4 and 5% per
year between 1990 and 1997. Despite this appreciation, during this period exports
continued to grow strongly.
    The massive capital inflows of the early 1990s also affected monetary policy. Since
the mid 1980s Chile’s Central Bank had pursued a disinflation policy based on real
interest rate targeting. However, after Chile regained access to international capital
markets, high domestic interest rates attracted foreign funds, putting pressure on
money creation. The URR allowed a differential in interest, but was certainly limited
by the magnitude of the URR. Figure 2 shows the difference between the forward dis-
count and the interest rate differential in Chile between 1994 and 1997. The forward
discount corresponds to UF/dollar 90-day forwards contracts while the interest rate
differential uses UF-indexed 90-day central bank notes and 90-day Libor in dollars.


                                           2
Due to the URR this difference moves between two bounds: zero and approximately
3%.2
    It is precisely in this context of an appreciating real exchange rate, and a loss of
monetary control that the authorities introduced, in June of 1991, capital controls on
inflows. These capital controls took the form of unremunerated reserve requirements
(URR), at a rate of 20%, (table 1 presents a chronology of the most important changes
in the URR administration), which were originally applied to all new credits. During
the initial phase of this policy, the 20% deposit applied for the term of the credit, with
limits of 90 days and one year, and was denominated in the currency of the credit.
This meant that an agent who borrowed $1 internationally had to deposit 20 cents
at the Central Bank in a non-interest bearing account. In order to avoid liquidity
problems arising from this requirement, foreign creditors were given the option to pay
an up-front fee marginally higher than the implied opportunity cost of the URR. This
was done through a promissory note with a repurchase obligation at a discount.
    In May and July, 1992 important changes were introduced to this policy. The
reserve requirement was raised to 30% and the holding period was fixed at one full
year, regardless of the term structure of the credit. In addition, at this time the
controls’ coverage was extended to credits associated to foreign direct investment.3
    From early on a war of sorts developed between the authorities and the private
sector. As the latter found ways to get around the controls, the authorities discovered
new way of closing loopholes. Important changes were again introduced in mid 1995:
Secondary market ADR’s (American depository receipts) became subject to the URR.
In addition, all portfolio flows entering through the so-called chapter XIV of the
Chilean payments regulation, would have to pay the URR. Simultaneously, rules for
FDI were changed. In 1998, and under strong pressures against the peso, the Central
Bank reduced the URR to 10% in late June, and later on in September the URR was
set at zero.
    In addition to the URR, Chile has attempted to control capital inflows by imposing
a minimum stay requirement to FDI and portfolio flows. The nature of this “minimum
stay” requirement changed through time, however. In early 1990s foreign investors
   2 In contrast to the full capital mobility case, the forward discount does not take a unique value given by interest

rate differential, but it must fluctuate within a range implicitly defined by the existence of the URR, see Cowan and
De Gregorio (1998). The exact wide of this band is complicated to calculate since it involves an option value, see
Herrera and Valdés (1997).
   3 Bank deposits in foreign-denominated currency in Chile also had a similar URR. This one has a different holding

period from the foreign credit URR, lasting as long as the deposit is in place.



                                                          3
had to wait three years to repatriate capital. In 1992, this requirement was reduced
to one year. This has limited participation of foreign institutional investors in Chile’s
capital markets, significantly reducing its liquidity. Although we recognize that this
restriction has been (very) important, in this paper we we restrict our attention to
the case of the URR.


3   The Interest Rate-Equivalent Cost of the URR

In this section we derive the implied interest rate-equivalent cost that agents face with
the reserve requirement on capital inflows, and discuss some important institutional
details. There are different ways to compute this tax-equivalence, and it is important
for the empirical implementation and the overall evaluation of the URR to understand
the assumptions and approximations underlying each alternative measure. We first
assume that the URR is the only tax and that there is no exchange rate risk. We
then analyze a more general case.
   The reserve requirement is a fraction (u) of a credit that has to be deposited at
the Central Bank without being remunerated. At the end of the holding period (h
months) the Central Bank reimburses the reserve requirement in the same currency
it was deposited in. Since this is a restriction to inflows we concentrate in the case of
borrowing abroad at i∗ to invest in Chile for a period of k months (maturity).
   Given a cost of borrowing abroad (i∗ ), and the reserve requirement implicit pa-
rameters, we can compute the interest rate (ignoring risk premia) for a k-months
investment, ik , at which an investor makes zero profits. Once we compute this rate,
we can compute the tax-equivalent of the unremunerated reserve requirement µk us-
ing:

                                     ik ≡ i∗ + µk .                                  (1)

   To compute the domestic interest rate at which the investor makes zero profit
from borrowing abroad and investing at home we can simply look at the cash flows
involved. Once we have the domestic rate that yields zero profit (that is, the internal
rate of return of the project “investing in Chile for k-months”) it is straightforward
to compute µk .




                                           4
3.1   Short-run Investment

We first consider the case of k < h months, with a holding period of h months
for the reserve requirement. Therefore, borrowing abroad one dollar at (an annual)
rate of i∗ to invest at ik in Chile, for k months, would have the following cash flows
consequences:
  1. At t = 0 the investor has available the remaining after depositing the reserve
     requirement. That is, he invests (1 − u) at ik .
  2. At t = k the loan has to be paid. The cash flow is: −(1 + i∗ )k/12 .
  3. At t = h the reserve requirement is returned, and hence, the cash flow is u.
   Therefore, the annual rate ik , at which the investor is indifferent between investing
at home and abroad (computing all values as of time h, when u is returned) is:

                 (1 − u)(1 + ik )k/12 (1 + i∗ )(h−k)/12 + u = (1 + i∗ )h/12 .           (2)

Solving for ik we find the tax-equivalent of the URR:

                            (1 + i∗ )k/12 − u(1 + i∗ )(k−h)/12
          (1 + ik )k/12 =                                      ≡ (1 + i∗ + µk )k/12 .   (3)
                                          1−u

3.2   Long-run Investment

The tax equivalence of the URR is somewhat more complicated when the investment
horizon exceeds one year (the required URR period). In this case, the investor has
to decide whether, at the end of the year, to maintain the 30% corresponding to the
URR in Chile, or to deposit it outside the country. For simplicity we first assume
that this decision is made in t = 0. If the returned reserves are deposited at i∗ , then
the no-arbitrage condition is the same as in the case of k < h (given by equation (3)).
However, if the returned reserves are deposited domestically at a rate ik , then the
implied interest rate-equivalent cost is smaller. We denote it by µ0k and is implicitly
defined by:

                          (1 + i∗ )k/12 − u(1 + ik )(k−h)/12
          (1 + ik )k/12 =                                    ≡ (1 + i∗ + µk )k/12 , (4)
                                        1−u
which has no closed form solution and has to be solved numerically for given param-
eters. Of course, in the case k = h we have that µh = µ0h .

                                               5
   More generally, given that the decision of what to do with the returned reserves
will be optimal, investors will consider the following no arbitrage condition:

           (1 − u)(1 + ik )k/12 + u(1 + E[maxhik , i∗ i])(k−h)/12 = (1 + i∗ )k/12 ,        (5)

where E[maxhik , i∗ i] denotes the expected maximum interest rate at which it will be
possible to invest the reserves.
   Using the approximation that (1 + j)x ≈ 1 + xj on (3), and that the proceeds of
the reserve requirement is invested at i∗ , we have that the approximate tax equivalent
(denoted by µ̃k ) is found solving the following equation:

                   1 + ki∗ − u(1 + (k − h)i∗ ) = (1 − u)(1 + k(i∗ + µ̃k )),                (6)

which yields:

                                           u h
                                        µ̃k = i∗ .                           (7)
                                         1−uk
   This simplified equation has been used in the URR literature by, among others,
Cárdenas and Barrera, 1997 and Valdés-Prieto and Soto, 1998).

3.3   Other Taxes

We can also consider two other taxes applied to foreign borrowing in Chile. First,
there is 4% tax on interest paid abroad that we denote as τ . With this tax the
borrower has to pay i∗ (1 + τ )% on interest abroad. And second, there is a tax of 0.1%
per month (denoted by w) for all credits, foreign and domestic, with a ceiling of 12
months. To simplify we assume that this tax is paid at date 0.
   We denote by µk and µ0k the implied interest rate-equivalent cost that agents face
when considering all taxes and investment of reserves is done at i∗ and ik , respectively.
These costs are given by:


                k/12     (1 + i∗ (1 + τ ))k/12 − u(1 + i∗ )(k−h)/12
       (1 + ik )       =                                            ≡ (1 + i∗ + µk )k/12   (8)
                                  (1 − u) − w minhk, 12i

and




                                                   6
                k/12     (1 + i∗ (1 + τ ))k/12 − u(1 + ik )(k−h)/12
       (1 + ik )       =                                            ≡ (1 + i∗ + µ0k )k/12 .   (9)
                                  (1 − u) − w minhk, 12i

3.4   Reserve Currency Denomination

During some periods investors were allowed to choose the currency denomination of
the reserve requirement. At a first sight one may think that given covered interest
rate parity the choice was innocuous, but this is not the case. Since the reserve is
unremunerated, an investor prefers to choose the currency for which the interest rate
was the lowest. For example, if the interest rate in yen was the lowest, as it was the
case for a long time, a reserve requirement of u dollars would be converted at the
spot exchange rate of ey (yen/dollar) to uey yen. In order to cover the operation,
the investor could buy dollars h months forward at a rate of f y . Hence, at the end
of the holding period the investor would receive uey /f y . Using covered interest rate
parity, and denoting by i∗ the interest rate in dollars and by iy the interest rate in
yen, the investor would receive back u(1 + i∗ )/(1 + iy ), which is greater than u as
long as iy < i∗ . The intuition behind the relevance of the currency denomination
is that being the reserve requirement unremunerated, the investor can minimize its
costs choosing the currency which is expected to appreciate.
    In this case the second term in equation (2) would be u[(1 + iy )/(1 + i∗ )]h/12 , which
would change the tax equivalent accordingly. We denote by µyk the tax equivalent
when there is a choice to choose the currency.

3.5   URR Cost-equivalent and Power

In the previous discussion we defined the following alternative measures for the tax
equivalent of the reserve requirement for an investment of maturity equal to k:

 µk and µ0k are the tax equivalents for the case of no additional taxes.

 µk and µ0k , are the tax-equivalents when the tax on interest paid abroad and the credit
     tax are included and after the holding period the reserve is invested abroad at
     i∗ or at home at the same return ik , respectively.
            0
 µyk and µyk are the tax equivalent when the investor is allowed to deposit the URR
                                                                              0
      in a currency other than the dollar. We can define similarly µyk and µyk for the

                                                 7
     case when other taxes are considered.

 µ̃k is a simplified formula that assumes no taxes. Similarly, an analogous simplifica-
      tion may be done for the case in which the deposit can be done in other currency
      than the dollar, leading to an expression like (7), but with iy instead of i∗ .

    To illustrate the difference among these alternative definitions, table 2 shows four
measures for the case of 12 months as holding period and considering a Libor of
6%. As expected, given that the holding period is fixed, the cost is decreasing with
maturity. For 1 to 2 months this cost is quite important to prevent short-term inflows
unless a large change in the exchange rate is expected. The first two measures include
all taxes applied on foreign borrowing.
    Notice that the only difference between µk and µ0k is the assumption about the
alternative cost of the reserve requirement, i∗ or ik . As expected, when the oppor-
tunity cost is ik , the cost before 12 months is greater for µ0k , but for a longer period
the situation reverses since ik is greater than i∗ . Columns (1) and (3) differ only on
the effect of taxes. The difference are relatively small. Finally, the last column shows
the approximation used in most of the literature. The difference is more important
at maturities less than a year.
    Table 2 is also useful in giving an idea of the potential economic importance of
the URR. At face value, the interest rate differentials that this control is capable to
generate are substantial. Loans with a 90-day maturity can have a differential due
to the URR alone equivalent to 7% (annual rate), while loans with maturities of 12
months have a differential of approximately 2.5%.
    Although there were some changes in the rate applied in the URR, the main
source of short-run fluctuation in the URR arises from changes in foreign interest
rates. Figure 3 shows the evolution of the cost of the URR when we assume that
for the whole period investors used the dollar to denominate the URR (µk ), or when
the lowest rate (Libor) between the dollar and the yen determined the denomination
(µyk ).4 As can be seen the cost of the URR could have been reduced substantially
by choosing the yen to denominate the reserves. For this reason, starting January
1995 the authority only allows the reserve requirement to be in dollars. By looking
at the actual composition of the reserve requirement, one can conclude that only in
the second half of 1994 the option of denominating the URR in yen was actually
  4 During   the period when this operation was allowed.



                                                           8
used. Therefore, in the empirical implementation we mainly consider and only-dollar
denominated URR and a mixed dollar and yen denominated URR. The latter measure
yields further variation in the URR implied cost.
   Because of the existence of loopholes, the URR gradually looses power, regaining it
each time a loophole is closed. This fact poses an important problem in an empirical
application for it would bias the estimated effects of the URR towards zero because
of the existence of measurement error. We try to overcome this issue by creating
a URR power index P that tries to measure how restrictive the implied tax was in
each moment. Each time a loophole was closed we reset P to 1. Afterwards we
slowly decrease it towards a minimum P that we (subjectively) consider appropriate
to reflect the importance of the loophole next to be closed.5 Figure 4 describes the
P index.


4      URR and Capital Flows

Supporters of Chile-style controls on inflows have argued that, by discouraging specu-
lative flows, this policy reduces a country’s degree of vulnerability to external shocks.
In this section we investigate formally whether the URR affected the volume and/or
composition of capital inflows to Chile.

4.1         The Composition of Debt: Evolution and International Evidence

The original objectives of the URR were to reduce the volume of capital coming into
the country, increase the degree of monetary autonomy, and avoid the appreciation
of the real exchange rate. However, by imposing a fixed cost – regardless of the loan
maturity – the URR would, in principle, also affect the composition of capital inflows.
Indeed, as table 3 shows, the share of short term debt declined from 19% in the early
1990s to 5% in 1997. The sharper decline occurred between 1995 and 1997, period
in which the URR was strengthened. Of course, that trend could be just re-labeling
of flows or just a problem with the way in which the data from the Central Bank are
constructed.6 For this reason is useful to have a comparison with other countries.
   5 Cardoso and Goldfajn (1997) construct a similar index for Brazil in which the try to summarize different regula-

tions in one index.
    6 For   further discussion on measurement issues see Nadal-De-Simone and Sorsa (1999).




                                                           9
   We use BIS data on composition of flows to make a comparative assessment on
Chile’s debt maturity structure. More specifically, to the extent that BIS reporting
norms are roughly the same for all countries, we can use BIS data to make useful
comparisons. There are two fundamental differences between BIS and national data
on debt maturity. First, the BIS focuses on “residual maturity,” while most countries
(including Chile) concentrate on contracted maturity. Second, domestic loans of
foreign banks in local currency as well as loans to residents made abroad (trade credit)
are considered part of foreign debt by the BIS, but not by the national authorities.
   Figure 5 shows the data of the BIS for all reporting countries with more than 2
million people, and a foreign debt above 6 billion of US dollars, plus Hong Kong and
Taiwan. We plot short term debt as a proportion of total debt for June 1997, and
the change in this ratio between 1990 and 1997.7 The figure shows clearly the large
increase in the share of short term debt in most emerging markets, with few excep-
tions. Some Asian countries appear with declining share, but this is likely if we think
that above, say, 80% a raise becomes very difficult. Indeed, the relationship between
change and stock is negative. Interestingly, Chile has a low level, and experienced a
decline in of short term to total debt ratio.

4.2     The Composition and Volume of Capital Flows

In order to evaluate the effect of the URR on capital inflows we pursue two alternative
methodologies. First, we use instrumental variables techniques to estimate reduced-
form capital flow equations. We report the results obtained from these estimations
in this subsection.8 Second, we estimate VAR systems using monthly capital flows
data. The results from these VARs are reported in Section 5 of this paper.
   In a recent paper Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1998) found out that, under a nonlinear
specification, the URR had a small effect on short term flows. Soto (1997) estimates
a VAR system using monthly capital flows data and concludes that the URR has
statistically significant but economically unimportant effects on both flows and the
exchange rate. He finds interesting results for exchange rate volatility (it decreases
with the URR) and flows composition (a tilt towards long-term maturities). Eyza-
  7 We consider June 1997 in order to avoid some drastic changes that followed the Asian crisis. In any case, the

main conclusion does not change if one includes data up to June 1998.
   8 Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1998) estimate equations of this sort for short-term flows in Chile. Cárdenas and Barrera

(1997) estimate reduced-form equations for Colombia.




                                                          10
guirre and Schmidt-Hebbel (1997) find similar results estimating a structural model
of capital flows using the data compiled by Soto (1997). Finally, Laurens and Car-
doso (1998) find no evidence of the URR affecting flows and claim (without putting
forward any formal evidence) that misreporting is what explains the eventual change
in composition of flows.9
    Three main issues arise in the estimation of the effects of the URR on capital
flows . First, there is a simultaneity problem: controls (and their variations) are put
in place when most needed, that is when there is a surge of inflows.10 Eyzaguirre
and Schmidt-Hebbel (1997) and Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1998) tackle this problem
using instrumental variables. Soto (1997) tackles it using monthly data in a VAR
framework, which allows him to estimate a URR reaction function. Second, and
related to the previous point, there probably exist an exogenous upward trend in
inflows. Since the URR is also increasing the regressions may be capturing a common
trend. Third, because of the existence of loopholes, the URR gradually looses power,
regaining it each time a loophole is closed. If this power lost is important, all estimates
would be biased toward zero since there would be measurement error.
    In this section we address these three issues simultaneously. As mentioned, we
use both instrumental variables and VAR estimations to control for the potential
endogeneity problem. As for trending exogenous flows problem we use proxies for
both credit rating (RAN K) and capital inflows to emerging markets as measures of
exogenous flows. And for the effect of loopholes, we use the power index P described
above.
    Our estimation is based on a reduced-form equation for capital flows. If there is
imperfect capital mobility, capital flows will depend on interest rate differentials and
other variables such as country-risk, “push” factors, and country-specific characteris-
tics. In particular, we assume that there is a portfolio allocation problem that yields
a (linear) solution of the following type for flows in period t, Ft :

                                 Ft = β0 + β1 (it − i∗t − êet − µt ) + β3 Zt .                                   (10)
    9 It is worth mentioning that the measure that Laurens and Cardoso (1998) use for the effect of the URR generates

an important bias in their results. Specifically, they construct a restrictiveness index as the tax rate times the base
(flows) and find that its is positively correlated with flows. However, this positive correlation obviously follows from
the fact that flows appear in both sides of the regression.
  10 Cardoso and Goldfajn (1997) study the case of capital controls of Brazil concluding that they are largely endoge-

nous.




                                                          11
where êe denotes expected devaluation, µ is the interest rate equivalent of the URR
and Z is a vector of other macroeconomic variables.
   Throughout the estimations we consider two alternative measures for expected
devaluation:11 (i) the effective depreciation; and (ii) the one-step-ahead forecast ob-
tained from on a rolling ARMA model, which also include as independent variables
lags of the interest rate differential between dollar-indexed and UF-indexed contracts
(since neither has URR this differential represents exchange rate expected deprecia-
tion), and the lagged relative distance of the nominal exchange rate to the floor of
the exchange rate band (relative to its width). The R2 of this procedure is around
0.23.
   Since both measures of expected depreciation are measured with errors (at least
the effective depreciation has an expectational error), there estimates of β1 will be
biased towards zero. This bias can mask the true effect of the URR on capital flows.
In the actual estimation of the flows equation we allow for a differntial effect of interest
rate differential and the URR:

                                Ft = β0 + β1 (it − i∗t − êet ) + β2 µt + β3 Zt .                               (11)

   We consider two alternative measures of Ft . First we analyze the effect of the
URR on short-term flows as a proportion of GDP. These flows include Balance of
Payments’ recorded short-term capital flows (flows with maturity shorter than 12
months) plus errors and omissions. Second, we analyze the behavior of total flows
– including flows with maturities longer than 12 months, foreign direct investment,
portfolio investment, and short-term flows – as a percentage of GDP. According to
ADF tests the two series we consider are stationary at the usual levels of confidence.
   Considering credit rating and interest rate differentials is the standard procedure
in the literature of determinants of capital inflows in developing countries. For ex-
ample, Taylor and Sarno (1997) consider both credit ratings and the international
interest rate among the determinants of capital inflows to developing countries.12 .
Fernandez-Arias (1996) explains capital flows to a group of developing countries us-
ing international interest rates and debt prices in the secondary market (as a proxy
for credit worthiness). We consider GDP growth as a determinant of flows for in
  11 Becausewe compare the nominal interest rate in dollars (Libor) to the indexed rate in Chile (in UF), the relevant
exchange one has to model is UF/dollar.
  12 The   other two variables they consider are black market exchange rate premium and industrial production



                                                         12
the same logic: it signals better creditworthiness and investment opportunities. Of
course, it is expected that a higher interest rate differential, higher growth, and a
better credit rating increase inflows.
    We included the (instrumented) current account deficit among the determinants of
capital inflows because ultimately it is excess expenditure what drives capital move-
ments. Thus, what we actually test when we control for the current account deficit is
whether the URR affects flows that are not explained by excess expenditure (although
they certainly cause excess expenditure).
    For the credit rating, denoted by RAN K, we use the one reported in Euromoney.
We consider Chile’s relative position in the credit ranking reported by Euromoney.
This rating is published once a year and is constructed trough an assessment of a
series of indicators.13 In order to have quarterly data we interpolate this figure..14
We mainly focus on Z-variables with statistically significant coefficients.
    Because, as explained above, there is an endogeneity issue between the variables
we consider in Z and capital flows we estimate (11) using TSLS, with lagged variables
as instruments.
    The two panels of table 4 presents the results for the short-term inflow equation
and for total inflows, both as percentage of GDP. The first four regressions in each
panel are for short term inflows; the next four are for total flows. In the estimation
we used alternative measures of the cost-equivalent of the URR, with and without the
interaction with the power index, and the two measures of exchange rate depreciation.
In the top panel we consider effective depreciation, and in the bottom one we use
expected depreciation.15
    The results presented in table 7 show that in almost all specifications interest rate
differentials have the correct sign and are highly significant in explaining shrot term
inflows. GDP growth, the current account deficit, and the credit rating proxy have
significant coefficients with the expected sign. More importantly, the URR has large
and significant effects in all of the equations for short term flows. Notice that the effect
  13 See   Haque et al. (1996) for details.
  14 We also considered real capital inflows to Latin American emerging markets (other than Chile) as a proxy for
“push factors.” However, it never appeared with a significant coefficient. The same happened with Institutional
Investor’s credit rating.
  15 We also considered the following cost-equivalent of the URR for an investment with a 12 month horizon: (i)

only-dollar deposit (µ12 ); (ii) possibility of investing in yens during the last 2 quarters in 1994 (µy12 ); (iii) only-dollar
deposit times the power index (µ12 × p); and (iv) yens deposit in 1994:III and 1994:IV times the power index (µy12 × p).
The full set of results is reported in the appendix.




                                                              13
of the URR is between 5 and 10 times larger than the effect of interest differentials.16
Economically, the effect of the URR on short-term flows appears quite important.
According to the results, the existence of the URR implies that quarterly short-term
flows between 0.5 and 1.0 percentage points of GDP smaller than otherwise.
    The results for total flows are reported in equations 7.5 through 7.6 and show that
interest rate differentials continue to be important (and significant) in explaining
flows, although the size of its effect is marginally smaller than in the case of short-
term flows.17 Among Z-variables, only the current account surplus is significant. As
expected, financing needs measured from the current account deficit increase these
flows one-to-one. As for the URR, the results show that in none of the regressions
reported (and those in the appendix) it has an effect on total flows significantly
different from zero. That is, there is no evidence that total capital inflows in Chile
have decreased with the URR.
    An immediate and important implication of the above results is that the URR has
a large and economically meaningful impact on the maturity composition of capital
inflows. At the same time that it decreases short-term flows, it increases long-term
flows.
    Two additional comments are in order, however. First, it is possible that we are
in the presence of a relabeling process of flows: what would have been classified as
short-term without URR is classified as long-term with URR. The fact that flows
appear less sensitive to interest rate differentials than the URR is in line with this
interpretation. Second, it is possible that URR changes affects Chile’s country risk
premium. This would be the case if changes in the composition of external liabilities
would reduce the probability of a banking and/or a Balance of Payment crisis (driven
by either fundamentals or sunspots). This could well generate larger inflows for risk-
adjusted yields may increase.18
  16 This has two explanations: either measurement error in our proxies for expected depreciation or large effects of

the URR on the composition of flows. The results below tend to confirm the latter.
  17 The   results are similar if one leaves out portfolio flows (i.e., considers short- plus long-term flows.)
  18 Cordella   (1998) goes further, arguing that it is incorrect to evaluate the URR according to its impact on capital
inflows.




                                                              14
5     Evidence from VARs

In this section we go a step further and we inquire whether, In addition to affect-
ing the composition of capital flows, Chile’s URR helped the authorities accomplish
their interest rate and real exchange rate objectives. More specifically, we estimate
a VAR system using monthly data to investigate: (a) whether the URR resulted in
significantly higher interest rate differentials and, thus, in a greater degree of mone-
tary autonomy; and (b) whether the URR reduced the extent of real exchange rate
appreciation.
   The estimation of a VAR system allows us to address the potential simultaneity
problems in two ways. In a VAR we implicitly estimate a reaction function for
the URR based on past macroeconomic variables. Thus, even if the URR reacts
to capital flows, impulse-response functions would isolate the simultaneity problem.
In addition, monthly data allows us to interpret in a structural way the impulse-
response functions of all endogenous variables to an URR shock. All we need to
assume is that the authority does not react during the same month in which other
shock take place. Because the international interest rate is exogenous, if the URR
rate (or loophole controls in the case of the P index) does not respond to innovations
in other variables, then a triangular ordering in the VAR with the URR as the most
exogenous variable will have a semi-structural interpretation. Notice, however, that
the structural interpretation is only partial. We are not able to identify the impulse-
response functions that follow from other shocks.
   Because of data availability we estimate VAR systems using monthly data for the
period January 1991 to July 1998. We consider the following endogenous variables:

    1. An indicator of the cost-equivalent of the URR (we report the results for µ × p
       and µy × p).19

    2. The domestic indexed interest rate (the banking system 90-day deposit rate in
       UF).

    3. A proxy for expected depreciation in the UF/US dollar exchange rate. We use
       the measure described section 4, based on a rolling ARMA.
  19 Recall all URR measures are for 12-month horizon, and µy is the URR were the US dollar is assumed to be the

currency in which the URR is denominated except for the second half of 1994 where the yen appeared to be the chosen
currency. The general results do not change if one considers µ alone, without the power index, although statistical
significance decreases.



                                                        15
  4. Short- and long-term real capital flows (in dollars on 1990).20

  5. Real exchange rate effective depreciation.

   In addition, we consider two exogenous variables:

  1. 6-month libor in dollars.

  2. The JP Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Indicators (an average of the premium
     that country bonds pay in the secondary market).

    The two VARs we report consider one lag, which is the model recommended by
the Schwarz criteria.
    Figures 7 and 8 plot the impulse-response functions of these two VARs to a one
standard deviation shock. Figures 7 plots the impulse-response for a shock in µ × p.
Figure 8 is the analogous to 7 but use instead µy × p as measure of the URR. The
two figures show similar responses of the endogenous variables. The impulse-response
functions show that an URR shock dies relatively quickly. After 8 months they are
no longer statistically significant different from zero. Therefore, URR returns quickly
to its mean.
    Short term capital flows: As may be seen from the impulse response functions,
short-term capital inflows marginally decrease between months 7 and 12 after the
shock by approximately USD 15 million/month. Long-term flows, on the other hand,
show a very small and marginally significant increase between months 3 and 10 after
the URR shock. These results are similar to those found in section 4, namely there
is a negligible effect on total flows, but there is a tilt toward long-term flows. In
that regard, then, the evidence examined here supports the contention that Chile’s
URR affected the composition of capital flows, reducing the importance of short term
inflows. To the extent that short term flows are more easily reversed, this suggests
that the URR will tend to reduce the country’s degree of vulnerability to sudden
changes in sentiment by international investors.
    Interest rates: One of the fundamental objectives of Chile’s URR was to increase
the Central bank’s ability to undertake independent monetary policy. In particular,
by (implicitly) taxing inflows, the authorities expected to target domestic interest
rates at a relatively high level, without encouraging massive capital inflows into the
country.
 20 We   use the same definition of short-term as before.


                                                            16
    The impulse response functions in Figures 7 and 8 show that, in response to a one
standard deviation shock to the URR, domestic interest rate increases significantly
after two months, peaking after 6 months and dying slowly 12 months after the
shock.21 The magnitude of this peak is about 0.1% to 0.15%. These results also
suggest that the Expected depreciation of the UF/dollar exchange rate increases on
impact, dying out after 4 months (just when domestic interest rates increase). Overall,
then, these results suggest that the URR policy did result in a temporary, and rather
small, increase in real (indexed) interest rates. From a broad perspective, this has
two consequences: on the one hand, the URR did allow (at least in the short run) the
monetary authorities to target interest rates, without generating a vicious circle of
higher rates, increased inflows, sterilization, even higher rates and even larger inflows.
On the other hand, this means that, as a result of the URR, there was an increase in
the cost of capital in the country.
    Real exchange rates: As pointed out above, tt the center of the successful recovery
of the Chilean economy in the second half of the eighties was a highly depreciated real
exchange rate that helped encourage exports. With this background, maintaining a
stable, or even depreciated, real exchange rate was present in all economic programs of
presidential candidates and all official speeches in the 1990s. Reality turned out to be
different, and since the early 1990s the real exchange rate appreciated substantially.
Anyway authorities attempted to prevent the appreciation, and for this purpose an
important role was given to the URR. Indeed one of the most important effects that
authorities wanted to achieve with the URR was to slowdown the appreciation of the
peso. By reducing capital inflows authorities intended to prevent further appreciation.
Authorities believed that the interest rates that prevailed during the 1990s would have
had weaker effects on the strengthening of the peso if, at the same time some cost of
entry for inflows would be imposed.22
    The VAR system estimated in this section can be used to analyze whether, as the
authorities expected, the imposition of the URR indeed affected the RER in the way
expected by the authorities. The impulse response function reported in Figures 7 and
  21 The responses plotted correspond to reactions of interest rate URR-equivalent shocks of size 0.18% and 0.20%,

respectively. According to the equivalent-cost of µ that we use in the estimations, a 30% URR interest rate-equivalent
corresponds to approximately 1.75%. Thus, the total effect of a 30% URR is approximately nine-fold what the
responses show
  22 This is the key of Valdés-Prieto and Soto (1996) analysis of the effectiveness of the URR. They have shown that

the URR had no effects on the long-run real exchange rate. However their estimation suffers from several specification
problems.




                                                         17
8 indicate that the real exchange rate experience a depreciation between one and four
months after the shock. These results are in c conflict with those obtained by other
authors (Edwards 1999b) and by ourselves in the estimation of an error correction
equation for the real exchange rate (De Gregorio, Edwards and Valdes 1998). In
that paper we reported results indicating that the real exchange rate appreciated
marginally with an increase in the URR. This confirms how inconclusive are the
effects on the real exchange rate. The general pattern of results are quite robust to
changes in the way we measure the URR, although using the P index generally yields
more significant and larger effects.
    The impulse response functions reported in Figures 7 and 8 show a transitory
effect of an URR shock mainly because the shock dies out relatively quickly. Since
fluctuations in the URR are mainly due to changes in P and i∗ , the results imply that
they are mean reverting.23 This is important, since transitory URR shocks should
not have permanent effects.
    However, a correct evaluation of the effects of the URR should use the estimated
elasticities but consider a permanent shock in the URR. The point estimates indicate
the following numerical effects of the Chilean 30% URR (according to the VARs
reported that include short- and long-term flows). The domestic interest rate increases
between 130 and 150 basis points. Short-term flows decrease by around USD 750
millions, long-term inflows increase around USD 1300 millions, whereas the overall
inflow is practically unaffected. The real exchange rate effect, on the other hand, is
rather small. A 30% URR results in a depreciation of the RER of approximately
2.5%.


6     Concluding Remarks

This paper has explored macroeconomic implications of the reserve requirement im-
plemented in Chile in 1991. Clearly the URR allowed for interest rate differentials
with annual averages ranging from 5 to 16% (real ex-post) during 1991–1997. Those
differentials were partly sustained by the URR. In this closing section we summarize
our findings, but also discuss other aspects that this paper have not covered, but that
  23 Recall that the interest rate equivalent of the URR moves because of movements in Libor and its reserve re-

quirement rate (u). Movements in the reserve requirement rate can be considered permanent if loopholes are under
permanent control. This interpretation issue is one of the reasons why the results reported in Soto (1997) differ from
ours (besides data definitions, exogenous variables considered in the VAR and sample period).



                                                         18
must be taken into account when evaluating the usefulness of capital controls.
   The URR was introduced to affect capital flows, interest rates and the real ex-
change rate. In this paper we have examined those relationships. We have used
cursory evidence, traditional estimation of reduced-form equations and VAR’s. We
can summarize our findings as follows:

  • During the period of the URR there was a larger interest rate differential with
    the rest of the world, but the econometric evidence does not support the view
    that fluctuations in the URR affected domestic interest rates. We only find a
    significant effect on the central bank interest rate, which suggest that the URR
    was indeed used more intensely to accompany monetary tightening.

  • The effects of the URR on the real exchange rate are not conclusive. The evidence
    from VARs shows that there is a real depreciation, but this result is not supported
    by the results from more traditional regression analysis.

  • There is a clear change in composition from short-run flows to long-run. The
    volume of flows did not decline as a result of the URR, but the maturity did
    change.

  • We find in general that the results show somewhat stronger results when the
    URR is combined with a power index, which captures the fact that there has
    been permanent closure of loopholes. This poses the question of up to which
    point policy should be based on an instrument that needs to be permanently
    revised and that gradually looses power.

    The third seems to be the most important effect of the URR. Indeed, there are
reasons to think that a tilt to longer maturities makes the country less vulnerable.
This in turn, as shown in Cordella (1998), may incentive increased inflows, reductions
in risk premium and appreciation of the currency. This may explain why effects on
net flows and exchange rates may be empirically elusive to pin down.
    The fact that composition changes toward longer term, in particular short term
debt declines as a percentage of total debt, raises the issue of chasing “specultive
inflows.” The total volume of inflows did not decline, and portfolio inflows boomed,
and therefore, arbitrage operations, taking advantage of good domestic conditions
and large interest rate differentials, did not decline. The only clear effect is that the
URR penalizes effective maturity, and not intended maturity.

                                           19
    The implication of the effect on interest rates is mixed. Increased monetary inde-
pendence is in principle good. However, this is not necessarily always true because
that independence may also reduce the discipline foreign capital markets impose to
domestic macroeconomic policy. At times of turbulence, independence is desired, but
during quite times it is convenient to have all discipline devices available. Figure 8
shows a feature of Chilean monetary policy which seems at odds with an economy in
a process of capital deepening. The figure shows the interest rate the Central Bank
uses as anchor for its monetary policy. Ignoring the events of late 1998, associated to
the crisis, there is a clear upward trend since the URR was implemented. Periods of
loosening monetary policy are characterized by a reduction of roughly one percentage
point in interest rate, while periods of tightening are characterized by 2 percentage
points increase. This has been allowed to some extent by the existence of the URR
which gives monetary authorities a sense of greater independence.
    There is of course an important cost associated to the URR and is the cost of a
high interest rate. Why must firms borrow with a tax if the world is willing to lend
cheaper? The cost-benefit analysis has not been done. But, there is an addition-
al microeconomic distortion. Since the URR penalizes more short-term credit, the
yield curve tends to be inverted. Small firms, that cannot issue long-term bonds in
international capital markets, have to borrow at a differential interest rates higher
than similar firms in other countries. In other words there is a bias against firms
that cannot borrow long, which are usually small business and firms that are starting
operations.
    Capital controls in Chile have worked for quite a while for two reasons. There is a
long tradition of controls, and the URR have become easy, loopholes notwithstanding
, to administer. The second reason is that among developing countries Chile ranks low
in corruption. Those two characteristics makes the URR relatively easy to implement
and plausible to operate. If there is one clear lesson from the Chilean experience with
loopholes and implementation of the URR is that it must be as neutral as possible.
This limits the scope for corruption and ineffectiveness. Furthermore, the incentives
for the economy to devote too many resources in finding loopholes is a cost usually
associated with this type of restrictions.
    Capital controls have usually a strong signaling effect (e.g., Bartolini and Drazen,
1997). For this reason the context in which they are introduced is extremely important
for its success. In Chile they were introduced when all the world wanted to buy more

                                          20
Chile than what the government wanted to sell. In Chile also the macroeconomic
situation was very strong. There was strong fiscal position, high savings-investment,
and all of the things that make an economy attractive. Chile was not the kind of
place that most of the countries where these controls are proposed are right now: a
place where nobody wants to buy and everybody wants to get out. There is no way
to avoid the run when it has started. Moreover, controls could make things worse.
   Finally, coming back to the main effect of the URR, the change in composition of
foreign liabilities, it is important to realize that there are other methods to overcome
the bias to the short run that may have capital flows, and the disturbing effects this
may have in periods of financial problems. Liquidity requirements on the banking
system may be an alternative way to reduce vulnerability due to short term flows.
Strong financial supervision also contributes to the reduction of vulnerabilities.


References

 Bartolini, L. and A. Drazen. 1997. “When Liberal Policies Reflect External Shocks,
    What Do We Learn?” Journal of International Economics 42(3-4): 249–73.

 Budnevich, C. and G. Le Fort. 1997. “Capital Account Regulations and Macroeco-
    nomic Policy: Two Latin American Experiences.” Documento de Trabajo BCCh
    No. 6, March

 Céspedes, L. y J. De Gregorio. 1999. “Tipo de Cambio Real de Equilibrio, Desalin-
     eamiento y Devaluciones: Teorı́a y Evidencia para Chile.” Mimeo, Universidad
     de Chile.

 Cárdenas, M. and F. Barrera. 1997. “On the Effectiveness of Capital Controls: The
     Experience of Colombia during the 1990s.” Journal of Development Economics
     54(1): 27–58.

 Cardoso, E. and I. Goldfajn. 1997. “Capital Flows to Brazil: The Endogeneity of
    Capital Controls.” IMF Working Paper 97/115. September.

 Cordella, T. 1998. “Can short-Term Capital Controls Promote Capital Inflows?”
    IMF Working Paper WP/98/131, October

 Cowan, K. and J. De Gregorio. 1998. “Exchange Rate Policies and Capital Ac-
    count Management: Chile in the 1990s,” in Glick, R. (ed.), Managing Capital

                                          21
   Flows and Exchange Rates: Perspectives from the Pacific Basin, pp. 465-488,
   Cambridge University Press.

Fernandez-Arias, E. 1996. “The New Wave of Private Capital Flows: Push or Pull?.”
    Journal of Development Economics 48(2): 389–418.

Gallego, F., Hernández, L. and K. Schimdt-Hebbel. 1999. Capital Controls in Chile:
    Effective? Efficient? Endurable?. Mimeo, Banco Central de Chile.

Haque, N. A., M. S. Kumar, N. Mark, and D. J. Mathieson. 1994. “The Econom-
   ic Content of Indicators of Developing Country Creditworthiness.” IMF Staff
   Papers 43 (4): 688–724.

Herrera, L. O. and R. Valdés. 1997. “The Effect of Capital Controls on Interest
   Rate Differentials” Mimeo, Banco Central de Chile.

Laurens, B. and J. Cardoso. 1998. “Managing Capital Flows: Lessons from the
   Experience of Chile.” IMF Working Paper 98/168, October.

Le Fort, G. and G. Sanhueza. 1997. “Encaje en la Experiencia Chilena de los 90s.”
    Mimeo, Banco Central de Chile.

Nadal-de-Simone, F. and P. Sorsa. 1999. “A Review of Capital Account Restrictions
   in Chile in the 1990s.” IMF Working Paper No. WP/99/52.

Taylor, M. P. and L. Sarno. 1997. “Capital Flows to Developing Countries: Long
   and Short-term Determinants.” The World Bank Economic Review 11(3): 451–
   470.

Soto, C. 1997. “Controles a los Movimientos de Capital: Evaluación Empı́rica del
    Caso Chileno.” Mimeo, Banco Central de Chile.

Valdés-Prieto, S. and M. Soto. 1996. “Es el Control Selectivo de Capitales Efectivo
   en Chile? Su Efecto sobre el Tipo de Cambio Real.” Cuadernos de Economı́a
   33(98): 77-108.

Valdés-Prieto, S. and M. Soto. 1998. “The Effectiveness of Capital Controls: Theory
   and Evidence from Chile.” Empirica 25(2).




                                        22
               Table 1: Main Changes in the URR Administration
Jun-91          20% URR introduced for all new credit
                Holding period (months) = min hmax hcredit maturity, 3i , 12i
                Holding currency = same as credit
                Investors can waive the URR by paying a fix fee (through a repo
                   agreement at discount in favor of the central bank)
                Repo discount = USD libor
Jan-92     1    20% URR extended to foreign currency deposits
                with proportional HP
May-92     2    Holding period (months) = 12
                URR increased to 30% for bank credit lines
Aug-92          URR increased to 30%
                Repo discount = USD libor + 2.5%
Oct-92          Repo discount = USD libor + 4.0%
Jan-95     3    Holding currency = USD only
Jul-95     4    URR extended to secondary ADR
Sep-95     5    Period to liquidate USD from Secondary ADR tightened
Dec-95          Foreign borrowing to be used externally is exempt of URR
Oct-96     6    FDI committee considers for approval productive projects only
Dec-96          Foreign borrowing < USD 200,000 (500,000 in a year) exempt of URR
Mar-97     7    Foreign borrowing < USD 100,000 (100,000 in a year) exempt of URR
Jun-98          URR set to 10%
Sep-98          URR set to zero
Sources: Le Fort and Sanhueza (1997) and Laurens and Cardoso (1998).
The numbers identify a change we consider in constructing the power index.




                        Table 2: Tax equivalents of the URR

                         Maturity       µk      µk0       µk       µ̃k
                         1            23.38    45.53    22.85    30.86
                         3             7.95    11.42     7.13    10.29
                         6             3.95     4.66     3.51     5.14
                         9             2.77     2.93     2.32     3.43
                         12            2.18     2.18     1.74     2.57
                         18            1.60     1.51     1.16     1.71
                         24            1.30      1.2     0.87     1.29
                         36            1.01     0.91     0.58     0.86




                                              23
                       Table 3: External debt (million of US dollars)


                           1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996    1997    1998
Total external debt       17425   16364   18242   19186   21478   21736   22979   26701   31691
  Private                  5633    5810    8619   10166   12343   14235   17816   21613   25977
  Public                  11792   10554    9623    9020    9135    7501    5163    5088    5714
Long and medium term      14043   14165   14767   15699   17613   18305   20344   25414   30081
Short term                 3382    2199    3475    3487    3865    3431    2635    1287    1610
Short term/Total (%)       19.4    13.4    19.0    18.2    18.0    15.8    11.5     4.8     5.4
Source: Central Bank




                                             24
                  Table 4: URR, Short-term, and Total Capital Flows

   Dep. Var.:                Short-term Inflows/GDP                    Total inflows/GDP
                        4.1         4.2         4.3       4.4      4.5      4.6     4.7         4.8
                         µ           µ           µ      p×µ         µ        µ       µ         p×µ
                                          êe : Effective UF/dollar depreciation
i − i∗ − êe            0.25       0.24        0.10       0.19    0.23     0.21    0.12          0.20
                      (3.57)     (3.18)     (1.43)      (2.97)  (3.32)   (3.05) (2.27)         (3.33)
µ or p × µ             -6.56      -4.37      -2.48       -7.84   -2.43    -0.70    1.25         -0.57
                      (-3.53) (-3.23) (-2.56) (-3.40) (-0.93) (-0.59) (1.22)                   (-0.44)
Curr.Acc./GDP          -0.67      -0.74                  -0.67   -0.99    -0.95                 -0.85
                      (-3.76) (-2.49)                  (-2.06) (-3.72) (-3.98)                 (-2.92)
GDP growth              1.03      1.05                   1.03     0.07
                      (3.76)     (3.56)                 (3.64)  (0.17)
RAN K                  -0.21                             -0.23   -0.15
                      (-1.86)                          (-2.01) (-1.82)
R2                      0.23       0.15        0.13       0.22    0.12     0.12    0.09         0.16
N. Obs.                  40         40          40         40      40       40      40           40
F − stat                3.15       5.04        5.06       3.09    2.57     4.36    1.88         3.69
D.W.                    2.10       1.94        1.95       2.31    1.84     1.77    1.76         1.76
   Dep. Var.:                Short-term Inflows/GDP                    Total inflows/GDP
                         4.9       4.10        4.11       4.12    4.13     4.14    4.15        4.16
                          µ          µ           µ      p×µ         µ        µ       µ         p×µ
                                         êe : Expected UF/dollar depreciation
i − i∗ − êe            0.78       0.66        0.08       0.63    0.56     0.42    0.29          0.41
                      (3.26)     (3.13)     (0.66)      (2.80)  (1.97)   (2.69) (2.81)         (2.82)
µ or p × µ             -6.32      -3.20      -2.34       -7.96   -1.63    -0.00    1.64          0.15
                      (-3.58) (-3.14) (-2.37) (-3.29) (-0.79) (-0.00) (1.50)                   (0.13)
Curr.Acc./GDP          -0.72      -0.59                  -0.73   -0.93    -0.88                 -0.82
                      (-2.40) (-1.96)                  (-2.26) (-3.32) (-3.91)                 (-3.03)
GDP growth              1.59      1.25                   1.49     0.39
                      (4.18)     (3.05)                 (4.08)  (0.79)
RAN K                  -0.27                             -0.29   -0.15
                      (-2.39)                          (-2.67) (-1.32)
R2                      0.12       0.22        0.10       0.14    0.06     0.12    0.10         0.15
N. Obs.                  40         40          40         40      40       40      40           40
F − stat                3.37       4.54        2.42       3.42    1.91     4.15    1.91         3.64
D.W.                    2.29       2.18        1.72       2.42    1.75     1.64    1.80         1.64
Coefficients reported times 100 (effect measured over basis points). Constants not reported.
TSLS estimates with lagged variables as instruments. Quarterly data, 1988.I-1998.II.
Newey-West consistent t-statistics in parenthesis.




                                                     25
                                           50
                                                60
                                                     70
                                                          80
                                                               90
                                                                    100
                                                                          110
                                                                                120
                                    1980




                                                                                      (1986=100)
                                    1981

                                    1982

                                    1983

                                    1984

                                    1985

                                    1986

                                    1987

                                    1988




26
                                    1989

                                    1990

                                    1991




     Figure 1: Real Exchange Rate
                                    1992

                                    1993

                                    1994

                                    1995

                                    1996

                                    1997

                                    1998
1



0



-1



-2



-3



-4



-5



-6
 1994                                    1995                                    1996                   1997




     Note: Calculated as the difference between 90-days/UF forwards and 90-dyas UF PRBC day and Libor




                                Figure 2: 90 days covered interest rate differential




                                                                            27
2,0




1,5




1,0




0,5




0,0
      Ja-87



              Ja-88



                      Ja-89



                              Ja-90



                                            Ja-91



                                                    Ja-92



                                                                 Ja-93



                                                                              Ja-94



                                                                                       Ja-95



                                                                                               Ja-96



                                                                                                       Ja-97



                                                                                                               Ja-98


                                      US$ Libor                          min (US$,Yen) Libor




                                           Figure 3: Tax Equivalent




                                                            28
1,1

                             2                                          4          5   6      7




0,9
                     1                                              3




0,7




0,5
  1991               1992              1993     1994         1995           1996           1997   1998
      Note: See text and table 1 for details




                                               Figure 4: Power Index




                                                        29
                                        0,3
                                                                                                                  MYS
                                                                                                                         PHL

                                                                                                                               BRA      URY
                                                                                                            NZL
                                        0,2
                                                                                    IND
                                                                                          POL                                         PRT
                                                                            HUN
Short Term Debt Share Change, 90-97/6




                                                                                                              GRC

                                                                                                       CHN
                                        0,1                                                 MEX                    ZAF


                                                                            MAR
                                                             VEN                                                        IDN
                                                                               COL
                                                                                                                                     THA
                                          0                                                       AUS TUR                             PER

                                                                                                                                       KOR              SAU              SGP
                                                                                      CHILE

                                                                                                                                                         HKG TWN


                                        -0,1                                LBR

                                                                                           ISR
                                                                                                    PAK
                                                                                                                                                  KWT

                                        -0,2                                         PAN




                                        -0,3
                                               0,2             0,3                0,4              0,5                   0,6                0,7     0,8            0,9         1

                                                                                     Short Term Debt as Fraction of Total, Jun. 1997.




                                                Source: BIS, Semi-Annual International Banking Statistics




                                                      Figure 5: Debt Composition in a Comparative Perspective




                                                                                                                        30
                                   Response Functions ± 2 S.E.

                          mu(12) x power                                Domestic Interest Rate (UF)
    0.20                                                     0.3


    0.15
                                                             0.2

    0.10
                                                             0.1
    0.05

                                                             0.0
    0.00


    -0.05                                                    -0.1
            2     4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24               2   4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24



                Expected Depreciation (UF/USD)                              Short-run Capital Inflows
       3                                                     150



       2                                                     100



       1                                                      50



       0                                                       0



      -1                                                     -50
            2     4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24               2   4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24



                      Long-run Capital Inflows                      Real Exchange Rate Depreciation
      60                                                     0.6

      40
                                                             0.4
      20

       0                                                     0.2

     -20
                                                             0.0
     -40

     -60                                                     -0.2
            2     4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24               2   4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24




Notes:
(1) Exogenous variables: - 6-month libor in dollars
                          - JP Morgan Emerging Market Bond Indicator
(2) Monthly data, 1991.1-1998.6.
(3) VAR estimation with 1 lag.




       Figure 6: VAR1 Response Functions to a Shock in µ×Power




                                                        31
                                         Response Functions ± 2 S.E.

                         mu^y(12) x power                               Domestic Interest Rate (UF)
    0.20                                                     0.3


    0.15
                                                             0.2

    0.10
                                                             0.1
    0.05

                                                             0.0
    0.00


    -0.05                                                    -0.1
            2   4    6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24               2   4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24



            Expected Depreciation (UF/USD)                                  Short-run Capital Inflows
     2.5                                                     150

     2.0
                                                             100
     1.5

     1.0
                                                              50
     0.5

     0.0
                                                               0
     -0.5

     -1.0                                                    -50
            2   4    6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24               2   4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24



                    Long-run Capital Inflows                        Real Exchange Rate Depreciation
      60                                                     0.6


      40
                                                             0.4
      20

       0                                                     0.2

     -20
                                                             0.0
     -40


     -60                                                     -0.2
            2   4    6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24               2   4    6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24


Notes:
(1) Exogenous variables: - 6-month libor in dollars
                          - JP Morgan Emerging Market Bond Indicator
(2) Monthly data, 1991.1-1998.6.
(3) VAR estimation with 1 lag.




       Figure 7: VAR2 Response Functions to a Shock in µ×Power




                                                        32
(% yearly, expressed in
          UF)
     12


     11


     10


      9


      8


      7


      6


      5


      4


      3
          Ja-87



                   Ja-88



                                   Ja-89



                                                 Ja-90



                                                               Ja-91



                                                                            Ja-92



                                                                                          Ja-93



                                                                                                       Ja-94



                                                                                                                     Ja-95



                                                                                                                                  Ja-96



                                                                                                                                          Ja-97



                                                                                                                                                  Ja-98




                           Since April 1987 and April 1995 is the interest rate of 90 days Central Bank papers (PRBC). From May
                            1995 until today is the discount rate of Central Bank, and that is called the rate of monetary instance.




                                           Figure 8: Interest Rate of Monetary Policy




                                                                                    33
