                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM THE REAGAN
                       DEFICITS AND THEIR DISAPPEARANCE?


                                       Benjamin M. Friedman


                                         Working Paper 7647
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7647

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2000




This paper was written for the Session " th Memoriam: Robert Eisner," at the annual meeting of the
American Economic Association, January, 2000. I am grateful to Jamie Hon for research assistance, and
to the Harvard Program for Financial Research for research support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Benjamin M. Friedman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including     notice, is given to the
source.
What Have We Learned from the Reagan Deficits and Their Disappearance?
Benjamin M. Friedman
NBER Working Paper No. 7647
April 2000
JEL No. H62


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper looks again at the U.S. deficit debate of the 1980s, this time with the benefit of
the Commerce Department's newly revised data for that period and also in light of the experience
of the 1990s when sizeable budget surpluses replaced chronic large deficits. The familiar conclusion
that sustained government deficits at full employment depress private capital formation has stood
up well in both regards. By contrast, the more recent experience in particular has sharply
contradicted any simple notion that the government balance and the current account balance move
in parallel. Other relevant issues include the equilibrium (that is, noninflationary) unemployment
rate, the response of private saving to government dissaving, and the role of debt and equity in
financing private capital formation.


Benjamin M. Friedman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 127
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bfriedman@harvard.edu
             WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM THE REAGAN DEFICITS
                    — AND THEIR DISAPPEARANCE?


                                     Benjamin M. Friedman



       Robert Eisner was a forceflul and tireless advocate for the kind of economics, and,

importantly, the kird of economic policy, that he thought right. In his mind the two were largely

the same. To Bob, the point of economic theory and empirical analysis was to further the ability

to shape public policy in the interest of the working men and women who comprise the vast

majority of the nation's citizens. Economics that did not somehow bear on practical questions of

public policy was at best suspect, and more likely irrelevant. At the same time, economic policy

initiatives that lacked firm underpinnings in theory and evidence were likely to prove at best

misguided and possibly counterproductive. The commitment and integrity that Bob brought to his

work on economics and economic policy — indeed, the sometimes surprising ferocity from such a

gentle man — should stand as a model for serious scholars in our discipline.

       That said, I disagreed with Bob Eisner on a significant matter of both economics and

economic policy. The issue on which we differed was what to think about the historically large

budget deficits that the U.S. Government ran in the 1980s and for some years into the 1990s, and

what, as a matter of public policy, to do about them. Earlier, in the mid 1 970s, we had both
                                                 -2-

argued that the deficits the government ran in the immediate post-OPEC years need not be cause

for concern. Bob, in his pioneering work with Paul Pieper, showed that under aproper

accounting, crucially including allowance for the implications of the rapid price inflation of that

time, the deficits the government was then running were not so large after all and might even be

surpluses. I focused instead on the country's available unused economic resources, arguing that

below fill employment the much discussed "crowding out" of investment attributed to the effects

of government borrowing might even be "crowding in." But by the mid 1980s inflation had

slowed and the American economy had returned to conventional full-employment benchmarks.

And at that point our respective views on the deficit question diverged.

       The end of the 1990s is an appropriate time to review these issues (in Bob's absence,

sadly) for two reasons. First, as remarkable as the deficits of the 1980s and early 1990s were,

since then their disappearance and the emergence instead of sizeable surpluses have comprised an

even more remarkable fiscal phenomenon. And second, the Commerce Department has only just

completed a major revision of the U.S. national income and product accounts, including changes

in the saving and investment concepts that are central to any debate over how government budget

imbalances affect economic activity. The object of this paper is therefore both to review and to

extend the "deficit debate," looking once again at the experience of the Americaneconomy under

large deficits but also considering the new developments that have emerged as the deficit has

disappeared.
                                                -3-

Deficits into Surpluses, and the Fin de Siecle Expansion

        On at least one question, Bob Eisner has proved right and most of the rest of the

American economics profession wrong. Perhaps the easiest way to reconcile Bob's ready

acceptance of the Reagan-era deficits with the opposition of so many economists who in other

respects thought the way he thought is to say that they (we) assumed the American economy was

filly employed and he didn't. In one sense — perhaps the most important sense — it is to Bob's

credit that he was never satisfied to consider a measured unemployment rate of, say, 6% as "fill

employment." In his view that meant accepting the inevitability of some six million men and

women (today it would be more) failing to find work, a situation that he found morally repugnant.

If the 6.1% unemployment that the United States maintained on average during 1985-90, for

example, were known to have been well above the corresponding "fill employment" rate, then

many economists who viewed the deficits of that time with alarm would have had a more benign

prospect.

       The question at issue here is not, of course, how many potential workers one should want

to see jobless, but rather how to think about the role of macroeconomic policy. If"fIill-

employment unemployment" (or in the more precise phase coined by Franco Modigliani, the

"non-accelerating-inflation rate of unemployment") was 6%, as Robert Gordon and many others

maintained, then further stimulating aggregate demand for goods and services by iy means —

fiscal, monetary, whatever — would only have led to renewed inflation. The laudable goal of

putting more willing Americans to work was therefore a task for labor market reforms, or training

programs to enhance workers' skills, or perhaps basic education, but in any case not stimulative

macroeconomic policy. Further, with the economy's resources already fully employed, either
                                                -4-

government spending programs or tax cuts that spurred consumption necessarily drew resources

away from some other application, like domestic investment or production for export, or else

forced higher imports, and more probably did both. By contrast, if fill-employment

unemployment were well below 6%, increased government spending and reduced taxes that

spurred demand and thereby created jobs would not have been inflationary. And fiscal stimulus

need not have crowded out investment, and might even have crowded in some.

       The discussion below re-examines the I 980s from the perspective ofjust these questions.

But it is worth recognizing at the outset that unemployment in the United States has now fallen to

levels far below what not long ago most economists other than Bob Eisner thought, with high

confidence, would prove inflationary. The widely cited 1997 paper by Douglas Staiger, James

Stock and Mark Watson, for example, concluded by highlighting economists' empirical ignorance

about the level of"NAIIRU," arguing in effect that it could lie anywhere within a three percentage

point range. But that range was 5-8% of the labor force. Yet the U.S. unemployment rate moved

to 4.9% in 1997, 4.5% in 1998 and 4.2% in 1999, and as yet there has been no visible acceleration

in any major recognized price index.

       As many economists have now argued (for example, Robert Gordon and Lawrence Katz),

this highly welcome development of the mid to late 1990s need not be inconsistent with the more

pessimistic macroeconomic view of a decade and more ago. Under that view it would take

microeconomic changes to push fill-employment unemployment lower, and many such changes

have in fact occurred. The rapidly expanding literature of this subject has pointed to

developments like the growing role of temporary employment agencies, the new ifingibility of the

set of basic skills needed to use a personal computer keyboard, the rising U.S. prison population,
                                                -5-
the declining power of trade unions, the eroding real level of the legal minimum wage, and so on.

Evaluating these and other potential explanations for the happy economic results of the late 1990s

lies beyond the scope of this paper, But the fact remains that by now unemployment has for some

years remained well below what used to be conventionally accepted flu-employment benchmarks,

with no sign of greater inflation. Bob Eisner would surely not have been surprised.

       By contrast, what would have surprised Bob Eisner — and this goes to the heart of the

argument over the role of government budget imbalances — is that the rapid economic growth

that has brought unemployment to this low level has occurred not only without a fiscal deficit but

with a growing surplus in the U.S. Government's consolidated accounts. A constant theme in

Bob's writing on this subject was the claim that fiscal deficits were not only not harmful but

actually necessary to achieve full employment. In effect, his view was that no successful and

lasting economic expansion could occur without positive fiscal stimulus. Implicitly, and

sometimes explicitly, this view amounted to rejecting the efficacy of monetary policy with respect

to real economic activity. In contrast to the conventional notion that there are two forms of

potential macroeconomic policy stimulus, fiscal and monetary, such that either can be sufficient to

spur an underemployed economy to full employment, Bob in effect thought that for this purpose

only fiscal policy mattered. The evidence of the mid to late 1990s has plainly run the other way.

       The turnaround in the U.S. Government's fiscal position in the 1990s has been perhaps the

most remarkable shift in fiscal policy observed in this country's history apart from the immediate

consequences of major wars. In the 1992 fiscal year, the government's unified deficit was $290

billion, or 4.7% of U.S. gross domestic product. In fiscal 1999 the government ran a unified

surplus of $123 billion, or 1.4% of GDP. Calculated by the Congressional Budget Office on a
                                                -6-

standardized employment basis, to eliminate the endogenous effects of recession and recovery on

both taxes and spending, the budget moved from a deficit equal to 3.0% of potential GDP in 1992

to an even balance in 1999. Moreover — and this is the main point — through the course of this

fiscal turnaround the American economy's real growth averaged a robust 3.7% per annum over

the seven years 1993-99.

       How about investment, the particular focus of so much of the debate over the impact of

fiscal imbalances in the I 980s? Here too, the evidence is broadly consistent with the view that

connects deficits at frill employment (although, again, what is fUll employment in the 1990s?) with

crowding out of domestic investment, and the elimination of fUll-employment deficits with a

relaxation of constraints on investment.

       Contrary to the fears repeatedly voiced by critics of the 1990 and 1993 tax increases that

were a significant part of the story of the 1990s fiscal turnaround (for example, Martin Feldstein),

business fixed investment has grown more rapidly than any other major component of U.S.

aggregate demand. From 1993 through 1999, real investment in plant and equipment expanded

on average by an astonishing 9.8% per annum, compared to 3,7% for real GDP overall, So much

for the idea that modestly higher marginal tax rates on upper-income individuals would so blunt

incentives as to throttle investment.

       Further, the rise in the American economy's gross investment rate implied by this sharp

difference in the respective growth rates of investment and GDP in the mid to late I 990s also

carried over to net investment, which presumably matters more for enhancing productivity and

therefore long-mn economic expansion. The lowest rate of net investment in plant and equipment

(as a share of GDP) recorded in the nearly four decades spanned by the Commerce Department's
                                                -7-

revised data series, just 1.5%, occurred in 1992. To be sure, the investment rate usually drops

during and immediately after business recessions, and the 1990-91 recession was no exception in

this regard. But as Figure 1 shows, the decline in investment experienced even in the wake of

recessions far more severe than that of 1990-91 never approached such a low level. In 1975 and

1976 net investment declined to 3.1% of GDP. In 1983 the low point was 3.0%. It is difficult to

avoid the inference that the far larger full-employment deficit that the government ran before,

during and after the 1990-91 recession was at least partly responsible for the record low net

investment rate.

       More importantly, as Figure 1 also makes clear, net investment as a share of GDP has

recovered sharply since 1991 as the deficit has disappeared. Indeed, by 1998 net investment had

risen to 4.0% of GDP, identical to the 1961-80 average. And when net investment data for 1999

become available, they will probably show yet a further increase. (Gross investment in plant and

equipment in 1999 was 13.7% of GDP, versus 12.6% in 1998, and it would be unusual for capital

consumption to have increased this sharply relative to GDP in just one year.)



Some Puzzles Posed by the Expansion

       The comovements among budget deficits or surpluses, overall economic growth, and

growth in both gross and net investment during the 1 990s have been broadly consistent with the

basic relationships to which critics of the Reagan deficits pointed. Even so, the experience of

these years raises sezeral interesting puzzles that should preclude any tendency toward

complacency among macroeconomists.
                                                 -8-

        First, most of the concerns expressed over the outsized deficits of the Reagan-Bush era

reflected the belief not only that large deficits at thu employment crowd out investment but also

that investment in factories, machinery, office equipment and the like — that is, increments to the

economy's stock of physical capital — are an important ingredient to productivity growth. And

yes, at a broad-brush level, the rapid expansion of investment in the 1990s has gone along with a

welcome increase in Anerica's productivity growth. Productivity has advanced especially rapidly

thus far during the second half of the decade: in the nonfarm business sector, 2.6% per annum on

average during 1996-99.

       But the growth of employment during the economic expansion of the 1990s has also been

unusually rapid, so much so that real physical capital per worker has declined. According to the

Commerce Department's latest capital stock data — which, perhaps importantly, do not yet

reflect the latest benchmark revisions of the NRA investment data — the amount of capital for

each worker in the economy's nonfarm business sector peaked at $82,600 (measured in 1997

dollars) in 1992. The capital-labor ratio then fell in each of the next three years, reaching S81,100

in 1995. Small increases since then have brought the amount of capital for each worker back only

to $81,900 in 1997 (capital stock data for 1998 or 1999 are not yet available as of the time of

writing). Yet this period of unincreasing capital intensity has seen the best productivity

performance in years.

       One popular interpretation of these facts would be that in the "new economy" physical

capital matters less than either human capital or the stock of knowledge that is embodied in

neither machines nor labor. An alternative interpretation would point out that different vintages

of physical capital embody different technologies, and go on to emphasize the role of rapidly
                                                  -9-

expanding gross investment in increasing the intensity of up-to-date capital even as rapidly

expanding labor input is eroding the intensity of older capital. Evaluating these and other possible

explanations for these particular facts at hand lies beyond the scope of this paper. But the fact of

rapid productivity growth in the face of a declining overall capital-labor ratio (at least on the

currently available capital stock data) is a flag of caution against too readily concluding that all of

the events of the 1990s have affirmed the assumptions underlying the standard argument against

large deficits in the 1980s.

        Second, the decline of private saving in the 1990s raises anew the question of whether, as

suggested long ago by David Ricardo and forcefblly articulated in modern times by Robert Barro,

individuals take account of the implications of government borrowing for ifiture debt service

obligations and hence future taxes, and adjust their own consumption-saving behavior in response.

As Figure 2 and Table I show, in the 1980s U.S. private saving rates did not rise on average and

even felt somewhat, thereby contradicting the Barro-Ricardo prediction of what would happen in

response to the widening budget deficit. But the continued and much sharper decline of private

saving in the 1990s, as government dissaving has given way to government saving, j consistent

with the Barro-Ricardo equivalence proposition, And if this proposition is correct, then swings in

the government budget due to tax changes need not affect the economy's saving-investment

balance at all (they might do so if marginal tax rates changed, but that is a different matter), and

budget swings due to changes in government spending would matter but in a different way.

        It is far too soon to embrace such a conclusion. Private saving moves in response to many

forces apart from government saving or dissaving, whether the Barro-Ricardo proposition is true

or not. Indeed, much of the literature of this subject over the past decade and more has been
                                                 -10-

devoted to parsing out the effects of such other influences in the 1980s, to see if Ricardo

equivalence might have been at work after all. (A concise but fair summary of the answer is no.)

Especially for the period since private saving began its most precipitous decline, in 1993, the

obvious influence to which to point is capital gains. Not only have equity prices risen

extraordinarily during these years, but under the Commerce Department's new measurement

concepts all such gains — even those distributed in cash by mutual fbnds, which most

shareholders probably see as indistinguishable from cash dividends — are excluded from income

and hence from saving as well. But this situation too respresents a challenge for new research in

the field.

        Third, and somewhat apart from the gross mechanics of the economy's saving-investment

balance, the growing role of equity inflows in the financing of American business in the I 990s

raises once again the old question of whether interest rates are a useful guide to the influence of

fiscal and monetary policies on investment, The simplest way of explaining the market mechanism

by which aggregate saving and aggregate investment are brought into equality — the version of

the story that, in one form or other, appears in most macroeconomics textbooks —centers on the

negative interest elasticity of investment, Years ago, however, James Tobin showed that interest

rates need not be decisive in this context if investment relies on equity finance and debt and equity

instruments have different risk properties so that asset holders regard them as imperfect

substitutes.

        The American investment boom of the 1990s has occurred in the presence of a

disappearing federal government deficit but also at a time of historically high real interest rates.

During 1993-99 long-term Treasury bond yields averaged 4.66% above the average percentage
                                               —11—


increase in the GDP chained price index, and the corresponding differential for Baa corporate

bonds was 6.11%. For high-grade debt instruments, these are high real returns by U.S. postwar

standards. (At the time of writing the stated real yield on inflation-protected long-term Treasury

bonds was 4.28%.) But especially in sectors of the economy that are driven by new technology,

the 1990s have also seen a surge in new stock offerings as well as an enormous flourishing of

America's venture capital industry. Has Tobin's three-asset model finally become essential for

understanding the U.S. economy's investment process?



A Look Back at the 1980s with the Newly Revised NIPA Data

        In light of the Commerce Department's just-completed benchmark revisions of the U.S.

national income and product accounts, it is also worth while to look once again at the basic

magnitudes at issue in the 1980s deficit debate. Do previous conclusions on the major questions

at issue still hold up? In short, yes.

        As the decade averages presented in Table I show, all forms of U.S. net private domestic

investment fell as a share of GDP in the 1980s compared to the 1960s and 1970s: net investment

in plant and equipment, net residential construction, and accumulation of business inventories.

Moreover, as is clear from Figure 1, especially for plant and equipment the decline in the

investment rate continued throughout the decade, so that comparing the 1 980saverage to the

1970s average far understates the magnitude of the decline during this period. Even leaving aside

the recession year 1990, the 2.7% net investment rate for both 1987 and 1988, and just 2.8% in

1989, were at that time the lowest levels recorded in more than a quarter century. (Similarly,

comparing the 1990s average to that of the 1980s completely mises the sharp revival that began in
                                                -12-

1993.) The Commerce Department's various redefinitions of capital and investment — for

example, including computer software — slightly raised the average investment rate in each

decade, but did not alter the basic conclusion that net investment shrank as a share of GDP as the

deficit widened. Nor was it true that Americans invested less in factories and machinery because

they were investing more in housing for a growing population. The share of GDP devoted to net

residential construction declined as well in the 1980s.

       Next, a useful point frequently made by Bob Eisner is that private investment is not the

only kind of potentially productive capital formation. The highways, airports, seaports and

research laboratories built and maintained directly by government are also part of the nation's

capital stock. As some economists have argued (for example, David Aschauer), there is evidence

for the United States showing that, at the margin, publicly provided capital may be just as

effective in enhancing the economy's productivity as that provided by the private sector. Bob

often made this point by asking (rhetorically) what harm is done, even if deficit financing does

crowd out private investment, if the purpose of the deficit is to finance public investment.

       A decade ago the national income and product accounts did not include government

investment as an expenditure category distinct from other government spending. Newer data do,

and so it is now straight forward to address this issue in ways that were not then possible. As

Figure 3 shows, the share of GDP devoted to net investment by the federal government did rise

during the 1980s. But that increase was small compared to the decline in the U.S. net private

investment rate — see again Figure 1 — and it was especially small compared to the enlargement

of the federal deficit. The increase in federal investment was hardly the main story of how the

Reagan deficits occurred. (Moreover, as Treasury expenditure data showed at the time, much of
                                                 -13-

the physical capital formation that the federal government undertook in the 1980s was for defense

installations. The share of federal spending that went into gross nondefense capital formation

declined.)

        Third, the Commerce Department's various conceptual redefinitions of the relevant

income and saving data -- most importantly, the inclusion in personal income of additions to state

and local government employees' retirement hinds -- now make the I 980s decline in net personal

saving, and therefore in overall net private saving, look more modest than it did before. In the

revised data personal saving is consistently greater in every year, but the difference is not uniform

across time. The old data showed net personal saving as a percentage of GDP rising from 5.3%

on average in the 1960s to 5.8% in the 1970s, and then falling to just 4.8% in the 1980s. By

contrast, as Table 2 shows, according to the new data net personal saving rose from 5.9%ofGDP

on average in the 1960s to 6.9% in the 1970s and then fell, but only to 6.5, in the 1980s.

Although the relevance of both corporate and state-local government pension accumulations to

personal saving behavior is well known in the literature, for those who prefer to look simply at the

personal saving data alone the contradiction of the Barro-Ricardo equivalence proposition in the

1980s, while still apparent, is now less sharp. (The new data show a slightly greater drop in net

corporate saving from the 1970s to the 1980s, and so the difference that the revision makes for

private saving overall is slightly less than for personal saving alone.)

       Finally, nothing in the new data revision has affected the conclusion that a major part of

the "crowding out" due to the Reagan-era deficits appeared in the economy's international sector.

One of the biggest surprises of the 1980s for many economists was the extent to which, as Figure

4 shows, the American economy was able to cushion the federal deficit's absorption of domestic
                                                -14-

U.S. saving by drawing on saving done by foreigners, as the United States switched from a capital

exporting country to a capital importer — in other words, from positive to negative net foreign

investment. Viewed from a real rather than financial perspective, what happened was that the

U.S. economy ran a trade deficit and thereby turned to foreign production to allow it to consume

and invest in excess of what it could produce domestically, and hence, on net, borrowing from the

rest of the world rather than lending to it. In the process, America quickly went from the world's

largest creditor country to the world's largest debtor.

       One of the most interesting developments of the late 1990s, as Figure 4 also shows, is the

reappearance of a large negative net foreign investment balance just as the federal deficit has

given way to a surplus. While the 1 980s showed that the United States is a sufficiently open

economy that under some circumstances a budget deficit can crowd out the foreign sector too,

the 1990s has put firmly to rest any naive version of the "twin deficits" view of the effects of

government imbalances.



Concluding Remarks

       The facts change from one decade to the next —that is part of what makes economics so

endlessly fascinating — but many of the questions that economists put to those facts remain.

They do so both because the analytical issues that these questions involve are interesting in

themselves and also because they bear on perennial matters of public policy import. Bob Eisner

knew that. He would have enjoyed debating the issues that the new developments of the 1990s,

and the new view of the I 980s provided by revised data, have thrown up to us. I suspect that he
                                             -I5-

would have disagreed with part, maybe even much, of what I have written in this paper. I am

sorry he is not here to say so.
                                                   -16-

                                               TABLE 1
                      U.S. NET SAVING-INVESTMENT BALANCE. 1960-1998



                                               1961-70        1971-80         1981-90   1991-98


TotalNetlnvestment                               11.1%           9.6%            6.1%     5.0%

        Private Domestic                          8.0            8.1             6.4      5.2

                  Plant and Equipment             3.9            4.1             3.4      2.6
                  Residential Construction        3.1            3.4             2.6      2.2
                  Inventory Accumulation          1.0            0.7             0.4      0.5

        Government                                2.4            1.2             1.4      1.0

                  Federal                         0.4           (0.1)            0.4      0.1
                  State and Local                 2.0            1.3             0.9      1.0

        Net Foreign                               0.6            0.2            (1.7)    (1.2)



TotalNet Saving                                 10.7%            8.5%            5.6%    4.7%

        Private                                   9.7            9.8             8,8     7.0

                  Personal                        5.9            6.9            6.5      4.5
                  Corporate                       3.8            2.9            2.3      2.5

        Government                                1.0           (1.2)           (3.2)    (2.3)

                  Federal                         0.1           (1.9)           (3.5)    (2.5)
                  State and Local                 0.9            0.6            0.3       0.2


Notes: Data shown as percentages of gross domestic product.
        Total saving and total investment differ because of statistical discrepancy.
        Detail may not add to totals because of rounding.
        Source: National Income and Product Accounts (revised 1999).
                       Figure 1: Federal Deticitlsurpius and Net Investment, 1959-1998
    15




    10




0
0
0




    0




    -5
         1960   1965         1970         1975         1980        1985         1990     1995
                       Figure 2: Federal deficit/Surplus and Net Saving, 1959-1 998
    15




    10




0
0
C
0




         1960   1965        1970         1975         1980         1985        1990   1995
           Figure 3: Federal Deficit/Surplus and Net Government Investment, 1959-1996

                                                   Federal Deficit/Surplus (NIPA)
                                                —a— Net Government Investment
                                                —e— Net Federal Investment




0
C
0
0




    1960    1965      1970     1975      1980     1985        1990        1995
            Figure 4: Federal Deficit/Surplus and Net Foreign Investment, 1959-1998
 3



2



 1




 0



-1




-2



-3



-4



-5
     1960   1965       1970         1975        1980         1985         1990        1995
