                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BEHAVIORAL AND DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF
                        ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY INTRODUCTION


                                             Carlo Carraro
                                           Gilbert E. Metcalf


                                          Working Paper 7648
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7648

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Carlo Carraro and Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Behavioral and Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy Introduction
Carlo Carraro and Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 7648
April 2000
JEL No. H21, H23


                                             ABSTRACT

        This paper summarizes research presented at the FEEM-NBER Conference on the Behavioral
and Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy, held in Milan Italy in June 1999.


Carlo Carraro                                                    Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
University of Venice                                             Tufts University
San Giobbe 873, Venice, Italy                                    Medford, MA 02155
and FEEM                                                         and NBER
                                                                 gmetcalf@tufts.edu
Background
      In recent years, environmental policymakers have adopted a set of instruments quite

different from those usually prescribed in environmental policy textbooks. Economists have

traditionally encouraged the use of incentive based instruments in place of command and

control regulation. The starting point for a discussion on efficient environmental policy has

been the Pigouvian prescription: to set taxes on pollution equal to marginal environmental

damages. In recent years, however, economists have come to recognize that the standard

Pigouvian prescription needs to be modified in the face of other important economic and

political considerations.

       The reasons for this modification of the standard Pigouvian prescription can be found

in the nature of the environmental problems to be managed. These problems are often

characterized by a transnational dimension, by links to other economic issues, and by their

interrelationship with several types of economic externalities. All this implies that

environmental policy has to be re-designed in order to be effective even in a world where the

policymakers may have multiple interrelated targets and an incomplete set of policy

instruments.

       Some examples may clarify this point. If markets are not perfectly competitive, and if

the regulator is unable to restore perfect competitiveness – sometimes because a single

regulator does not exist as in the case of multinationals -- then an environmental policy,

designed to correct the environmental externalities produced in the imperfectly competitive

industry, cannot be the usual “optimal” tax scheme where the tax rate is equal to the social

marginal damage produced by the industry. In general, the optimal tax is lower than the
social marginal damage, because the market externality induced by imperfect competition

must be taken into account.1

       As another example, if the regulator is concerned about unemployment, capital flows

and the location of firms, or distributional considerations across different sectors in the

economy, then he may set a tax and mandate the use of the resulting tax revenue in such a

way as to identify the optimal tradeoff among multiple objectives (environment, employment,

capital stock, economic structure and growth, etc.).2

       If the environmental problem is transnational or global, optimal policy design is even

more complicated. Trade-offs may be necessary to ensure the adoption of environmental

policy tools by all or most countries involved in the management of the environmental

problem. Again the standard economic principle which implies the equalization of marginal

abatement costs and benefits across countries may not be the “optimal” one.3

       It is often argued that environmental policy may induce firms to innovate, either by

carrying out more and newer R&D or by adopting existing environmentally benign

technology. Even in this case, environmental policy needs to take into account external

effects induced by innovation, market distortions in the R&D markets, free-riding incentives

induced by R&D spillovers, possible delays in innovation, as well as benefits and costs of

R&D cooperation.4

       Finally, actual policymakers often attach considerably more importance to the

distributional impacts of the policy measures that they adopt than they do to issues of

efficiency. As a consequence, environmental policy, given the incompleteness of the policy

tools that governments have at their disposal, and the presence of multiple externalities, faces

the well known trade-off between efficiency and equity.5
        The     departure   of   actual   environmental   policy   from   “optimal”   textbook

recommendations may be induced also by political constraints. For example, the failure to

use environmental taxation in Europe can be explained by objections to new taxes in countries

where the tax burden is already quite high. This has to do with the acceptability of policy

measures on which a consensus needs to be found. This is also why voluntary environmental

agreements seem to have become a widely adopted policy tool in Europe. Even if this tool

may not produce the optimal management of a given environmental problem, it may be the

only way to achieve some satisfactory results on emission control in some given industries

and/or countries.6 In other cases, environmental policy is not optimal because it is simpler or

less costly in terms of administrative costs to adopt a policy which is built upon existing

policies or which is implemented through an existing set of procedures or administrative

structures.7

        The above remarks suggest some common themes. First, environmental policy has to

manage new environmental problems in a world in which there are an insufficient number of

appropriate policy tools, because of inertia, lack of consensus, or an excessive number of

policy targets. Hence, policy analysis inevitably deals with second best worlds and yields

second best policy outcomes.

        In addition, most environmental problems are closely linked to industrial, trade, and

financial problems. Hence, any analysis of these problems should not be carried out by

specialists in environmental economists only, but by economists who can integrate

environmental economics with public finance, industrial economics, and trade theory, among

other fields.
       These conclusions led us to design a book in which:

•   chapters are written by leading economists who are able to integrate environmental

    analysis with the analysis of other intertwined economic issues. Hence, we invited experts

    from public finance, industrial organization, and trade theory in order to increase

    “leakages” and “ transplants” across fields.

•   chapters analyze economic and policy problems where distributional issues and multiple

    market failures inevitably lead to second best policy analyses.

       There two other novel features of this book that deserve some comment. First, most

chapters adopt a microeconomic, behavioral approach to environmental problems. This is not

to say that a macroeconomic analysis of environmental issues, as is presented in most

textbooks, is inappropriate. We believe, however, that greater insight on the mechanisms

through which environmental policy works to correct externalities can be obtained by looking

at the behavioral responses of economic agents to environmental policy initiatives. It is thus

possible to single out the economic incentives provided by environmental policy, their

impacts on a firm’s strategy, and their distribution across sectors.

       A second important feature is the focus on empirical microeconomic analysis. Most

chapters not only provide important theoretical advances, but also attempt to validate the

theoretical analysis through careful empirical research, which is often carried out on newly

constructed data sets.8 Hence, this book can be distinguished from other books because of its

ability to integrate theoretical and empirical research, environmental economics and

environmental policy, behavioral and distributional concerns, and environmental issues within

a wide set of economic analytical tools.
       The book is the outcome of a fruitful partnership between the NBER and FEEM. In

order to prepare this book, a conference was held in Milan Italy in June of 1999, where papers

were presented and discussed. Discussants have been asked to prepare written discussions

which are also published in this book. These discussions outline directions for future research

and can be quite useful to those who might extend and generalize the results presented in the

chapters of this book.

       The papers published in this volume fall into four broad groups. The first group is

concerned with issues that arise in the design and implementation of tax or other market based

instruments. The second group of papers addresses compliance cost issues in environmental

policy. The third group of papers addresses environmental policy design when trade and

development issues are considered. Finally, the last group of papers takes up the issues of

incentives, information, and research and development as they affect optimal policy design.

As the various categories above suggest, the papers in this volume span a wide range of topics

in the area of environmental policy in keeping with the overall design we had in mind when

planning the volume.

Taxes and Other Economic Instruments

       As noted above, environmental policy is rarely applied in a first-best world in which

pollution is the only externality to be corrected, and in which policymakers have all the

information which is necessary to implement standard Pigouvian tax schemes. Moreover,

distributional concerns and administrative costs may also affect the decision to adopt a given

environmental policy instrument. These issues are discussed in depth in the first part of this

volume.
        Chapter 2 by Don Fullerton, Inkee Hong, and Gilbert E. Metcalf titled, "A Tax on

Output of the Polluting Industry is Not a Tax on Pollution: The Importance of Hitting the

Target," considers the efficiency implications of imprecisely targeted instruments. While the

standard undergraduate environmental economics textbook prescribes the use of Pigouvian

taxes on emissions, real world environmental taxes generally tax inputs or outputs that are

imperfectly correlated with pollution. Given the practical difficulties in monitoring pollution,

it is often administratively less costly to tax inputs or outputs associated with pollution. These

goods may already be taxed and are traded in markets making the imposition and collection of

a tax relatively straight-forward. The authors calculate optimal tax rates on goods associated

with pollution as well as tax rates on pollution itself under different assumptions about the

availability and use of different tax instruments. Among other findings, the authors confirm

the result that the optimal tax rate on emissions in the presence of pre-existing taxes on other

goods or factors is less than the social marginal damages of pollution, the level prescribed by

Pigou (1932) in his classic analysis of pollution taxes. The authors also consider the relative

gains from changes in either pollution or output taxes and find that the welfare gain from

increasing output taxes is roughly half of the welfare gains from a comparable increase in a

tax on pollution itself.

        Distributional concerns and their impact on the optimal environmental policy are at

the heart of Chapter 3 by A. Lans Bovenberg and Lawrence H. Goulder, titled "Neutralizing

the Adverse Industry Impacts of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?". One of the

significant obstacles to any major tax reform or new tax initiative is the existence of windfall

gains and losses that accrue to different industry sectors. This concern has manifested itself in

the construction of a market for tradable permits for SO2 emissions in the 1990 Clean Air Act
Amendments in the United States. During the debate leading up to this new law, an important

question was whether firms should be given the permits (grandfathered) or should be sold the

permits. Bovenberg and Goulder draw attention to the possibility of an intermediate position

in which some of the permits are given and the remainder sold. Given the large potential of

any CO2 policy to generate industry rents (windfall profits), the authors find that only a small

fraction of emissions permits need be grandfathered to preserve profits and equity values for a

firm. CGE simulations that the authors run suggest that the most affected industries (coal, oil

& gas) need have no more than 15 percent of their permits grandfathered to preserve profits

and equity values.

       In the context of an emissions tax, only a small fraction of the emissions need be

exempted from taxation. The authors also point out the large difference between preserving a

firm's profits and preserving its tax payments. Since a large fraction of the carbon tax burden

is shifted forward to consumers, compensating firms for the taxes they owe (the statutory

burden) will overcompensate them (relative to the economic burden of the tax). Bovenberg

and Goulder carry out a variety of simulations in a CGE model to consider a full range of

possible policy plans with their corresponding incidence effects across industries. The key

finding – that potential rents are large relative to profits in the absence of regulation and so

grandfathering a small fraction of permits suffices to compensate firms for their losses – holds

generally in their model.

       A frequent obstacle to the introduction of efficient environmental policies is the

presence of relevant administrative costs. Chapter 4 by Sjak Smulders and Herman

Vollebergh is titled "Green Taxes and Administrative Costs: The Case of Carbon Taxation."

Smulders and Vollebergh explore the tradeoff between efficiency and administrative costs in
the design of environmental tax instruments with a particular focus on carbon taxes in Europe.

As emphasized by Fullerton and Metcalf, emissions taxes are more efficient than output or

input taxes which only indirectly tax emissions. Smulders and Vollebergh focus more sharply

in this chapter on the specific administrative costs that arise in the construction and operation

of a pollution tax system. In addition, they allow for a continuum of policy choices between

the use of emission taxes and product or input taxes.

       Smulders and Vollebergh note that where emissions are closely linked to inputs (or

outputs), abatement possibilities are few, and if administrative costs of emission taxes are

high, then emission taxes should not be implemented. Those conditions precisely apply to

carbon emissions and the current tax treatment of carbon in several European countries. The

carbon content of fuels is relatively fixed for each fuel type and carbon scrubbing is very

costly with current technologies. Moreover, carbon taxes can build on an extensive system of

energy taxation and so does not require a large new collection system to be developed. This

"piggy-backing" can lead to considerable administrative cost savings. The authors then go on

to examine current carbon taxation in various European countries to investigate the extent to

which the taxes have been optimally implemented. They find that there is considerable scope

for broadening the tax base for the carbon tax at little additional administrative cost.

Compliance Costs

       Environmental policy often gives rise to substantial compliance costs. This is an

argument raised by companies and industrial lobbies to oppose environmental regulation and

policy, often by threatening to re-locate their industrial plants in countries where compliance

costs are lower. To assess the validity of this argument, it is crucial to define a correct

methodology to quantify compliance costs. Only then is it possible to analyze the impact that
compliance costs have on the investment decisions of domestic and foreign firms. This is

done by the second group of papers of this volume.

        In Chapter 5 titled "An Industry-Adjusted Index of State Environmental Regulatory

Stringency," Arik Levinson, constructs an index of state level environmental regulatory

stringency from 1977 to 1994 across the 50 states in the United States. The index has a

number of advantages over existing indices of environmental regulation. Previous measures

were often subjective and simple cross sectional measures which made analysis of trends

across time and states impossible to carry out. Moreover, Levinson notes that the indices

ignore differences in industrial composition across states. Ignoring industrial composition

means that states with a heavy concentration of pollution intensive industry will show up as a

highly regulated state (as measured by costs of compliance) regardless of the state's regulatory

structure.   Levinson's measure explicitly controls for industrial composition. After

constructing the measure, Levinson applies it to an analysis of foreign direct investment in the

United States. He finds that the index performs better than other measures of regulatory

stringency in measuring the impact of environmental policy on FDI.

        Chapter 6 by Randy Becker and J. Vernon Henderson is titled "Costs of Air Quality

Regulation," and investigates the role of air quality regulations in the United States on capital

investment as well as the cost structure of firms. For the past twenty years, each county in the

United States has been designated as in or out of attainment with the National Ambient Air

Quality Standards for ground-level ozone (O3). Firms in non-attainment areas are subject to

stricter scrutiny and regulation than are firms in attainment areas and the contrast between

investment behavior in non-attainment versus attainment areas can serve to identify the

impact of environmental policy on firm investment. The identification process is confounded,
however, by the fact that firms can self-select into or out of non-attainment areas and Becker

and Henderson pay careful attention to the endogeneity of firm behavior. Focusing on the

industrial organic chemical and miscellaneous plastic parts industries – major emitters of

volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides – the authors find that the stricter regulation

in non-attainment areas leads to greater amounts of up-front investment in those areas but

lower overall size in mature firms.       The large up-front fixed costs associated with the

permitting process for construction of new plants makes it efficient for firms to increase their

initial plant investment.    Moreover, as regulations tighten over time, these plants are

grandfathered under the old rules and so avoid increased production costs. Becker and

Henderson then look to quantify the regulatory costs by estimating cost functions and

comparing cost differences between attainment and non-attainment areas.               The cost

differences are substantial. Not surprisingly, these cost differences are considerably larger

than the costs of pollution abatement estimates from data sets that directly measure pollution

abatement investment and costs. Among other things, the latter data sets only measure costs

of activities directly and substantially related to pollution abatement and so ignore many of

the costs that firms bear in response to regulation.

International Trade and Development

       Environmental policy often has an international dimension. This is because

environmental problems are often international or even global. But the international

dimension of environmental policy is also related to its distributional and behavioral impacts.

Indeed, policy decisions taken in one country may affect economic variables in other

countries, through their impacts on trade, investment, energy prices, and other economic

variables. This may modify both the growth and the distribution of world income (this point
should be obvious if, for example, one thinks of the impacts of past oil shocks). Some of these

aspects are taken into account by the papers in the third part of this volume. For instance, the

paper by Rauscher extends the analysis of the double dividend question to the case in which

international factor movements are explicitly considered in the model,9 whereas the paper by

Jha and Whalley focuses on the interdependence between environmental policy and income

distribution at the world level.

       Chapter 7 by Michael Rauscher is titled "International Factor Movements,

Environmental Policy, and Double Dividends." Rauscher investigates how the design of

environmental policies affects unemployment and welfare in a model with unemployment due

to sticky wages.     While a fixed wage model ignores the complexities that arise when

unemployment is due to a wage bargaining type model, it allows Rauscher to focus on the

interactions between unemployment and environmental tax reforms. As in Bovenberg and

Goulder's chapter, environmental policy can lead to scarcity rents which accrue to those who

employ capital as a factor of production. A tightening of environmental policy raises the

scarcity rents, which in turn makes capital more desirable (since the rents are associated with

the use of capital). As the demand for capital rises, labor is more productive and firms

respond by hiring more workers and so lowering unemployment. Rauscher now considers a

variety of environmental tax reforms and measures the impact of this rents effect on

unemployment. He finds that this rents-unemployment connection persists in the general

equilibrium and that it is possible that tighter environmental policy could in fact attract mobile

capital from outside the country and thus lower unemployment. A corollary finding is that a

shift from command and control regulation that creates scarcity rents to a tax regime that
allows the government to appropriate those rents could lead to capital flight. How large this

effect is remains an empirical question to be answered in future research.

       Chapter 8 by Raghbendra Jha and John Whalley is titled "The Environmental Regime

in Developing Countries." Again the chapter is concerned with distributional issues, but at

the international level. Jha and Whalley make a number of points relating to differences in

environmental problems and solutions between developing and developed countries. First,

they note that environmental problems in developing countries are more typically problems of

degradation rather than of pollution.      Soil erosion, congestion, and common property

resources, for example, create externalities that may dwarf the externalities arising from

traditional pollutants.   Jha and Whalley argue that to contrast environmental policies in

developed and developing countries without taking into account the very different

environmental issues is to paint a very misleading picture of the problems and possible

solutions. They next point out that measures of the social costs arising from environmental

problems are highly misleading if the measures focus on traditional pollutants that are the

focus of policy in developed countries. Third, the relation among economic growth, policy

reform, and environmental quality        may differ considerably between developed and

developing countries suggesting that grafting policy responses from developed countries onto

developing countries without consideration of the differences between the two regions may by

misguided. The authors conclude by arguing that an index of the severity of environmental

problems across countries that measures the welfare gain from moving to full internalization

of the externalities would work best to transcend the large differences in institutional and

economic structure, as well as environmental problems across developed and developing

countries.
Information, Incentives, and Environmental R&D

       The last group of papers of this volume focuses more deeply on the behavioral effects

of environmental policy. In order to assess the effectiveness of different sets of policy

instruments, it is important to analyze how these instruments modify firms’ strategic

incentives to promote their products, to innovate, to invest in R&D, to locate their plants in

different countries or regions. The chapters contained in the fourth part of the volume extend

previous results by introducing uncertainty and irreversibilities, by allowing for endogenous

cooperative environmental R&D among firms in the same industry, and by accounting for the

possibility that firms adopt appropriate incentive schemes to increase the environmental

performance of their own management.

       In chapter 9, titled "The Response of Companies to Information-Based Environmental

Policies," Domenico Siniscalco, Stefania Borghini, Marcella Fantini, and Federica Ranghieri

present some preliminary results from a fascinating new data set on voluntary environmental

initiatives at the firm level. These voluntary initiatives range from company environmental

reports to environmental audit and management schemes such as the recent ISO 14000

standards. Critics of these policies argue that they are simply public relation schemes to make

the companies look environmentally benign. It may be, however, that these types of policies

can have real effects given the complex structure of large corporations. Agency theory can

help explain why these policies might have real effects. Shareholders care about the value of

the company which can be adversely affected by liabilities arising from harmful

environmental activities in which the firm may engage. In addition to liability risk, firms can

lose valuable goodwill and reputation which in turn can diminish the value of the firm. While

shareholders may have a stake in their company engaging in environmentally clean activities,
managers may not share this stake. Voluntary information-based policies can play a role in

aligning the two groups' interests. Siniscalco and his co-authors have a unique data set which

may allow formal tests of some of the theoretical underpinnings of agency theory associated

with these voluntary environmental policies.

       Since 1992, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei has been collecting data from firms that

produce corporate environmental reports. By 1998, about 150 firms have produced these

reports. The authors first provide some background information on the firms and the types of

reports they prepare and then turn to a data analysis on a number of large firms based in

sixteen countries in the petro-chemical, oil and gas, and electric power generation industries.

Importantly, the researchers have gathered additional information on the companies'

environmental compensation and award schemes for employees as well as economic data for

the firms. Their preliminary data analysis suggests that the quality of information provided in

these corporate environmental reports has important explanatory power for corporate

environmental management. While tentative, their results are compatible with some of the

emerging agency theories on voluntary information-based environmental policies. Their

empirical analysis suggests that firms which implement some forms of environmental

reporting performs better both from an economic and an environmental point of view.

Moreover, firms which implement incentive schemes to induce managers to careful

environmental reporting achieve better results than the other ones. While these results are

quite preliminary, the chapter provides valuable information about the range of information-

based activities taken at a large number of important international firms and suggests fruitful

research opportunities as this data set grows over time.
       Chapter 10 by Anastasios Xepapadeas is titled "Environmental Policy and Firm

Behavior: Abatement Investment and Firm Location Decisions Under Uncertainty and

Irreversibility." Xepapadeas allows for uncertainty over output prices, environmental policy,

and technological parameters as firms consider the optimal level of investment in pollution

abatement capital as well as the location of new plants. Investment and relocation costs are in

many cases irreversible and optimal decision making takes into account the value of options

that are killed by making irreversible investments. Xepapadeas constructs a framework with

which policy makers can construct optimal emission taxes and pollution abatement subsidies

under a variety of models of uncertainty.

       Yannis Katsoulacos, Alistair Ulph, and David Ulph take up the topic of environmental

research joint ventures (RJVs) in Chapter 11.          Their paper, titled "The Effects of

Environmental Policy on the Performance of Environmental RJVs", investigates the optimal

amount of investment in research and development related to pollution abatement

technologies when firms can form voluntary research joint ventures. From the point of view

of firms, RJVs help firms avoid costly duplication of R&D effort. This is beneficial from

society's point of view although there is the countervailing loss from possibly slower

development of new technologies that can significantly reduce pollution due to the lack of

competition. In the context of this model, policy makers have two instruments at their

disposal. They can levy environmental taxes which will encourage R&D activity. They can

also prohibit the formation of RJVs if they feel that the costs resulting from a slowdown in

pollution abatement innovations from RJVs outweighs the benefits of avoiding duplicative

investment costs. The authors show that the magnitude of environmental damages that can be
averted through innovations resulting from R&D activity is a critical parameter for

understanding whether government should allow or prohibit RJVs.

Conclusions

       There are a few lessons that can be learned from the set of papers published in this

book. First, in a world in which multiple externalities and market imperfections interact, and

in which implementation costs are relevant -- mainly because of information asymmetries --

environmental policy needs to be careful designed, and is inevitably more complex than the

first best policies usually studied in textbooks. In particular, a policy mix formed by

environmental and non-environmental policy instruments is often adopted as part of the price

paid for political or administrative viability. Second, innovation in policy instrument design is

also important for managing new and complex environmental problems. Third, social costs of

environmental policy cannot be neglected. There are various strategies through which a

regulator can reduce the costs paid by firms and consumers. For example, when designing the

environmental policy mix, the regulator can use the possible revenue of environmental

taxation to provide incentives to spur economic growth. But the regulator can also adopt low

cost economic instruments, i.e. information based policies and incentive schemes, that

improve firms environmental performance while minimizing impacts on firm profitability.

Alternatively, the regulator can adopt policies to encourage environmental technological

cooperation, or policies to discourage firm re-location or capital flight.

       The chapters presented in this book suggest that further efforts should be made to

analyze the costs and benefits of policy mixes specifically designed to manage new and

complex environmental problems. Empirical analyses can be a great help in this matter.

Another lesson that can be derived from the chapters of this book is that new empirical
information can be very helpful for assessing the performance and cost of different policy

mixes. However, empirical analysis is still at a preliminary stage, particularly in Europe,

mainly because reliable and broad data sets on environmental issues are still relatively rare.

It is our hope that the research presented in this book will play a part in spurring further

empirical work -- both in Europe and North America -- that will extend our understanding of

environmental policy design in a second-best world.
                                        References


Bovenberg, A. Lans. 1997. Environmental Policy, Distortionary Labor Taxation, and
      Employment: Pollution Taxes and the Double Dividend. In New Directions in the
      Economic Theory of the Environment, ed. Carlo Carraro and Domenico Siniscalco, 69-
      104. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bovenberg, A. Lans. 1999. Green Tax Reforms and the Double Dividend: an Updated
      Reader's Guide. International Tax and Public Finance 6, no. 3: 421-443.

Carraro, Carlo. 1999a. Environmental Technological Innovation and Diffusion. In Frontiers
       of Environmental Economics, ed. H. Folmer, L. Gabel, S. Gerking, and A. Rose.
       Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Carraro, Carlo. 1999b. Imperfect Markets and Environmental Policy Instruments. In
       Handbook of Environmental and Resource Economics, ed. J. Van den Bergh, chapter
       15. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Carraro, Carlo, Yannis Katsoulacos, and Anastasios Xepapadeas, eds. 1996. Environmental
       Policy and Market Structure. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Carraro, Carlo, and Domenico Siniscalco, eds. forthcoming. Global Issues, Sovereign States.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1997. Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and
        Pre-Existing Distortions. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Working Paper No. 6091.

Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1998. Environmental Taxes and the Double
        Dividend Hypothesis: Did You Really Expect Something For Nothing? Chicago-Kent
        Law Review 73, no. 1: 221-256.

Pigou, Arthur C. 1932. The Economics of Welfare. Fourth ed. London: MacMillan and Co.
                                                  Endnotes

1
  The design of environmental policy under imperfect competition is analyzed in several recent
theoretical contributions. See Carraro, Katsoulacos, and Xepapadeas (1996) and the survey by Carraro
(1999b). See also an analysis of monopolies and optimal environmental taxation in Fullerton and
Metcalf (1997).
2
  The EU proposal of a 50-50 carbon/energy tax to reduce GHGs emissions is an example of a policy
instrument which balances environmental effectiveness, distributional burden across sectors, and cross
country equitable burden sharing. Another example is provided by the so called Green Tax Reforms and
by their attempts to provide both an environmental and an economic benefit (double dividend). A
interesting discussion of this problem is in Bovenberg (1997) and Fullerton and Metcalf (1998). A
theoretical analysis of environmental policy in the presence of multiple targets is provided by
Anastasios Xepapadeas and Michael Rauscher in this book.
3
  The design of policy instruments in a world where economic issues are often global, but decisions are
taken by (many) sovereign states, is the core of the analysis carried out in Carraro and Siniscalco
(forthcoming).
4
 These problems are more fully analyzed in Carraro (1999a). New results are provided by Katsoulacos,
Ulph, and Ulph in this book.
5
    See the chapters by Bovenberg and Goulder and by Rauscher in this book.
6
  For example, the Danish and Italian governments have recently implemented a policy scheme to
achieve the Kyoto targets in which a modest environmental tax is linked to widespread adoption of
industry specific voluntary agreements.
7
    See the chapters by Fullerton, Hong and Metcalf and by Smulders and Vollebergh in this book.
8
 Three good examples are the chapters by Becker and Henderson, Levinson, and Siniscalco et al. in this
book.
9
 The Double Dividend literature explores the implications of non-environmental benefits in addition to
environmental benefits when taxes on pollution are implemented. For a recent survey on this issue, see
(Bovenberg 1999).
