                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SOCIAL SECURITY INCENTIVES FOR RETIREMENT


                                             Courtney Coile
                                            Jonathan Gruber


                                          Working Paper 7651
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7651

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




This work builds on earlier joint research with Peter Diamond, and we are grateful to him for his continuing
guidance through this project. We are also grateful to Dean Karlan for excellent research assistance, and to
the National Institute on Aging for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Courtney Coile and Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Social Security Incentives for Retirement
Courtney Coile and Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 7651
April 2000
JEL No. H3, H5


                                            ABSTRACT

       We present a detailed analysis of the incentives that Social Security provides for continued
work at older ages. We do so using information on older males from the Health and Retirement
Study over the 1980-1997 period to calculate the changes in the present discounted value of Social
Security entitlements from additional work at each age. We find that the median male worker faces
a small tax on work at ages 55-61, a near zero tax at ages 62-64, and a large tax at ages 65-69.
However, there is significant heterogeneity in tax rates. We also document significant non-
monotonicities in the accrual of Social Security entitlements with additional work, and suggest a
more appropriate measure of incentive effects that considers accruals over not just the next year but
future years as well.




Courtney Coile                                        Jonathan Gruber
NBER                                                  Department of Economics
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Room E52-355
and NBER                                              50 Memorial Drive
ccoile@nber.org                                       Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                      and NBER
                                                      gruberj@mit.edu
         One of the most striking labor force phenomena of the second half of the twentieth

century has been the rapid decline in the labor force participation rate of older men. In 1950, for

example, 81% of 62 year old men were in the labor force; by 1995, this figure had fallen to 51%,

though it has rebounded slightly in the past few years (Quinn, 1999). Declines have been seen

for all groups of older men, as illustrated by Figure 1. For women, these declines with age have

been offset by an overall rising trend in labor force participation, as shown in Figure 2.1

         Much has been written about the proximate causes of this important trend among older

men, and in particular about the role of the Social Security program. A large number of articles

have documented pronounced “spikes” in retirement at ages 62 and 65, which correspond to the

early and normal retirement ages for Social Security, respectively. While there are some other

explanations for a spike at age 65, such as entitlement to health insurance under the Medicare

program or rounding error in surveys, there is little reason to see a spike at 62 other than the

Social Security program. Indeed, as Burtless and Moffitt (1984) document, this spike at age 62

only emerged after the early retirement eligibility age for men was introduced in 1961.

         The presence of these strong patterns in retirement data suggest that SS is playing a

critical role in determining retirement decisions. But in order to model the impact of SS reform

on retirement behavior, it is critical to understand what this role is. The evidence of spikes at age

62, for example, is consistent with at least three alternative hypotheses. The first is that there is

an actuarial unfairness built into the system penalizing work past age 62, so that there is a “tax”


   1
       Both figures are from Diamond and Gruber (1998).



                                                  1
effect that leads workers to leave at that age. The second is that workers are liquidity

constrained; they would like to retire before age 62, but cannot because they are unable to borrow

against their SS benefits and have no other source of retirement support. In this case, there will

be a large exit at age 62 as benefits first become available. The third is that workers are myopic

or information constrained; they either do not understand or do not appreciate the actuarial

incentives for additional work past age 62, so they retire as soon as benefits become available.

       The existing evidence would appear to refute the first explanation. Diamond and Gruber

(1998) calculate for a typical individual the implicit tax on continued work at each age from the

Social Security system and find that there is actually a small subsidy to continued work at age 62.

There is some supportive evidence for the second view; Kahn (1988) finds that there is a

pronounced spike in the retirement hazard at age 62 for those with low wealth, but that the much

larger spike is at age 65 for those with higher wealth. There is little work on the third view, other

than a recent careful exposition of the model by Diamond and Koszegi (1998).

       This paper provides a more thorough investigation of the first effect, the tax effect, along

four dimensions. First, we assess whether the tax rate Diamond and Gruber compute using a

synthetic individual with annual earnings at the median of his cohort is similar to the tax rate of

the real median person. We might expect a difference, as the shape of the earnings history is a

significant determinant of SS incentives through the dropout years provision and this is not

appropriately reflected with a synthetic earnings history. Second, we assess the distribution of

retirement incentives across the population. Even if there is not a significant disincentive for the

typical worker, disincentives for a large subset of workers could still be associated with a spike in

the aggregate retirement data. Third, we assess the importance of considering incentives for


                                                 2
retirement in the next year versus incentives for retirement over all possible years, drawing on the

insights of the option value model of Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b). Finally, we incorporate

the role of private pensions, an important determinant of retirement for a large share of workers.

       Our strategy is to apply the model of Diamond and Gruber to a set of real individuals, the

older persons surveyed by the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS). This is a very rich survey

with information on individual SS earnings histories, private pension plan details, and

demographics. This data allows us to carefully compute the incentives for retirement from SS

and pensions, both for the median individual and across the distribution.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. We begin, in Part I, with background on the relevant

institutional features of the SS system and the previous literature in this area. In Part II, we

describe our data and empirical strategy. Part III presents our basic results for the accrual of

Social Security wealth with additional work and the associated tax/subsidy relative to potential

earnings, both on average and across the distribution. Part IV then highlights the fundamental

weakness of simple one year accrual measures of this type: many Social Security wealth

trajectories are non-monotonic, suggesting that the appropriate measure must look across all

years to find the optimal retirement date. We then present calculations for what we label “peak

value,” an incentive measure which provides a middle ground between accrual and the utility-

based option value metric of Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b) by comparing retirement wealth at

the current retirement date to retirement wealth at its global maximum. In this section, we also

extend the results to incorporate private pensions. Part V concludes by discussing the

implications of our findings and the directions for future research.




                                                  3
                                         Part I: Background

Institutional Features of Social Security

                 The Social Security system is financed by a payroll tax which is levied equally on

workers and firms. The total payroll tax paid by each party is 7.65 percentage points; 5.3

percentage points are devoted to the Old Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) program, with 0.9

percentage points funding the Disability Insurance (DI) system and 1.45 percentage points

funding Medicare's Hospital Insurance (HI) program.2 The payroll tax that funds OASI and DI is

levied on earnings up to the taxable maximum, $72,600 in 1999; the HI tax is uncapped.

         Individuals qualify for an OASI pension by working for 40 quarters in covered

employment, which now encompasses most sectors of the economy. Benefits are determined in

several steps. The first step is computation of the worker's Averaged Indexed Monthly Earnings

(AIME), which is 1/12th of the average of the worker's annual earnings in covered employment,

indexed by a national wage index. A key feature of this process is that additional higher earnings

years can replace earlier lower earnings years, since only the highest 35 years of earnings are

used in the calculation (the “dropout year provision”).3


   2
       The total OASI +DI contribution rate has been 6.2% since 1990, although the division

between the two parts has varied slightly from year to year; the OASI portion is 5.35% in 1999

and will be 5.3% starting in 2000.



   3
       In particular, while earnings through age 59 are converted to real dollars for averaging,

earnings after age 60 are treated nominally. There is a two-year lag in availability of the wage

index, calling for a base in the year in which the worker turns 60 in order to be able to compute

                                                   4
         The next step of the benefits calculation is to convert the AIME into the Primary

Insurance Amount (PIA). This is done by applying a three-piece linear progressive schedule to

an individual's average earnings, whereby 90 cents of the first dollar of earnings is converted to

benefits, while only 15 cents of the last dollar of earnings (up to the taxable maximum) is so

converted. As a result, the rate at which SS replaces past earnings (the "replacement rate") falls

with the level of lifetime earnings. While up to 85% of SS benefits are subject to tax for retirees

with sufficiently high incomes (couples with non-SS income above $32,000 in 1999), all of

earnings are taxed (including the employee portion of the payroll tax), raising the effective

replacement rate of the program.

         The final step is to adjust the PIA based on the age at which benefits are first claimed.

For workers commencing benefit receipt at the Normal Retirement Age (currently 65, but

legislated to slowly increase to 67), the monthly benefit is the PIA. For workers claiming before

the NRA, benefits are decreased by an actuarial reduction factor of 5/9 of one percent per month;

thus, a worker claiming on his 62nd birthday receives 80% of the PIA.4 Individuals can also delay

the receipt of benefits beyond the NRA and receive a Delayed Retirement Credit (DRC). For


benefits for workers retiring at their 62nd birthdays. While it would be possible to make

adjustments as data become available, this is not done. This gap would become important if we

had large and varying inflation rates.



   4
       The reduction factor will be only 5/12 of one percent for months beyond 36 months before

the NRA, which will become relevant once the delay in NRA becomes effective.



                                                   5
workers reaching age 65 in 1999, an additional 5.5% is paid for each year of delay; this amount

will steadily increase until it reaches 8% per year in 2008.

         While a worker may claim as early as age 62, receipt of SS benefits is conditioned on the

"earnings test" until the worker reaches age 70. A worker age 62 to 65 may earn up to $9,600 in

1999 without the loss of any benefits, then benefits are reduced $1 for each $2 of earnings above

this amount; for workers age 65 to 69, the earnings test floor is $15,500 and benefits are reduced

at a rate of $1 for each $3 in earnings. Months of benefits lost through the earnings test are

treated as delayed receipt, entitling the worker to a delayed retirement credit on the lost benefits

when he does claim benefits. Despite this, the earnings test appears to have a pronounced effect

on retirement decisions, with evidence of extreme “piling up” of the earnings distribution among

elderly workers at the earnings test limit (Friedberg, 1998).

         One of the most important features of Social Security is that it also provides benefits to

dependents of covered workers. Spouses of SS beneficiaries receive a dependent spouse benefit

equal to 50% of the worker’s PIA, which is available once the worker has claimed benefits and

the spouse has reached age 62; however, the spouse only receives the larger of this and her own

entitlement as a worker.5 Dependent children are also each eligible for 50% of the PIA, but the

total family benefit cannot exceed a maximum which is roughly 175% of the PIA. Surviving

spouses receive 100% of the PIA, beginning at age 60, although there is an actuarial reduction for

claiming benefits before age 65 or if the worker had an actuarial reduction. In practice,


   5
       Spousal benefits can begin earlier if there is a dependent child in the household; spousal

benefits are also subject to actuarial reduction if receipt commences before the spouse’s NRA.



                                                   6
estimating a family’s total benefits is complicated by the fact that both spouses may qualify for

SS benefits as retired workers. Finally, benefit payments are adjusted for increases in the

Consumer Price Index (CPI) after the worker has reached age 62; thus, Social Security provides a

real annuity.



Previous Related Literature

         There are two broad strands of the literature on Social Security that are related to this

paper. The first strand attempts to document the labor force disincentives inherent in Social

Security, or implicit SS “tax rates.” Feldstein and Samwick (1992) model the tax rates on the

marginal earnings decision for simulated workers of different ages, earnings, and marital status.

They find that there are significant marginal tax rates on earnings for higher income workers and

secondary earners, and for younger workers as well.6

         A subsequent paper by Diamond and Gruber (1998) focuses more directly on tax rates on

around the time of retirement. They build a simulation model similar to that used here and

compute SS tax rates for simulated workers. As noted above, they find that for the median

worker, there is little net incentive or disincentive for continued work at age 62, although there is

a sizeable positive tax rate at age 65 and beyond due to the unfair Delayed Retirement Credit still

in place. They also find that tax rates are higher for single workers, since they do not benefit

from dependent and survivors benefits, and that tax rates are initially lower for low earners (who


   6
       Earlier work by Blinder, Gordon, and Wise (1980, 1981) and Burkhauser and Turner (1981)

calculates tax rates under the pre-1977 Social Security rules.



                                                   7
benefit from the redistributive nature of benefits) but eventually higher (since they are penalized

more by actuarial unfairness after age 65).

       While suggestive, both of these studies suffer from a key limitation: they do not consider

the incentives facing real individuals. This is important because of the dropout years provision,

which implies that the actual pattern of earnings, and not just the level of average or final

earnings, matters for benefits determination. As we will show later, even for workers with the

same average and final earnings, there is considerable heterogeneity in SS tax rates. By

considering a real sample of individuals, we will be able to appropriately measure both the

incentives for the median worker and the underlying heterogeneity in these incentives.

       The second literature is that on the retirement effects of Social Security. A number of

studies use aggregate information on the labor force behavior of workers at different ages, such

as that documented in the introduction, to infer the role that is played by Social Security. Hurd

(1990) and Ruhm (1994) emphasize the spike in the age pattern of retirement at age 62; as Hurd

(1990) states, "there are no other institutional or economic reasons for the peak". Using precise

quarterly data, Blau (1994) finds that almost one-quarter of the men remaining in the labor force

at their 65th birthday retire within the next three months; this hazard rate is over 2.5 times as

large as the rate in surrounding quarters. However, Lumsdaine and Wise (1994) document that

this penalty alone cannot account for this "excess" retirement at age 65, nor can the incentives

embedded in private pension plans or the availability of retirement health insurance through the

Medicare program. This does not rule out a role for Social Security; by setting up the "focal

point" of a normal retirement age, the program may be the causal factor in explaining this spike.

       The main body of the retirement incentives literature attempts to specifically model the


                                                  8
role that potential SS benefits play in determining retirement. The general strategy followed by

this literature is to use micro-data sets with information on potential SS benefit determinants

(earnings histories) or ex-post benefit levels to measure the incentives to retire across individuals

in the data.7 Then, retirement models are estimated as a function of these incentive measures.

While the exact modeling technique differs substantially across papers,8 the conclusions drawn

are fairly similar: SS has large effects on retirement, but they are small relative to the trends over

time documented in Figures 1 and 2. For example, Burtless (1986) found that the 20% benefit

rise of the 1969 to 1972 period raised the probability of retirement at 62 and 65 by about 2

percentage points. Over this period, however, the labor force participation of older men fell by


   7
       The data used are generally the Retirement History Survey (Boskin and Hurd, 1978;

Burtless, 1986; Burtless and Moffitt, 1984; Hurd and Boskin, 1984; Fields and Mitchell, 1984;

Blau, 1994), although some authors have relied on the National Longitudinal Survey of Older

Men (Diamond and Hausman, 1984), and recent work uses the Survey of Consumer Finances

(Samwick, 1998).



   8
       The earliest studies (Boskin and Hurd, 1978; Fields and Mitchell, 1984) used standard

linear or non-linear regression techniques. Later research (Burtless, 1986; Burtless and Moffitt,

1984) used non-linear budget constraint estimation to capture the richness of Social Security's

effects on the opportunity set. The most recent work (Diamond and Hausman, 1984; Hausman

and Wise, 1985; Samwick, 1998; Blau, 1994) uses dynamic estimation of the retirement

transition.



                                                  9
over 6%, so that SS can only explain about 1/3 of the change.9

          This literature suffers from two important limitations. First, the key regressor, Social

Security benefits, is a non-linear function of past earnings, and retirement propensities are clearly

correlated with past earnings levels. This problem is common to the social insurance literature in

the U.S.10 But for other social insurance programs there is often variation along dimensions

arguably exogenous to individual tastes, such as different legislative regimes across locations or

within locations over time, that can be used to identify behavioral models. There is no

comparable variation in Social Security, which is a nationally homogeneous program. Of course,

this criticism does not necessarily imply that the estimates of this cross-sectional literature are

flawed; as Hurd (1990) emphasizes, the non-linearities in the SS benefits determination process

are unlikely to be correlated with retirement propensities. But there has been little serious effort

to decompose the sources of variation in SS benefits in an effort to assess whether the

determinants that drive retirement behavior are plausibly excluded from a retirement equation.11


   9
        One exception is Hurd and Boskin (1984), who claim that the large benefits increases of the

1968-1973 period can explain all of the change in labor force participation in those years.



   10
        See Meyer (1989) for a careful discussion of this issue in the context of Unemployment

Insurance (UI).



   11
        At a minimum, one would want to include the level of lifetime earnings as a regressor, but

most studies include only earnings in a recent year (ie. Boskin and Hurd, 1978; Burtless, 1986).

In addition, even using a somewhat longer time frame for measuring the earnings control (as

                                                   10
       This criticism is levied most compellingly by Krueger and Pischke (1992), who note that

there is a unique "natural experiment" provided by the end of double-indexing for the "notch

generation" that retired in the late 1970s and early 1980s. For this cohort, SS benefits were

greatly reduced relative to what they would have expected based on the experience of the early-

mid 1970s. Yet, the dramatic fall in labor force participation continued unabated in this era.

This raises important questions about the identification of this cross-sectional literature.

       The second problem with this literature is that it generally focuses on only one of the two

key SS benefits variables, including SS benefits or wealth but ignoring the SS tax/subsidy rate

documented above. In theory, as discussed above, both of these factors play an important role in

determining retirement behavior. Studies which include the tax/subsidy rate find it to have a

significant role in explaining retirement (Fields and Mitchell, 1984; Samwick, 1993); indeed,

even in Krueger and Pischke's (1992) paper the accrual rate is often right-signed and significant,

even as the wealth effect is insignificant. More recently, Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b) note

that the correct regressor for considering both SS and pension incentives for retirement is not the

year to year accrual rate, but the return to working this year relative to retiring at some future

optimal date.


Diamond and Hausman, 1984, do) does not solve the problem; one could imagine that certain

features of the lifetime pattern of earnings are correlated with both benefit levels and retirement

decisions, such as the ratio of earnings around age 62 to earnings at earlier ages (since

individuals who have relatively high earnings at older ages may have better labor market

opportunities around the age of retirement and therefore work longer).



                                                  11
         Our findings are relevant to addressing both these shortcomings. To the extent that we

find substantial variation in the retirement incentives facing workers under the SS system, even

after conditioning on correlates of the retirement decision such as earnings, it suggests that there

are significant non-linearities in the determination of SS incentives which can help identify

retirement impacts. And we will compare the retirement incentives over the subsequent year

with those over all future years, following the insights of Stock and Wise.



                               Part II: Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

         Our data for this analysis comes from the Health and Retirement Study. The HRS is a

survey of individuals aged 51-61 in 1992 with re-interviews every two years; the first two waves

of the survey (1992 and 1994) and preliminary data for the third and fourth waves (1996 and

1998) are available at this time. Spouses of respondents are also interviewed, so the total age

range covered by the survey is much wider.

         A key feature of the HRS is that it includes Social Security earnings histories back to

1951 for most respondents. This provides two advantages for our empirical work. First, it

allows us to appropriately calculate benefit entitlements, which depend (through the dropout year

provision) on the entire history of earnings.12 Second, it allows us to construct a large sample of

person-year observations by using the earnings histories to compute SS retirement incentives and


   12
        Only earnings since 1950 are required to compute SS benefits for our sample’s age range;

the benefit rules specify that a shorter averaging period is used for persons born prior to 1929.



                                                  12
labor force participation at each age. We use all person-year observations on men age 55-69 for

our analysis, subject to the exclusions detailed below.

          Our sample is selected conditional on working, so that we examine the incentives for

retirement conditional on being in the labor force. Work is defined in one of two ways. For

those person-years before 1992, when we are using earnings histories, we define work as positive

earnings in two consecutive years; if earnings are positive this year but zero the next, we consider

the person to have retired this year. For person-years from 1992 onwards, when we have the

actual survey responses, we cannot use this earnings-based definition, since we only have

earnings at two year intervals. For this era, we use information on self-reported retirement status

and dates of retirement to construct annual retirement measures. While these are somewhat

different constructs, the retirement rates by age are similar across the two samples, so we

combine them for precision purposes. We also only consider individuals before their first

retirement; if a person who is categorized as retired reenters the labor force, the later observations

are not used.

          Our sample selection criteria are documented in Table 1. There are 6,173 men who

participate in one or more waves of the HRS. We exclude 121 men who were born before 1922

and thus subject to different SS benefit rules. We lose an additional 1,747 men due to a lack SS

earnings history data.13 We lose 860 men who cease working prior to age 55, and an additional


   13
        Individuals were required to sign a permission form in order for their SS records to be

attached; approximately 75% of the sample gave permission. Haider and Solon (1999) find that

willingness to give permission varies only weakly with observable characteristics.



                                                   13
214 men due to a lack of information on their wives’ SS earnings histories (necessary due to the

family structure of benefits).14 The 3,231 remaining observations are converted into 18,903

person-year observations by creating one observation for each year from 1980 through 1997 in

which the individual is between the ages of 55 and 69 and working. Finally, we lose 1,356

person-year observations where the individual is working after a previous retirement. The final

sample size is 17,547 person-year observations.



Empirical Strategy

         Our goal is to measure the retirement incentives inherent in SS and private pension

systems. For the case of Social Security, we begin with the calculation of an individual’s Social

Security Wealth. The basis for this calculation is a simulation model that we have developed to

compute for any individual their Social Security entitlement for any age of retirement. This is

based on a careful modeling of Social Security benefits rules, and our simulation model has been

cross-checked against the Social Security Administrations’s ANYPIA model for accuracy.

         The next step in our simulation is to take these monthly benefit entitlements and compute

an expected net present discounted value of Social Security Wealth (SSW). This requires

projecting benefits out until workers reach age 120, and then taking a weighted sum that

discounts future benefits by both the individual discount rate and the probability that the worker


   14
        We keep observations for which the wife’s SS earnings records are not available but we

can ascertain from the self-reported labor force histories that the wife worked less than half as

many years as the husband.



                                                 14
will live to a given future age. Our methodology for doing so is described in Appendix I. For the

worker himself, this is fairly straightforward; it is simply a sum of future benefits, discounted

backwards by time preference rates and mortality rates. For dependent and survivor benefits, it is

more complicated, since we must account for the joint likelihood of survival of the worker and

the dependent. In our base case, we use a real discount rate of 3%. To adjust for mortality

prospects, we use the sex/age specific U.S. life tables from U.S. Department of Health and

Human Services (1990).15 All figures are discounted back to age 55 by both time preference

rates and mortality risk.

         For the output of the simulations, we calculate several different concepts. The first is the

level of SSW. The second is the accrual, or the dollar change in SSW from the previous year.

We then compute the “after-tax accrual”, which subtracts from this dollar change the payroll

taxes paid by the worker and his employer (assuming full tax incidence on wages). Finally,

since it is natural to think about these incentives relative to the returns from additional work, we

also follow Diamond and Gruber (1998) in calculating the implicit tax/subsidy rate on additional

work, which normalizes the negative of the accrual by the potential wage for that year; a positive

accrual implies a negative tax rate and vice versa. Thus, if the tax rate is positive, it implies that

the SS system causes a disincentive to additional work through foregone SSW. To measure the

full tax wedge, we use the gross wage in the denominator; under the assumption that the


   15
        In principle, individual-specific mortality prospects should be used to compute SSW and

related retirement incentives. In future work, we plan to use the richer information in the HRS

on health and even subjective mortality evaluation to do these richer calculations.



                                                  15
employer portion of payroll taxes is reflected in wages, we increase reported wages by 6.2%.

       For assessing the accrual rate and related concepts used later in the paper, we must project

the worker’s earnings over the next year (or all future years) if he continues to work. We

considered a number of different projection methodologies, and found that the best predictive

performance was from a model which simply grew earnings from the last observation by 1% real

growth per year, so this is the assumption we use for our simulations.

       For the purposes of the simulations below, we assume that workers claim SS benefits at

the point of their retirement, or when they become eligible if they retire before the point of

eligibility. In fact, this is not necessarily true; retirement and claiming are two distinct events,

and for certain values of mortality prospects and discount rates it is optimal to delay claiming

until some time after retirement (due to the actuarial adjustment of benefits). Coile, Diamond,

Gruber, and Jousten (1999) investigate this issue in some detail, using simulation analysis to

document the gains to delaying claiming and showing that a non-trivial share of individuals do

delay claiming past age 62. In this case, our calculations will overstate any subsidies to

continued work, since part of this subsidy will come from delayed claiming that could be

obtained without delaying retirement.

       Also, it is important to highlight that our work is focused on the impact of SS on the labor

force participation decision. A separate and interesting issue is the impact of SS on the marginal

labor supply decision among those participating in the labor force, which was the focus of the

Feldstein and Samwick (1992) analysis. This is more complicated for those around retirement

age, since it involves incorporating the role of the earnings test, which we avoid with our analysis

of participation. This, in turn, would involve modeling expectations about the earnings test,


                                                  16
since individuals appear not to understand that this is just a benefits delay instead of a benefits

cut. This is clearly a fruitful avenue for further research.



                      Part III: Social Security Accruals and Tax/Subsidies

Median Worker

         We begin by considering the incentives facing the median worker at each age. These

results are presented in Table 2. Each row represents the incentives facing a worker whose last

year of work is labeled in the first column; that is, the age 55 row represents the incentives facing

a worker who decides to retire on his 56th birthday.16 We show for each age the SSW, the

accrual, the after-tax accrual, and tax/subsidy rate. In the final column, we show the tax/subsidy

rate from Diamond and Gruber (1999), for comparison; their results are for a married male,


   16
        The SSW value is calculated from the data for age 55, and is then constrained to follow the

pattern of accruals from age 56 onwards. We do this because the actual median SSW at each age

does not correspond to the accrual pattern. If we use the SSW of the person with the median

accrual, the pattern of SSW is nonsensical (with large shifts from year to year), since that person

is different at every year. If we use the median SSW across the sample in each year (picking the

median SSW in our sample, and not the SSW of the median accrual person), the SSW rises

substantially over all years, due to sample selection. Another alternative is to project retirement

incentives out to age 69 for the sample working at age 55; doing so, we find that the median

SSW follows the same pattern as accruals, and that the accrual and tax variables are very similar

to what we report here.



                                                  17
which is appropriate since 90% of our sample is married.

       We find that the median SSW for workers who retire on their 55th birthday is $154,928.

SSW grows steadily through age 65, then declines. This is shown most clearly in the next

column, which presents the benefit accruals at each age. From age 55-61, these accruals are

positive due to the dropout year provision; the median worker is increasing his SSW by replacing

lower earning years in his earnings average. These accruals then get much larger between ages

62-64, due to the actuarial adjustment. That is, the fact that accruals are larger after age 62

suggests that the actuarial adjustment is more than fair for the median worker; the gain to

delaying receipt outweighs the fact that benefits are received for fewer years. At age 65 and

thereafter, however, there are negative accruals for working additional years, as the delayed

retirement credit is not sufficiently large to fairly compensate workers.

       The next column amends the benefit accrual by incorporating the fact that the worker and

his employer must pay payroll taxes for additional work. This reverses the signs on the accruals

at ages 55-61, which are now negative, as the small benefit of AIME recomputation is

outweighed by paying 12.4% of wages in tax. However, at ages 62-64, the larger benefit accruals

approximately offset the taxes incurred through additional work, so that the after-tax accrual for

the median person is near zero. The after-tax accrual then turns sharply negative from age 65

onwards.

       The next column converts these after-tax accruals into tax/subsidy rates by dividing by

the gross wage. There are positive taxes on work from age 55-61, but these taxes are

significantly lower than the statutory 12.4% payroll tax rate, due to the benefit of additional

earnings through the dropout year provision. The tax rate is near zero for the median worker at


                                                 18
ages 62 and 63 and is 2.7% at age 64. From age 65 onwards, the tax rate is positive and very

large. By age 68, the tax rate exceeds 30%; it drops back down again at age 69, but the samples

at these ages in the HRS are very small.

       These results are very similar to those in Diamond and Gruber, in spite of several

important differences in methodology. First, Diamond and Gruber use a smooth age-earnings

profile, which underestimates the value of the dropout year provision for people with real

earnings trajectories with more variance. Second, Diamond and Gruber take an age 55 individual

and simulate his incentives to work at each future age, while the current calculations potentially

incorporate some selection effects by using only those individuals still working at each age. The

most notable differences between the two sets of results are at age 55, where Diamond and

Gruber find a subsidy to work (by construction, their individual replaces a zero year of earnings

with his 55th year of work), and at age 62, where Diamond and Gruber find a subsidy of 2.8%

and we find a zero tax rate. But the bottom line story is very similar: small taxes on work up

through age 61, tax rates near zero at ages 62-64, and more sizeable taxes after age 65. Thus, we

reaffirm the important conclusion of previous studies that the SS system does not place a

significant tax on work at age 62 for the median worker.



Heterogeneity

       As emphasized earlier, the incentives facing the median worker may mask considerable

heterogeneity across the population in retirement incentives. Substantial heterogeneity may in

turn be associated with an increase in retirement rates at age 62, even if the incentives are small

for the median worker. If for example, there are large tax rates on work for 50% of the


                                                 19
population, and small subsidies to work for 50% of the population, then there may be a zero tax

rate for the median worker, but still potentially a large amount of retirement at age 62.

       We explore the heterogeneity in incentives in Table 3, which shows the distribution of

after-tax accruals and of tax/subsidy rates by age. As is immediately apparent, there is a

substantial amount of heterogeneity in the accruals and tax rates. For example, from age 55-61,

while the median tax rate is positive and non-trivial, roughly one-sixth of the sample actually has

a subsidy to additional work. At age 62, while there is a zero tax rate for the median worker,

10% of the sample faces a tax rate of 6.8% or higher and the standard deviation of the tax rate is

17.8%. After age 65, while virtually all of the sample faces positive tax rates, there remains

substantial variation in the magnitude of the tax rate; at age 65, the standard deviation is nearly

twice as large as the median tax rate.

       What explains this substantial heterogeneity in SS incentives? This is an important

question for both understanding how SS incentives work and for considering the validity of

empirical work which relies on SS incentives to identify retirement behavior. As highlighted by

Krueger and Pischke’s (1992) criticism of the previous literature, if the vast majority of the

variation in these incentives comes from factors such as wages or marital status, which are

themselves likely to be independently correlated with retirement decisions, we might worry that

incentive measures are capturing these other aspects of retirement decisions. But if, as suggested

by Hurd’s (1990) rebuttal to this line of criticism, there are significant non-linearities and

interactions otherwise (likely) uncorrelated with retirement that primarily identify the impact of

these incentive measures, one might feel more confident about retirement estimates.

       We next turn to regression modeling of SS accruals and tax/subsidy rates to address this


                                                  20
question. We consider in turn various potential determinants of the variation in incentives:

•      Age: as shown earlier, there is important variation in tax rates with age

•      Earnings in the last year of work: this is the denominator of the tax rate, and will also
       enter through the dropout year provision. This may as a result have both linear and non-
       linear effects, so we try both a linear earnings term and an earnings quartic.

•      AIME: Average lifetime earnings is the primary determinant of benefits. Once again, the
       effects will be non-linear, through the redistributive function that determines the PIA.

•      Marital status and age difference with spouse: Marital status will be an important
       determinant of tax rates through the dependent benefits structure. In addition, larger the
       positive age difference between spouses (a larger number of years by which the husband
       is older), the larger the value of the dependent spouse and survivor benefits.

•      Earnings in lowest year: In combination with earnings in the last year, earnings in the
       lowest year will determine the value of the dropout year provision. We also include the
       number of years in the 35-year earning history with earnings below current earnings.

       The results of this exercise are shown in Table 4. We find that the explanatory power on

the accrual is much more substantial than on the tax/subsidy rate, which is not surprising since

the tax/subsidy rate introduces additional variation simply by normalizing by the wage. Thus, we

focus on the accrual in our discussion.

       Our overall conclusion is that, while these factors have some ability to explain accrual

patterns, the overall explanatory power is small. Factors clearly (potentially) correlated with

tastes for retirement such as age, current earnings, and lifetime earnings, even when the former is

entered as a series of dummies and the latter as flexible cubic functions, explains less than 25%

of the variation in accruals. Even if we include a full set of interactions of these cubic functions

of earnings and AIME, we only explain 27% of the variation. Adding marital status, age

difference with spouse, spouse’s earnings, and the low earnings year explains only another 2% of

variation. Thus there appears to be a substantial amount of variation in the accrual that is not


                                                 21
explained by factors that would plausibly otherwise be correlated with retirement.



                                Part IV: Peak Value Calculations

Motivation

       The results thus far have focused on one year accruals of SSW and the associated

tax/subsidy rates on an additional year of work. As noted above, a key insight of Stock and Wise

(1988) in the private pension context is that one-year forward measures of this type may be

misleading if there are substantial incentives or disincentives for retirement in future years. This

was a natural concern in the context of private pensions, which often have dramatic and explicit

retirement incentives at certain ages, such as the plan’s early and normal retirement age. But is

this an important issue in the context of Social Security?

       In fact, the critical importance of considering the entire future path of incentives is

illustrated in Figure 3. This figure shows the most common patterns of after-tax SSW evolution

(including payroll taxes paid for additional work) across our sample. In each figure, we graph for

a group of workers the pattern of SSW evolution over all future years; this is done for the full

cross-sectional sample, comparable to Table 2, where each worker contributes an observation for

up to 14 years. Each observation is then the pattern of SSW from that year forward, based on

that year’s characteristics. Under each graph is a figure for the percentage of our full cross-

sectional sample that is in each case, and the cumulative share across the cases. For example, as

shown in panel 1, 1% of the sample has an SSW that is everywhere increasing; while panel 3

shows that 14% of the sample has an SSW that first rises, then falls. In each case, the length of

each segment is defined by the median starting and ending age of the segment and the slope of


                                                 22
the segment is determined by the median SSW at the beginning and end of the segment.

       As these graphs illustrate, substantial non-monotonicities of the type seen for private

pensions also exist for Social Security. For 38% of our sample, there is a local maximum that is

not a global maximum. The most common pattern in the data (panel 2), which applies to 48% of

the sample, is one where after-tax SSW is always declining. However, the second most common

pattern (panel 6), which applies to 29% of the sample, is one where after-tax SSW declines from

55-61, rises from 62-64, then falls.

       This is a striking finding, because it highlights an important weakness of the accrual

measure. For any given year from age 55-61, a typical worker will be lose money on net through

the Social Security system by working. But, by working, that worker is also buying an option on

the more than fair actuarial adjustment that exists from age 62-64. Incorporating this option, as

shown in panel 6, leads to the conclusion that there may overall be net subsidies to work before

age 62 for many workers through the Social Security system.



Peak Value

       To incorporate this feature into our incentive calculations, we move away from the

accrual and tax/subsidy rate to a more forward looking measure of incentives, which we call

“peak value.” This is the value of continuing to work until the future year when SSW is

maximized, or the difference between the expected PDV of SSW at its highest possible value in

the future, and the expected PDV of SSW if you retire this year. So this is like the typical accrual

concept, except that the individual looks forward to the optimal year, rather than just to next year.

If the individual is at an age that is beyond the SSW optimum, then the peak value is the


                                                 23
difference between retirement this year and next year, which is exactly the accrual rate. Once

again, it is natural to think about this type of concept relative to potential earnings, but here what

is relevant is the entire stream of earnings until the optimal SSW is reached. That is, if the

optimum is $5000 higher than SSW today and is one year away, then this is a larger subsidy to

continued work than if the optimum is higher by the same amount but is five years away. We

therefore normalize this peak value by the expected PDV of wages over the period between this

year and the year of maximal SSW. So this concept captures the benefits of continuing to work

towards the peak SSW year, relative to earnings over that period.

       We show our peak value calculations in Table 5. On a pre-tax basis, peak value is

$22,426 at age 55 and falls steadily, becoming negative at age 65. For the median worker, post-

tax peak value is negative at all ages except for 62-63. However, 30-40% of workers have a

positive after-tax peak value at ages 55-61. For these workers, the option value of a more than

fair actuarial adjustment after age 62 outweighs payroll tax payments before age 62. As a result,

Social Security is actually providing a subsidy to additional work throughout all ages 55-64.

This subsidy is rather small relative to earnings; the median after-tax peak value for those with

positive values is about $3,000. After age 65, there is a negative return to additional work for

the vast majority of workers.

       Thus, viewed from a year-to-year perspective, the Social Security system taxes work

between ages 55-61 at a modest rate for over 80% of workers; but, viewed from a more forward-

looking perspective, there are actually modest subsidies at those ages for 30-40% of workers

because workers are buying the option of delaying claiming at a more than actuarially fair rate.

Of course, this conclusion is somewhat overstated, for two reasons. First, as noted above,


                                                  24
exercising the option to delay claiming does not require additional work, simply delayed

claiming. Second, for an individual who was planning to retire and claim at 62 for other reasons,

there is no option value from delayed claiming. Thus, whether peak value is the relevant concept

for actual retirement decisions at this age is an empirical question, and one which we plan to

explore in further work. But the fact remains that this option exists and is not recognized by the

accrual concept.

       It is worth noting an apparent inconsistency between Table 2 and Table 5. As should be

obvious, the peak value at any given age is just the sum of all future accruals to the year when

SSW is maximized. Yet, the sum of the benefit accruals from age 55 forward in Table 2 is not

equal to the age-55 pre-tax peak value from Table 5. The reason for this apparent inconsistency

is simply composition effects; the median individuals at each age and across the two tables are

different. There is no clear way to address this in the aggregate, while still representing the

median values for our incentive variables of interest.

       Instead, we illustrate that this is not a problem at the individual level in Table 6, where

we show these concepts for a “typical” individual in our data set, who was age 55 in 1992 and

who has roughly the median earnings of his age cohort in our data. For this individual, the sum

of the benefit accruals from any given age forward to the peak of SSW (age 66) does equal the

pre-tax peak value at that age. That is, at age 55, the peak value after-tax is $19,170, which is the

sum of the after tax accruals from age 55 through age 66. Thus, for a “typical” individual, we see

that there is no inconsistency across these concepts; it only arises when we try to compare sample

medians across the concepts.




                                                 25
Heterogeneity

         As with after-tax accruals, there is a substantial amount of heterogeneity in after-tax peak

values, as illustrated in Table 7. At age 62, for example, the median after-tax peak value is $274.

However, at that age 48% of the sample has peak values that are less than zero, the 90th percentile

value is $6,299, and the standard deviation is $7,852, nearly 30 times the median.

         The variation in peak values is more readily explained by the other factors that might

naturally be included in a retirement model, as is shown in Table 8. For the after-tax peak value,

including flexible functions of age, earnings, and AIME can explain about half of the variation;

adding marital status, spousal characteristics, and lowest earnings year can explain another 3%.

Still, a substantial share of the variation in peak value remains unexplained, suggesting that there

is useful identifying variation available for inclusion in a retirement model.



Incorporating Private Pensions

         We can also incorporate private pension incentives into our analysis. The HRS collected

detailed pension determination information from employers for roughly 60% of the individuals

with pensions in the sample.17 They then used this information to create a pension benefits

calculator that is comparable to the PIA simulation model we developed for Social Security. We

use these calculated pension benefits at each retirement age to create an analogous set of

retirement incentive variables which include pensions.


   17
        Conversations with HRS staff indicate that HRS did not attempt to collect pension

information for people in firms with under 100 employees and that the non-response rate among

employers they did contact was about 30%.

                                                  26
       The results of doing this for both of our incentive concepts (accrual and peak value) are

presented in Table 9. The patterns of incentives by age for the median worker are very similar to

those shown in Tables 2 and 5. This should not be surprising, as only 40% of our sample has

pensions. Annual accruals are roughly $700 larger at ages 55-64 when pensions are included.

The median tax/subsidy rate with pensions is roughly 2-3 percentage points lower at ages 55-64

than the median tax rate without pensions, and is similar at ages 65-69. With the inclusion of

pension, the after-tax peak value is now often positive for the median person at ages 55-64.

       Table 10 shows the impact of including pensions on the distribution of the incentive

measures. There is a substantial increase in the variation for all measures, particularly at ages 55-

61. For example, at age 60, the ratio of the standard deviation to the median is close to one for

the tax rate in the no pensions case, but is above three in the with pensions case. For the peak

value measures, there are similarly large increases in heterogeneity, particularly at younger ages.

Thus, adding pensions to the analysis does not dramatically change the incentives at the median,

but does add substantial variation to the distribution of incentives.



                                       Part V: Conclusions

       The substantial time series decline in older male labor force participation, as well as the

striking correlation between the labor force departure rates of older workers and the early and

normal retirement ages for Social Security, has motivated an enormous body of literature on how

the Social Security program affects retirement. Yet, there has been little recognition of a

fundamental mystery in the relationship between Social Security incentives and retirement

behavior: there is no evidence of a substantial disincentive to continued work at age 62, despite


                                                 27
the enormous increase in labor force exit at that age. This point was highlighted by Diamond and

Gruber (1998), but this was based on a typical (simulated) individual.

       In this paper, we have expanded on the earlier analysis in four ways. First, we have

considered the impact of SS retirement incentives in real data, the HRS. We confirm in these

data that there is fact no tax on work at ages 62-64 at the median, further heightening the

disconnect between observed retirement patterns and the pattern of SS retirement incentives.

Second, however, we have shown that there is a substantial amount of heterogeneity in these

incentives across our sample, and that (for example) there is a net tax on work at age 62 for about

one-half of our sample. This would be more consistent with a “spike” in the hazard rate at that

age, if it is those individuals being taxed who are responding by retiring. We also show that

factors that otherwise might be expected to naturally impact retirement decisions can explain

only a small share of the variation in accruals, suggesting that these are fruitful regressors for

explaining retirement decisions.

       Third, we have suggested the focus on next-year measures such as accruals and

tax/subsidy rates might be misleading, particularly at ages 55-61, because they ignore the option

value of reaching age 62 and taking advantage of a (for many workers) more than fair actuarial

adjustment. Thus, we also have considered a “peak value” concept which compares wealth

accruals not between this year and next, but instead between this year and the year in which SSW

reaches its peak. We find that using peak values instead of accruals leads to very similar results

at the median after age 62, but to subsidies to work rather than taxes at ages 55-61 for a large

share of the sample. Finally, we incorporate private pensions into our analysis; we find that the

addition of pensions increases the return to additional work modestly at the median and


                                                  28
substantially increases heterogeneity in the measures.

       Our findings have two important implications for future empirical work on Social

Security and retirement. First, our results suggest that if researchers are careful to condition on

the determinants of both retirement and SS incentive measures, there is sufficient remaining

variation to hopefully identify the impact of these measures on retirement decisions. Second, our

results suggest that, even in a Social Security-only context, it is important to consider forward-

looking measures of the type pioneered by Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b). In preliminary work

on retirement decisions (Coile and Gruber, 1999), we have found that these forward looking

measures are indeed an important determinant of retirement behavior, while there is a much

weaker relationship between retirement and accruals.




                                                 29
                                          References



Blau, David M. (1994). “Labor Force Dynamics of Older Men,” Econometrica 62(1): 117-156.



Blinder, Alan S., Roger H. Gordon, and Donald E. Wise (1981). “Rhetoric and Reality in Social

Security -- A Rejoinder,” National Tax Journal 34(4): 473-478.



Blinder, Alan S., Roger H. Gordon, and Donald E. Wise (1980). “Reconsidering the Work

Disincentive Effects of Social Security,” National Tax Journal 33(4): 431-442.



Boskin, Michael J. and Michael D. Hurd (1978). “The Effect of Social Security on Early

Retirement,” Journal of Public Economics 10(3): 361-377.



Burkhauser, Richard V. and John Turner (1981). “Can Twenty-Five Million Americans Be

Wrong? – A Response to Blinder, Gordon, and Wise,” National Tax Journal 34(4):467-472.



Burtless, Gary (1986). "Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases, and the Timing of

Retirement," Review of Economic Studies, 53(5): 781-805.



Burtless, Gary and Robert Moffitt (1984). "The Effect of Social Security Benefits on the Labor

Supply of the Aged," in Retirement and Economic Behavior, H. Aaron and G. Burtless, eds.

Washington: Brookings Institution, 135-175.


                                               30
Coile, Courtney, Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber, Alain Jousten (1999). “Delays in Claiming

Social Security Benefits,” NBER Working Paper #7318.



Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber (1999). “Social Security and Retirement,” presented at

NBER Summer Institute Workshop in Labor Economics.



Diamond, Peter and Jonathan Gruber (1998). “Social Security and Retirement in the United

States,” in Social Security and Retirement around the World, Jonathan Gruber and David A.

Wise, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Diamond, Peter and Jerry Hausman (1984). “Retirement and Unemployment Behavior of Older

Men,” in Retirement and Economic Behavior, H. Aaron and G. Burtless, eds. Washington:

Brookings Institution, 97-135.



Diamond, Peter and Botond Koszegi (1998). “Hyperbolic Discounting and Retirement,” mimeo,

MIT.



Feldstein, Martin A. and Andrew A. Samwick (1992). “Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax

Rates,” National Tax Journal 45(1):1-22.



Fields, Gary S. and Olivia S. Mitchell (1984). “Economic Determinants of the Optimal

Retirement Age: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Human Resources 19(2): 245-262.


                                             31
Friedberg, Leora (1998). “The Social Security Earnings Test and Labor Supply of Older Men,”

in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 12. Cambridge: MIT Press.



Hausman, Jerry A. and David A. Wise (1985). “Social Security, Health Status, and Retirement,”

in David A. Wise, ed., Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 159-191.



Hurd, Michael D. (1990). “Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and

Consumption and Saving,” Journal of Economic Literature 28(2): 565-637.



Hurd, Michael D. and Michael J. Boskin (1984). “The Effect of Social Security on Retirement in

the Early 1970s,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 99(4): 767-790.



Kahn, James A. “Social Security, Liquidity, and Early Retirement,” Journal of Public Economics

35(1): 97-117.



Krueger, Alan B. and Jorn-Steffan Pischke (1992). “The Effect of Social Security on Labor

Supply: A Cohort Analysis of the Notch Generation,” Journal of Labor Economics 10(4): 412-

437.



Lumsdaine, Robin and David Wise (1994). “Aging and Labor Force Participation: A Review of

Trends and Explanations,” in Aging in the United States and Japan: Economic Trends, Y.


                                              32
Noguchi and D. Wise, eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Meyer, Bruce D. (1989). “A Quasi-Experimental Approach to the Effects of Unemployment

Insurance,” NBER Working Paper #3159.



Quinn, Joseph (1999). “Retirement Patterns and Bridge Jobs in the 1990s,” Policy Brief for the

Employee Benefit Research Institute. Washington, DC: EBRI.



Ruhm, Christopher (1995). "Secular Changes in the Work and Retirement Patterns of Older

Men," Journal of Human Resources, 30(2): 362-385.



Samwick, Andrew A. (1998). “New Evidence on Pensions, Social Security, and the Timing of

Retirement,” Journal of Public Economics 70(2): 207-236.



Stock, James H. and David A. Wise (1990a). “Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and

Retirement,” Econometrica 58(5):1151-1180.



Stock, James H. and David A. Wise (1990b). “The Pension Inducement to Retire: An Option

Value Analysis,”in David A. Wise, ed., Issues in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University

of Chicago Press, 205-229.




                                               33
                                               Appendix


In this appendix, we provide the formula for the computation of SS wealth.



Notation:


t = year of observation

R = year of retirement

T = last year either spouse could be alive (max age is 120)

prh,s|t = probability husband is alive at time s conditional on being alive at time t

prw,s|t = probability wife is alive at time s conditional on being alive at time t

d = real discount rate (.03 in base case)

age62h,s = indicator variable equal to 1 if husband is age 62 or over at time s

age62w,s = indicator variable equal to 1 if wife is age 62 or over at time s

age60h,s = indicator variable equal to 1 if husband is age 60 or over at time s

age60w,s = indicator variable equal to 1 if wife is age 60 or over at time s

rwbh,s = retired worker benefit of husband if husband retires at time s

rwbw,62 = retired worker benefit of wife if wife retires at age 62

dsbh,62 = dependent spouse benefit of husband if wife retires at age 62

dsbw,s = dependent spouse benefit of wife if husband retires at time s

svbh,s = survivor benefit of husband if wife dies at time s

svbw,s = survivor benefit of wife if husband dies at time s

s, k = simple counting variables
Formula:


               R −1
SSWt ( R) =   ∑ (1 + d )
               s=t
                           − ( s−t )
                                       [ prh ,s|t * prw ,s|t * age62 w,s * rwbw,62
                                                                 s −1
                                                                        prh ,k |t − prh ,( k +1)|t
+ (1 − prh ,s|t ) * prw ,s|t * age62 w ,s * max(rwbw ,62 , ∑                                         svbw ,k )]
                                                                k =t       prh ,t |t − prh ,s|t
   T
+ ∑ (1 + d ) − ( s −t ) [ prh ,s|t * prw ,s|t *(age62 h ,s *(rwbh , R + age62 w,s * max(0, dsbh ,62 − rwbh , R ))
  s= R

+ age62 w ,s *(rwbw ,62 + age62 h ,s * max(0, dsbw, R − rwbw ,62 )))
                                                               s −1    prw ,k |t − prw,( k +1)|t
+ prh ,s|t *(1 − prw ,s|t ) * age62 h ,s * max(rwbh , R , ∑                                          svbh ,k )
                                                               k =t      prw ,t |t − prw ,s|t
                                                                 s −1   prh ,k |t − prh ,( k +1)|t
+ (1 − prh ,s|t ) * prw ,s|t * age62 w ,s * max(rwbw ,62 , ∑                                         svbw ,k )]
                                                                k =t       prh ,t |t − prh ,s|t
Notes:


1. An important assumption built into the calculation is that the spouse retires at age 62.



2. The benefit variables (rwb, dsb, and svb) are adjusted appropriately for actuarial adjustment or

delayed retirement credit. The adjustment depends on R, the birth year of each spouse (since SS

rules differ by birth cohort), and age difference between the spouses. Where an individual first

claims retired worker benefits and later tops them up to the level of the dependent spouse benefit,

the appropriate actuarial adjustment is applied to each part of the total benefit.



3. Claiming is assumed to occur at first eligibility (the age of retirement or age 62, whichever is

later). For simplicity, survivor benefits are assumed to be claimed no earlier than age 62, though

individuals are allowed to claim them at age 60, or earlier if there are dependent children.



4. The calculations including pensions are analogous, except that pension receipt commences as

soon as the individual retires (not at age 62).
                                      Table 1:
                                  Sample for Analysis

Category                                        Number of Obs           Obs Lost
                                                Obs    Person-        Obs    Person-
                                                        Year                  Year
                                                         Obs                  Obs

Men in HRS, ages 55-69, 1980-1997                6,173    40,614           --        --
Drop if born pre-1922                            6,052    39,658         121       956
Drop if missing earnings history                 4,305    29,110       1,747    10,548
Drop if not working                              3,445    20,059         860     9,051
Drop if missing spouse earnings history          3,231    18,903         214     1,156
Drop if re-enter labor force                     3,231    17,547           --    1,356

Notes:
(1) Obs is the number of persons for which we have data in the HRS.
(2) Person-year obs is the number of person-year observations for which we have data.
(3) Each row in the first two columns shows the number of observations after the
exclusion labelled in that row. Each row in the second two columns shows the number of
observations lost through the exclusion labelled in that row.
                                 Table 2:
                   Accrual and Tax Rate, Medians by Age

 Age      Obs        SSW         Benefit     After-Tax       Tax        Diamond/
                                 Accrual      Accrual        Rate        Gruber
                                                                        Tax Rate
  55       2,811     154,928         2,277          -933        0.047      -0.022
  56       2,746     157,205         2,136        -1,136        0.052       0.046
  57       2,444     159,341         1,958        -1,314        0.057       0.060
  58       2,131     161,299         1,791        -1,517        0.061       0.069
  59       1,822     163,090         1,687        -1,781        0.067       0.072
  60       1,547     164,777         1,563        -1,848        0.073       0.071
  61       1,252     166,340         1,643        -1,848        0.073       0.064
  62       1,010     167,983         3,855           -48        0.002      -0.028
  63         688     171,838         4,019            46       -0.001      -0.005
  64         443     175,857         2,849          -843        0.027       0.031
  65         313     178,706          -902        -4,831        0.145       0.188
  66         159     177,804        -2,074        -5,833        0.176       0.225
  67          91     175,730        -2,908        -6,418        0.249       0.269
  68          57     172,822        -4,190        -6,989        0.334       0.439
  69          33     168,632        -4,043        -7,138        0.252       0.455

Notes:
(1) Each row reflects the incentives workers face for continued work that year
(e.g., the age 55 row is the incentive to delay retirement until age 56).
(2) SSW is the NPDV of Social Security Wealth at the beginning of the year.
(3) Benefit accrual is the change in SSW that results from working that year.
(4) After-tax accrual is the benefit accrual net of SS taxes paid during the year.
(5) Tax rate is the negative of the after-tax accrual divided by annual earnings.
(6) Diamond-Gruber tax rate replicates results from Table 1 in Diamond and
Gruber (1999).
                                  Table 3:
                   Heterogeneity in Accrual and Tax Rate

 Age        After-Tax Accrual            Tax Rate       % With
         10th% 90th% Std. Dev. 10th% 90th% Std. Dev. Tax < 0
  55      -3,977       92   2,553 -0.003    0.090 0.059   0.175
  56      -4,100      154   3,416 -0.006    0.093 0.073   0.176
  57      -4,205      178   3,492 -0.008    0.098 0.081   0.152
  58      -4,342      212   2,778 -0.010    0.103 0.069   0.144
  59      -4,476      212   3,458 -0.012    0.109 0.076   0.135
  60      -4,478      272   4,005 -0.014    0.116 0.073   0.140
  61      -4,365      340   4,971 -0.017    0.113 0.076   0.150
  62      -1,592    2,291   2,945 -0.139    0.068 0.178   0.493
  63      -1,657    2,490   2,888 -0.156    0.089 0.172   0.515
  64      -2,497    1,628   1,985 -0.110    0.117 0.161   0.336
  65      -7,462     -882   4,196  0.044    0.556 0.268   0.058
  66      -8,365 -1,591     3,073  0.093    0.771 0.290   0.050
  67      -8,627 -1,321 11,069     0.117    1.000 0.386   0.055
  68      -9,391 -2,010     3,397  0.117    1.000 0.351   0.053
  69      -9,878     -278   3,630  0.117    1.000 0.360   0.061

Notes:
(1) This table shows the 10th and 90th percentiles and the standard deviation
of the distribution of after-tax accruals and tax rates, as well as (in the last
column) the percent of the sample with negative tax rates.
(2) For a description of the incentive variables, see notes to Table 2.
                               Table 4:
              Variance Decomposition, Accrual and Tax Rate

Variable              After-Tax Accrual                      Tax Rate
                   R-squared Cumulative               R-squared Cumulative
                   of Variable R-squared              of Variable R-squared
Age dummies              0.062           --                 0.044          --
Earnings                 0.087       0.155                  0.000      0.045
Earnings quartic         0.092       0.158                  0.000      0.045
AIME                     0.156       0.230                  0.012      0.059
AIME quartic             0.171       0.238                  0.015      0.064
Earn*AIME quartic        0.198       0.266                  0.039      0.081
Married, agediff         0.002       0.270                  0.001      0.082
Spouse earn*AIME^4       0.169       0.280                  0.033      0.110
Low earn year            0.074       0.284                  0.010      0.110

Notes:
(1) The second and fourth columns of the table show the R-squared from
regressions of the after-tax accrual or tax rate on the variable in the first
column; the third and fifth column show the cumulative R-squared from
including that variable and all previous variables in the regression.
(2) Low earn year includes earning in lowest year and number of years with
earnings below current years.
(3) For a description of the incentive variables, see notes to Table 2.
                               Table 5:
                      Peak Value, Medians by Age

  Age        Obs         SSW        Peak     Peak      % with
                                    Value    Value    After-Tax
                                   Pre-Tax After-Tax    PV>0
   55         2,811      154,928      22,426     -820      0.307
   56         2,746      157,205      20,477   -1,018      0.292
   57         2,444      159,341      18,339   -1,213      0.275
   58         2,131      161,299      16,395   -1,399      0.282
   59         1,822      163,090      15,228   -1,675      0.288
   60         1,547      164,777      13,500   -1,701      0.326
   61         1,252      166,340      12,245   -1,694      0.380
   62         1,010      167,983      10,812      192      0.525
   63           688      171,838       7,652      170      0.538
   64           443      175,857       3,280     -758      0.359
   65           313      178,706        -864   -4,808      0.077
   66           159      177,804      -1,984   -5,799      0.069
   67            91      175,730      -2,908   -6,418      0.066
   68            57      172,822      -4,190   -6,989      0.053
   69            33      168,632      -4,043   -7,138      0.061

Notes:
(1) Peak value is the change in SSW that results from working to
the age at which SSW is maximized (if peak has passed, PV is the
after-tax accrual).
(2) PV pre-tax excludes SS payroll taxes, PV after-tax is net of taxes.
                          Table 6:
        Accrual and Peak Value for Sample Observation

  Age      Benefit After-Tax         Tax        Peak     Peak
           Accrual Accrual           Rate       Value    Value
                                               Pre-Tax After-Tax
   55          2,120      -1,388       0.046     19,170    -1,388
   56          2,093      -1,218       0.041     17,050    -1,218
   57          2,029      -1,159       0.039     14,957    -1,159
   58          1,730      -1,360       0.046     12,928    -1,360
   59          1,018      -1,996       0.066     11,198    -1,996
   60            674      -2,287       0.074     10,180    -2,287
   61            781      -2,077       0.066       9,505   -2,077
   62          2,863         110      -0.003       8,725      274
   63          2,817         164      -0.005       5,862      164
   64          1,747        -804       0.025       3,045     -804
   65            999      -1,451       0.045       1,297   -1,451
   66            298      -2,052       0.063         298   -2,052
   67           -368      -2,621       0.080        -368   -2,621
   68           -960      -3,116       0.094        -960   -3,116
   69         -1,480      -3,540       0.112      -1,480   -3,540

Notes:
(1) Table shows the incentives for one sample observation.
(2) For a description of the incentive variables, see notes to Tables
2 and 5.
                  Table 7:
         Heterogeneity in Peak Value

 Age       Peak Value After-Tax    % With
         10th% 90th% Std. Dev. PV>0
  55      -3,936    3,441    8,027   0.307
  56      -4,081    4,095    8,384   0.292
  57      -4,171    4,808    8,019   0.275
  58      -4,310    5,221    8,260   0.282
  59      -4,443    5,587    8,803   0.288
  60      -4,441    6,589    9,435   0.326
  61      -4,338    6,690    9,400   0.380
  62      -1,515    6,299    7,852   0.525
  63      -1,484    4,628    7,527   0.538
  64      -2,428    2,023    5,684   0.359
  65      -7,462     -215    7,943   0.077
  66      -8,365     -994 10,680     0.069
  67      -8,627 -1,200 12,274       0.066
  68      -9,391 -2,010      3,849   0.053
  69      -9,878     -278    3,630   0.061

Notes:
(1) For a description of the incentive variables,
see notes to Table 5.
                     Table 8:
        Variance Decomposition, Peak Value

Variable                      Peak Value After-Tax
                            R-squared Cumulative
                            of Variable R-squared
Full Sample
Age dummies                         0.014               --
Earnings                            0.024           0.040
Earnings quartic                    0.025           0.041
AIME                                0.254           0.318
AIME quartic                        0.297           0.350
Earn*AIME quartic                   0.473           0.491
Married, agediff                    0.006           0.497
Spouse earn*AIME^4                  0.162           0.518
Low earn year                       0.100           0.521

Notes:
(1) See notes to Table 4 for description of table layout.
(2) Low earn year includes earning in lowest year and
number of years with earnings below current earnings.
(3) For a description of the incentive variables, see
notes to Table 5.
                                Table 9:
             Peak Value Including Pensions, Medians by Age

  Age      Obs        SSW        Accrual       Tax        Peak     Peak
                                After-Tax      Rate       Value    Value
                                                         Pre-Tax After-Tax
   55       2,811     183,138         -342       0.019     28,417       326
   56       2,746     185,767         -381       0.018     25,843       197
   57       2,444     188,380         -540       0.032     23,120       -61
   58       2,131     190,675         -649       0.040     20,524       -18
   59       1,822     192,781         -857       0.047     18,757       -90
   60       1,547     194,637         -956       0.051     16,518       329
   61       1,252     196,384       -1,003       0.053     14,341     1,143
   62       1,010     198,149          672      -0.030     11,431     1,857
   63         688     202,891          662      -0.025       7,949      863
   64         443     208,312         -381       0.014       3,382     -172
   65         313     212,733       -4,237       0.145        -774   -4,179
   66         159     211,980       -5,384       0.189      -1,984   -5,369
   67          91     210,024       -6,201       0.246      -3,538   -6,137
   68          57     207,164       -6,916       0.344      -4,330   -6,916
   69          33     203,236       -7,138       0.278      -4,452   -7,138

 Notes:
(1) For a description of the incentive variables, see notes to Tables 2 and 5.
These results differ through the inclusion of pension incentives as well as
Social Security program incentives.
                                                    Table 10:
                           Heterogeneity in Peak Value and Accrual, Including Pensions

 Age       Accrual After-Tax            Tax Rate       % With                        Peak Value After-Tax    % With
        10th% 90th% Std. Dev. 10th% 90th% Std. Dev. Tax<0                          10th% 90th% Std. Dev. PV<0
  55     -3,700    6,213 12,980  -0.177    0.091 0.195   0.366                      -3,511 73,702 63,294       0.454
  56     -3,701    6,914 10,779  -0.191    0.093 0.181   0.381                      -3,570 69,620 57,529       0.476
  57     -3,954    6,506 11,202  -0.185    0.100 0.186   0.340                      -3,739 58,252 50,959       0.505
  58     -4,158    6,517   9,477 -0.182    0.109 0.194   0.334                      -3,973 50,340 38,199       0.501
  59     -4,436    6,054 11,703  -0.171    0.117 0.189   0.323                      -4,251 41,994 34,032       0.504
  60     -4,410    5,021   9,189 -0.147    0.117 0.177   0.312                      -4,245 34,273 29,530       0.483
  61     -4,373    5,339   9,833 -0.149    0.117 0.166   0.322                      -4,210 30,574 27,320       0.446
  62     -1,677    6,512   7,269 -0.283    0.081 0.216   0.615                      -1,495 24,078 21,155       0.347
  63     -2,085    5,669   7,410 -0.272    0.106 0.214   0.606                      -1,815 17,647 19,821       0.362
  64     -2,637    4,540   7,662 -0.188    0.123 0.211   0.447                      -2,535    8,479 16,403     0.517
  65     -7,762      657   9,306 -0.028    0.556 0.304   0.121                      -7,702    1,949 14,390     0.853
  66     -9,392       11   5,459 -0.003    0.771 0.308   0.101                      -9,392      987 13,680     0.874
  67     -9,039      358 11,588  -0.015    1.000 0.403   0.121                      -9,039    1,590 14,935     0.857
  68    -10,830     -485 11,266   0.067    1.000 0.396   0.053                     -10,830     -485 11,267     0.947
  69    -10,370     -278   4,407  0.109    1.000 0.358   0.061                     -10,370     -278    4,407   0.939

Notes:
(1) For a description of the incentive variables, see notes to Tables 2 and 5. These results differ through the inclusion
of pension incentives as well as Social Security program incentives.
                                  Figure 1: Historical Trends in LFP of Older Men

                   100


                   90


                   80


                   70
Percentage in LF




                   60


                   50


                   40


                   30


                   20


                   10


                    0
                    1960   1965           1970       1975           1980        1985     1990

                                                            Year

                                        45-54 men   55-59 men      60-64 men   65+ men
                             Figure 2: Historical Trends in LFP of Older Women

                   100


                   90


                   80


                   70
Percentage in LF




                   60


                   50


                   40


                   30


                   20


                   10


                    0
                    1960   1965         1970        1975           1980         1985        1990

                                                           Year

                                  45-54 women   55-59 women       60-64 women   65+ women
                                           Figure 3: After-Tax SSW Patterns

                               Pattern 1                                                           Pattern 2


        130,000                                                             190,000
        120,000                                                             180,000
        110,000                                                             170,000




                                                                      SSW
  SSW




        100,000                                                             160,000
         90,000                                                             150,000
         80,000                                                             140,000
                  55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70                     55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
                                       Age                                                                 Age


Percent=1.0, Cumulative Percent=1.0                                 Percent=47.7, Cumulative Percent=48.7

                               Pattern 3                                                           Pattern 4

        160,000                                                             110,000
        150,000                                                             100,000
        140,000                                                              90,000
  SSW




                                                                      SSW
        130,000                                                              80,000
        120,000                                                              70,000
        110,000                                                              60,000
                  55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70                     55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
                                       Age                                                                 Age


Percent=13.6, Cumulative Percent=62.3                               Percent=1.8, Cumulative Percent=64.1

                               Pattern 5                                                           Pattern 6


        110,000                                                             170,000
        100,000                                                             160,000
         90,000                                                             150,000
  SSW




                                                                      SSW




         80,000                                                             140,000
         70,000                                                             130,000
         60,000                                                             120,000
                  55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70                     55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
                                       Age                                                                 Age


Percent=0.2, Cumulative Percent=64.3                                Percent=29.0, Cumulative Percent=93.3

                               Pattern 7                                                           Pattern 8


        150,000                                                             100,000
        140,000                                                              90,000
        130,000                                                              80,000
  SSW




                                                                      SSW




        120,000                                                              70,000
        110,000                                                              60,000
        100,000                                                              50,000
                  55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70                     55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
                                       Age                                                                 Age


Percent=4.1, Cumulative Percent=97.4                                Percent=0.3, Cumulative Percent=97.8

                                                                                                  Pattern 10


                                                                            150,000
                                                                            140,000
                                                                            130,000
                                                                     SSW




                                                                            120,000
                                                                            110,000
                                                                            100,000
                                                                                      55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70
                                                                                                           Age


                                                                    Percent=2.0, Cumulative Percent=99.7
