                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFECT OF ATTENDING A SMALL CLASS IN THE
               EARLY GRADES ON COLLEGE-TEST TAKING AND MIDDLE
               SCHOOL TEST RESULTS: EVIDENCE FROM PROJECT STAR


                                          Alan B. Krueger
                                         Diane M. Whitmore


                                         Working Paper 7656
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7656

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2000




We thank Helen Pate-B am and Jayne Boyd-Zaharias for providing data and answering many questions, James
Maxey and Amy Schmidt for assistance merging the STAR database to the ACT and SAT databases, the
Smith Richardson Foundation for financial support, and Joshua Angrist, Anders Björklund, and David Card,
two referees and seminar participants at Hebrew University, American thstitutes for Research, Berkeley and
Princeton for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Stacy Dale, Cecilia Rouse, and Mark Votruba for
help with data. Naturally, we bear sole responsibility for all views expressed in the paper.

  2000 by Alan B. Krueger and Diane M. Whitmore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the Early Grades on College-Test
Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project STAR
Alan B. Krueger and Diane M. Whitmore
NBER Working Paper No. 7656
April 2000
JELNo. 12


                                             ABSTRACT

        This paper provides a long-term follow-up of students who participated in the Tennessee
STAR experiment. The Tennessee STAR experiment randomly assigned 11,600 elementary school
students and their teachers to a small class, regular-size class or regular-size class with a teacher-aide.
The experiment began with the wave of students who entered kindergarten in 1985, and lasted for
four years. After the third grade, all students returned to regular-size classes. We analyze the effect
of past attendance in a small class on standardized test scores through the eighth grade, on whether
students took the ACT or SAT college entrance exam, and on how they performed on the ACT
or SAT exam. The results suggest that attending a small class in the early grades is associated with
somewhat higher performance on standardized test, and an increase in the likelihood that students
take a college-entrance exam, especially among minority students. Most significantly, being assigned
to a small class appears to have narrowed the black-white gap in college-test taking by 54 percent.
A calculation is presented suggesting that the internal rate of return from reducing class size from 22
to 15 students is 5.5 percent.




Alan Krueger                                                     Diane Whitmore
Industrial Relations Section                                     Industrial Relations Section
Princeton University                                             Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                              Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                                         whitmore@princeton.edu
akrueger@princeton.edu
          Project STAR was an experiment in which an eventual 11,600 students in their first four
 years of school (from kindergarten until              grade) were randomly assigned to a small class
 (target of 13-17 students), regular-size class (target of 22-25 students), or regular-size class with
 a teacher aide within 79 Tennessee public schools.' Teachers were also randomly assigned to
class types. The experiment began with the wave of students who entered kindergarten in the
 1985-86 school year. Students who entered a participating school while this cohortwas in first,

second, or third grades were added to the experiment and randomly assigned to a class type.
After four years, all students were returned to regular-size classes. Students were supposed to

stay in their original class-assignment type for four years, although students were randomly re-

assigned between regular and regular/aide classes in first grade.2 Students who moved along on
pace graduated from high school in the Spring of 1998. Mosteller (1995) described Project
STAR as "a controlled experiment which is one of the most important educationalinvestigations

ever carried out and illustrates the kind and magnitude of research needed in the field of

education to strengthen schools." Given the scarcity of large-scale educational experiments like
Project STAR, it is important to follow up on the long-term outcomes of the subjects of the
experiment.

         Another reason to continue tracking the progress of the STAR participants is that some
educational innovations have produced short-term gains in terms of test scores without producing

lasting academic or nonacademic benefits (e.g., STEP; see Grossman and Sipe, 1992), while
others have produced ephemeral gains on standardized tests but nonetheless had significant long-
term benefits in terms of economic and social outcomes (e.g., Perry and many other pre-school

programs; see Bamett, 1992). The real test of educational interventions like reducing class size

'The experiment is described in extensive detail in Word, Johnston, 11am, et at. (1990), Folger and Breda (1989),
Finn and Achilles (1990), Krueger (1999) and Achilles (1999).

21n addition, about 10-percent of students switched between class types for other reasons. Krueger (1999) examines
the impact of these transitions on the experiment, and finds that they have retatively little effect on the main results.



                                                       1
                                                                                                                            -
is whether the intervention imparts lasting economic and social benefits for society, such as

increased educational attainment, enhanced earnings power and employability, reduced welfare
utilization, and reduced crime. Here we provide a first step toward evaluating the long-term

impact of being assigned to a small class by examining college-entrance exam data.
        This paper is organized chronologically, in terms of students progression through school.

In the next section we present population characteristics comparing Project STAR students to
students in the state and nation. Section 2 evaluates evidence on random assignment. Section 3

analyzes students' scores on standardized tests taken each year from kindergarten through 8th

grade (i.e., grades K-8). Section 4 provides an analysis of the effect of attending a small class in

the early grades on students' propensity to take the ACT or SAT college-admissions tests by the
senior year of high school. Section 5 provides an analysis of the effect of class size on students'

ACT and SAT scores, for the subset of students who took one of the exams. This section

presents several alternative estimators to account for sample selection bias that could arise
because test scores are only available for test takers.

       We regard the analysis of college test taking behavior as the main contribution of this
paper. To analyze ACT and SAT data, we worked with ACT, Inc. and the College Board and
Educational Testing Service (ETS) to link information on high school seniors in the class of
1998 who took the ACT or SAT exam to records on the 11,600 students from Project STAR,

regardless of where the students resided in 1998. The resulting database contains information on
whether Project STAR students wrote either the ACT or SAT exam, their test scores, and

information from the background questionnaire students fill out when they take the ACT or SAT
exam. The ACT exam is the more prevalent college aptitude test taken by Tennessee students:
some 40 percent of Tennessee high school seniors in our sample wrote the ACT exam while
fewer than 6 percent wrote the SAT. This is the first database that permits a long-term

examination of the behavior and post-high school aspirations of Project STAR participants.
       Our main finding is that students who were assigned to a small class are more likely to
                                              2
take the ACT and SAT exams. For the sample of high school seniors in 1998, 43.7 percent of

students initially assigned to a small class took either the ACT or SAT exam, whereas 40.0
percent of those assigned to a regular class took one of the exams. The increase in the college-
entrance-exam-taking rate due to attending a small class was substantially greater for black

students than for white students. Assignment to a small class as opposed to a regular-size class

appears to have raised the likelihood that black students take the ACT or SAT exam by a quarter,

from 31.7 to 40.2 percent. As a consequence, the black-white gap in the college-test-taking rate

was 54 percent smaller among students assigned to small classes than among students assigned
to regular-size classes.

        Lastly, we find insignificant differences between small- and regular-size-class students in
the average SAT or ACT score among those who wrote an exam, although this comparison is

clouded by selection problems since a wider pool of students assigned to small classes took one
of the exams. When we adjust for selection effects, using either a parametric Heckman-

selection-correction procedure or by linearly truncating the sample of test takers from small
classes (based on the rank of their score) to correspond to the same proportion from regular-size
classes, we find that students in small classes outperformed those in regular-size classes by about

0.1 standard deviation overall, and by about 0.2 standard deviation for black students. A
nonparametric bound of the effect that attending a small class would have had for the average
student who attended a regular class is between 0 and 0.5 standard deviations.


1. Sample and Population Characteristics

       Schools were selected to participate in the STAR experiment if they met certain

requirements (e.g., sufficient enrollment and geographic criteria), and volunteered to participate.
As a consequence, the 79 participating elementary schools were not a random sample of
Tennessee elementary schools. To be eligible for the experiment, a school had to be large
enough to have at least three classes per grade so students could be assigned to a small, regular,
                                             3
 or regular with teacher's aide class within each school. Furthermore, the state legislature
mandated that the sample consist of a specified fraction of schools from inner-city, suburban,

urban and rural areas, which led to participation of a higher proportion of inner-city schools than
the overall state proportion. To assess how Project STAR schools compare to all schools in

Tennessee and in the United States, we present selected characteristics of schools in Table 1.

        Project STAR schools have a larger minority population than do schools in Tennessee
overall, but have a proportion similar to [he national average. But most minority students in the
STAR experiment are black — only a small fraction of students are Hispanic, Asian, or other
races — so the proportion of black students in the participating schools is nearly twice the national

average. STAR schools are also located in areas with somewhat higher child poverty rates, and

teachers are slightly less likely to have completed more than a bachelor's degree. Average

student performance as measured by ACT scores is slightly worse for STAR students than for all
Tennessee students, and Tennessee performs worse than the nation as a whole.

        Since schools in the experiment were required to have at least three classes per grade, the

STAR schools are larger than the average school. Average 3td grade enrollment in Tennessee
schools is about 70, whereas STAR schools had almost 90 students per grade — equal to the 72Ud

percentile of 3rd grade enrollment statewide. Average current expenditures per student in 1990

were virtually identical in the STAR and Tennessee sample at about $3,425. Per-pupil spending
levels in Tennessee were only about three-quarters of the national average.

       Most schools in the STAR experiment consisted of students in kindergarten (the typical

first year of school) through sixth grade. The average kindergarten student in the experiment
was 5.4 years old at the beginning of his or her first school year. Kindergarten attendance was

not mandatory in Tennessee when the STAR experiment began, so some students started school
in first grade. In addition, some students repeat a year of school (e.g., they are retained in the
same grade level), especially in the early years, so additional students joined the wave of

students going through the experiment in first, second, and third grade. New students in
                                              4
 participating schools were randomly assigned to a class each year. After attending elementary
 school, students typically attend middle school and then high school. Students graduate from

 high school after successfully completing 12 years of school beyond the kindergarten level.
Most students are 17-18 years old by the time they finish high school. In their last or
penultimate year of high school, students who intend to enroll in college take the ACT or SAT

exam. These are privately administered exams that are required by most colleges for admission.


2. Another Look at Random Assignment

         A limitation of the design of the STAR experiment is that students were not

systematically tested prior to entering a small class.3 Random assignment would be expected to
produce groups of students that did not differ on average among the three assignment groups,

conditional on school and entry grade. If data were available, one could test for significant
differences in mean student achievement scores across class types. Nonetheless, if random

assignment was implemented correctly, observable characteristics of students and teachers
should be similar across class types. This is examined in Panel A of Table 2, which presents a

linear regression of student class-type assignment on demographic characteristics.4 The
dependent variable is a dummy variable that equals one if the student initially attended a small
class, and zero if he or she initially attended a regular or regular/aide class.5 Each student

appears in the sample once, in the year he or she initially joined the experiment. Standard errors
have been adjusted for heteroskedasticity that arises in the linear probability model using White

3This point is made, for example, in Krueger (1999) and Hanushek (1999).

4Although one may object to the use of a linear probability model in this instance (e.g., as opposed to a logit).
because the class-type variable is an independent variable in the models that follow, and we are simply interested in
whether class-type and personal characteristics are related, the linear model provides appropriate estimates.

Sunfortunately we do not know which class type students were initially assigned to, as opposed to the class type
they initially attended. However, for a subsample of 18 STAR schools, Krueger (1999) finds that 99.7 percent of
kindergarten students attended the class type they were randomly assigned to their first year in the experiment.
Consequently, henceforth we treat initial assignment and the initial class the student attended interchangeably.


                                                     S
standard errors. Column 1 only controls for three explanatory variables: race, sex, and free-

lunch status. Column 2 additionally controls for 78 school fixed effects. Strictly speaking, class-

type was randomly assigned within schools for each grade (or entry wave) that the students
entered the experiment. Thus, in column 3 we control for 304 school-by-entry-wave dummy
variables. When school fixed effects or school-by-entry-wave fixed effects are controlled for,

none of the student characteristics predict small-class assignment for the STAR sample (see

columns 2 and 3). This finding is consistent with the students being randomly assigned to class

types.

         An important feature of the STAR experiment is that classroom teachers were also

randomly assigned to class types within each participating school. If random assignment of
teachers was properly executed, one would not expect a teacher's characteristics to be related to
whether or not she taught a small class. Panel B of Table 2 reports results from a linear

regression of teachers' class assignments on their demographic characteristics, using the sample

of 1,330 teachers pooled across all grade levels. The dependent variable equals one if the teacher
was in a small class, and zero if she was in a regular or regular/aide class. The results indicate

that teachers' education, experience, race and gender are essentially uncorrelated with the class
type to which they were assigned. Moreover, this result holds irrespective of whether school
effects or school-by-grade-level effects are held constant.

         Table 2 highlights the importance of controlling for school fixed effects, since random
assignment of teachers and students was performed within schools. Moreover, students were

randomly assigned within schools in the grade they initially entered Project STAR, which
suggests that it is desirable to control for school-by-entry-grade effects as in column 3. Most
previous analyses of the STAR data have estimated treatment effects controlling for school fixed
effects, but not school-by-entry-wave fixed effects. In most of what follows, we control for
dummy variables indicating the school students initially attended interacted with dummy

variables indicating the grade they entered the experiment (i.e., entry wave).
                                             6
 3. Grades K-8

          One difficulty in conducting a long-term follow-up of test score results is that the STAR
 students were given different tests in different grades. In grades K-3, students took the Stanford

Achievement Test, and in grades 4-8 they took the Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills (CTBS).
Both are multiple-choice standardized tests that measure reading and math achievement, taken
by students at the end of the school year.6 Panel A of Table 3 presents a correlation matrix

between the percentile scores on the Stanford Achievement Test (grade K-3), the CTBS (grade

4-8) and the ACT or SAT percentile rank (generally taken in grade 11 or 12). For each of the
exams, the percentile ranks are based on the distribution of scores among students assigned to

regular and regular/aide classes.7 The samples used to calculate the correlations vary from year

to year; Panel B reports the sample sizes. The correlations along the diagonal of Table 3

correspond to correlations of percentile ranks in adjacent years for the sample of students who
have available data in those two years.

         A critical juncture occurred between third and fourth grade, when all students returned to
regular size classes. Unfortunately, this also coincides with the switch to the CTBS exam. A
further problem is that the fourth grade sample is a subset of the overall sample because only
one-third of the Memphis schools administered the CTBS that year; all Memphis administered

the CTBS in later years. Nonetheless, the correlation matrix does not display a discrete jump
6The tests also cover other subjects such as language and social studies, but we restrict the analysis to math and
reading scores since they were available for all grades.

7The Stanford Achievement Test percentiles were derived by using the distribution of rawscores for students in
regular and regular/aide classes, as described in Krueger (1999). We use the average percentile score of the math
and reading exams. The CTBS scores were converted to percentile ranks similarly. The distribution of raw scores
for students in regular and regular/aide classes were used to generate percentile ranks for those students, and for
students in small classes. The average of the math and reading percentile ranks was used in the analysis. If a
student repeated a grade, we used his or her first test score for that grade level. The ACT and SAT data are
described in more detail below, but briefly: if a student took the ACT, we used his or her ACT score. Jf a student
took the SAT and not-the ACT, we converted the SAT score to an ACT-equivalent score. We then used the
distribution of ACT scores among regular and regular/aide students to calculate percentile ranks. The standard
deviation of the average percentile ranks across students for all the exams was typically 26 to 27.


                                                      7
 between third and fourth grade, which suggests that the sensitivity of the CTBS and Stanford
 Achievement Test may be similar. We similarly find that the correlations are of roughly the
same magnitude if we restrict the sample to a common set of students with available scores in
grades 2-5. These results suggest that the percentile ranks can be compared across the CTBS and

Stanford Achievement Test, although we recognize that data from a consistent exam would be
desirable.

         To summarize the effect of being assigned to a small class on test scores, each grade we

estimated the following regression

(1)                             = 130g + 131g SMALLS + 132g XIS + Usw +

where YiSg represents the test score percentile rank for student i in grade g (g = K                  8) who
initially attended school s (s = 1         79), SMALL is a dummy variable that equals one if student i
initially was assigned to a small class and zero if he or she was assigned to a regular or

regular/aide class, X1, is a vector of covariates reflecting the students' free lunch status, sex and
race, and cc,,A, is a set of school-by-entry-wave fixed effects (based on initial school attended).8

The base group for the small-class-size effect consists of students who were assigned to either

regular or regular/aide classes.9 It is important to stress that class-type is based on the class the
student attended the initial year of the experiment, and does not vary over time. As a
consequence, the coefficient estimates are not subject to bias because of possible non-random
transitions after the initial assignment.

        Equation (1) was estimated separately for the full sample, for students on free or reduced-
price lunch, and for the subset of black students. Figure 1 summarizes the coefficients on the

SMALL dummy variable, using the largest sample of observations available for each group in

tFree lunch status was measured by whether the student ever received free or reduced-price lunch in grades K-3.

9For students who were present in grades K and 1, we tested this specification against a less restrictive one that
differenttated the base group among those who were consistently in regular classes, those who were consistently in
regular/aide classes, and those who switched between regular and regularlaide classes. This less restrictive
specification typically performed no better than the one reported in the text.


                                                    8
 each year. Because our interest is in comparing the treatment effect over time, we also

 calculated the small-class effects for the subset of students with available data in each adjacent

 pair of years. Figures 2 and 3 summarize these results for all students and for the black students,

 where each segment in the figures consists of students with available data in two adjacent years.

Thus, in Figures 2 and 3, the year-over-year comparisons are always between the same set of
students on each segment of the graph. The results are similar, however, if we include the largest
number of students each year.

         Figure 1 summarizes many of the findings of the earlier work on STAR. A 5 percentile-
point gap opened up between students in small and regular-size classes by the end of

kindergarten, and the gap stayed roughly constant in subsequent grades during the course of the
experiment.'0 The small-class advantage was larger for the minority children and thoseon free
lunch." Jn fourth grade, when the experiment ended and students returned to regular size
classes, the effect size in terms of mean percentile ranks was reduced approximately to half to

one quarter of its previous magnitude. From teacher reports, we have data on the actual class
size for a subset of 520 fourth grade students. Interestingly, the average fourth grade class size

for students who were initially assigned to regular size classes was about 0.36 (t=2.4) students
smaller than it was for students initially assigned to small classes, conditional on initial school

fixed effects. It is possible that, to some extent, school principals attempted tocompensate for

the earlier effects of the experiment, which may partially account for the relative improvement of
students who were previously in larger classes. In addition, peer effects could have raised the


'°Previous work tends to find that the small class advantage expanded between kindergarten and first grade, but that
appears to result from the omission of controls for school-by-entry-wave effects.

"Several studies have found that minority and disadvantaged students benefit more than other students from
attending small classes. See, for example, Summers and Wolfe (1977) and Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin (1998). We
also examined how the small-class effect varies across the distribution of scores by running quantileregressions at
every decile for 3rd and 8th grade test scores. These results were suggestive that the largest test score gains occurjust
above the middle of the distribution, since the coefficient on small class peaked between deciles 5and 7. However,
we could not statistically reject coefficient equality at all deciles.


                                                      9
 performance of students from regular classes relative to those from small classes after the
 experiment ended.

        Figures 2 and 3, which use the consistent subset of students available in each pair of

 adjoining years, show a similar pattern. Moreover, when we use the subsample of students with
 scores available in both 3" and 5th grade to avoid possible problems created by the omission of

 many Memphis students in the 3"' to 4th grade comparison, the results still show a sharp decline
in test scores at the conclusion of the experiment when all students returned to normal-size

classes. Nye, et al. (1994) find a similar pattern with CTBS data through the seventh grade.

        One important qualification should be kept in mind while considering changes in the
magnitude of the small-class effect in Figures 1-3: the tests are scaled by percentile ranks. Test
score percentile ranks are not a cardinal measure. It is possible, perhaps likely, that a given

percentile gap implies a larger educational difference in the higher grades than in the lower
grades. Indeed, Finn et al. (1999) present evidence that, when the Stanford Achievement Test
and CTBS scores are scaled in terms of grade equivalents, the gap between students in small and

regular-size classes expands from grade K to 3, and from grade 4 to 8.


4. Effect of Class Size on College Entrance Exam Taking and ACT/SAT Scores
A. Genesis of STAR-ACT-SAT Sample

       The ACT is approximately a 3-hour test, with 215 multiple choice questions covering

reading, math, English and science. Similarly, the SAT is a 3.5-hour multiple choice test limited
to math and verbal sections. Most students in Tennessee who aspire to attend college take the
ACT exam, Nonetheless, it is important to know whether students took the SAT examas well,

because the SAT is required by many highly selective colleges, and because some students
moved to states where the SAT is the predominant test. To create a longitudinal database with

ACT and SAT information, in the summer of 1998 HEROS, Inc. provided the ACT and ETS

organizations identical computer files which contained several variables from the STAR
                                            10
 database, including demographic data, class assignment, and elementary school test scores. The
Project STAR students' ACT and SAT data were mergedto these records on the basis of the
students names, dates of birth and Social Security numbers. If a STAR record was missing
information on one of these three identifiers, the remaining identifiers were used tocomplete the

merger. The data were merged by searching over ACT and SAT records for the entire United
States, so any student who had moved away from Tennessee shoUld still be included in the

sample. In fact, about 9 percent of the STAR students who were identified by the search
algorithm took the ACT or SAT exam outside of Tennessee. Once the data were merged, the

students' names, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers were concealed topreserve

confidentiality.
         Several checks indicated that the data were linked properly, for students who were

matched. For example, the correlation between the students' ACT score percentile rank and their
8th grade CTBS percentile rank was .81, which is about the same as the correlation between

other percentile scores of tests given four years apart.12 Additionally, the sex of the students
based on their STAR records matched their sex in the ACT records i.n 98.7 percent of cases.

These checks suggest that STAR students were correctly linked to their ACT and SAT records.

        The ACT and SAT databases are organized by graduating high school classes! Thus,
only members of the High School Class of 1998 were included in the ACT and SAT records that
formed the basis of their search. As a consequence, STAR students who either repeated agrade

or for some other reason were not high school seniors in 1998 could not be matched to their ACT
and SAT records, even if they had taken one of the exams. Because students who were not
seniors in 1998 could not be matched to their records, they were classified as not having taken

the ACT or SAT exam, even though they may actually have taken it in their junior year or they
may take it their senior year. This creates classification errors in our dependent variable.

12The correlation between the 3rd grade Stanford Achievement Test and 7th grade CTBS is .75, and the correlation
between the CTBS in 4th and 8th grade is .80.


                                                   11
          Unlike the case for a continuous outcome variable, rndom classifications errors in a
dichotomous outcome variable cause inconsistent regression coefficient estimates and

inconsistent mean differences between groups (see Hausman, Abrevaya, and Scott-Morton,
 1998). The intuition for this result is that, with a dichotomous variable, errors are negatively
related to the true outcome values: a one can only be misclassified as a zero, and vice versa. In

the present case, students who fell behind a grade cannot be classified as having taken the ACT
or SAT given the way the data are maintained by the ACT and ETS organizations. Randomly
misclassifying some students who took the ACT or SAT exam as not having taken an exam will
tend to attenuate the effect of class size on test-taking rates. Because of this feature of the data,

for most of our analysis we restrict the sample to the subset of 9,397 students (81 percent of the

full sample) who were not behind normal grade-level through eighth grade, based on information
that we have on students who wrote the CTBS.'3 Measurement error in whether the student took
the ACT or SAT is a much less serious problem for this subsample.

         Restricting the sample to those who are on grade level, however, could introduce sample
selection bias if being assigned to a small class affects the likelihood that students are behind

grade level. Because we do not find a significant difference in the probability of being behind a

grade by initial class assignment, this sample selection restriction is unlikely to bias our results.14
Nonetheless, we also present logit results for the full sample for comparison. In the future, we
hope to obtain additional ACT and SAT data for the Class of 1999 to augment the sample to
include students who did not graduate on schedule.




'3That is, if the student's last available CTBS indicated that the student fell behind a grade, we excluded the student.
If the CTBS information was missing, then the student was included.

14Pate-Bain, et a!. (1999) present preliminary evidence suggesting that students initially assigned to small classes
were more likely to graduate on schedule (small: 72 percent; regular: 66 percent; regular/aide: 65percent). If more
(marginal) students from small classes were seniors in 1998, then restricting the sample to those who are on grade
level will attenuate differences in test-taking rates between small and regular-size classes.


                                                      12
B. Test Taking Results

         Improving school quality can increase educational attainment by increasing the return to

investment in schooling, by raising aspiration levels, and by raising skill levels.15 Our main
findings are illustrated in Figure 4. This figure reports the percent of students who took either
the ACT or the SAT exam by the type of class they attended during their initial year in Project

STAR. The results are reported for all students combined, for white and black students

separately, and for students who received free or reduced-price lunch in at least one year in

grades K-3. The figure is based on the subset of students who were on grade level as of eighth

grade. For all students, Figure 4 indicates that 43.7 percent of students who were assigned to a
small class tok either the ACT or SAT exam, whereas 40.0 percent of those assigned to a
regular-size class took one of the exams, and 39.9 percent of those assigned to a regular-size
class with an aide took one of the exams. The 3.7 percentage-point differential between students

assigned to small classes and those assigned to regular-size classes is statistically significant at
the .05 level. The fact that regular and regular/aide students have essentially the same test-taking
rates is not surprising because many of the students initially in regular classes were subsequently

randomly re-assigned to a regular/aide class, and many of those initially in regular/aide classes
were subsequently assigned to a regular class without an aide.
        The raw data in Figure 4 also indicate that attending a small class was particularly

effective in raising the proportion of black students who wrote one of the college entrance

exams. Only 31.7 percent of black students in regular-size classes wrote the ACT or SAT exam,
whereas 40.2 percent of black students in small classes wrote the college entrance exam. To gain

some perspective on the magnitude of this effect, note that the black-white gap in taking a
college entrance exam was 13.3 percentage points for students in regular-size classes, and

6.1 percentage points for students in small classes. Thus, attending a small class reduced the


'5See Card and Krueger (1996) for an economic model of school quality and educational attainment.


                                                  13
 black-white gap in the college-entrance-test-taking rate by 54percent. Nationwide, 65.8 percent
 of white and 55.3 percent of black young high school graduates enrolled in college within 12
 months of graduating from high school in 1996.16 The 10.5 percentage point black-white gap in

 college enrollment for the nation as a whole is close in magnitude to the racial gap in college-

entrance-exam taking rates in regular-size classes in Tennessee.

          Recall that Figure 1 showed that minority students and students on free lunch exhibited
the greatest gains in test scores through middle school as a consequence of attending a small

class during Project STAR. The findings in Figure 4 complement a result that has been found
consistently throughout Project STAR: minority students benefited most from attending a small
class.'7 Small classes were able to considerably narrow, though not eliminate, the gap in

educational performance between black and white students.

         Comparing raw test-taking numbers does not take advantage of the within-school

randomized design. Since the initial random assignment was done at the school level, student

characteristics, on average, would not be expected to vary by class type within school. We can
therefore employ a simple, balanced-within-school estimator that compares test-taking rates
within schools. This estimator allows the treatment effect to vary by school, and calculates the

weighted average of the school-level treatment effects. Our balanced-sample estimator takes the

weighted average of the school-level difference in test-taking rates between small and regular

classes for each of the 79 elementary schools, where the weights are the number of students in
regular-size classes in the school.
         Let      and D' represent binary variables equal to one if a student in a small or regular
class, respectively, took a college entrance exam, and Nf and Nf equal the number of students in


'6Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1998, Table 301.

 'This pattern is not explained by a more-intensive treatment, as small classes were not relatively smaller for black
students. The reduction in class size between regular and small classes is about one third of a student larger for
white students than for black students.


                                                     14
 small and regular classes at school j. Then the treatment effect for each school is calculated as:

 (2)


 The overall small-class effect, 8, is calculated as the average of the school-level effects, weighted

 by enrollment in regular-size classes:
                                            öJNJ
(3)


         The balanced-sample estimator yields a statistically significant small-class effect of

4.4 percentage points in the overall sample, and 8.2 percentage points for black students. (The

standard errors for these estimates are 1.4 and 2.3 points, respectively.) These estimates are

quite similar to the effects found in the raw data, and are similar if we weight the school-level-

treatment effects by the total number of observations from each school, instead of by the number

of regular-class students.

         Table 4 provides further evidence on the effect of class size on the percent of students

who took the college entrance exam. The first three columns of Table 4 contain logit models for

all students who have not fallen behind grade level. The last three columns contain logit models

for the subsample of black students who have not fallen behind grade level. The dependent

variable in these models equals one if the student took the ACT or SAT, and zero if not. The

logit coefficients were converted to changes in marginal probabilities, which are reported in

brackets beneath the coefficients and standard errors.18 Conditional on school-by-wave fixed


'8Since all the independent variables in the logit models are dummy variables, the marginal effects in bracketswere
calculated from the logit coefficients by comparing the average of the logistic distribution function evaluated at the
values of the sample points, setting the independent variable (X) of interest to a value of one, and then to zero. That
is, if we define the coefficient on the dummy variable of interest as 5, and let Z represent a vector of all the other
independent variables and represent a vector of their logit coefficients, the marginal effects were calculated as:

                                                     15
effects and student race, sex, and earlier free-lunch status, we still find that students in small

classes are more likely to take the ACT or SAT exam. For the combined sample, students who

initially attended a small class are 2.7 percentage points more likely to take the ACT or SAT (see

column 3), and black students who attended a small class are 5.9percentage points more likely to

take one Of the college tests than are black students who attended regular classes (see column 6).

For both samples, the gap in test taking between those in regular/aide and regular classes is

statistically insignificant.

        The results in columns 2 and 3 indicate that, conditional on the other regressors, black

students and females are more likely to take the ACT or SAT exam than are white students and

males, while students who received free lunch are substantially less likely to take the ACT or

SAT exam. As mentioned earlier, black students are 6 to 13 percentage points less likely to take

the ACT or SAT exam depending on class-type assignment when we do not condition on the

covariates. These results are consistent with Griliches, Hall and Hausman (1978) and Lang and

Ruud (1986), who find that, on average, African-Americans have lower educational attainment

than whites, although African-Americans have greater average educational attainment than

whites conditional on family background variables. The school effects and free-lunch variable

probably pick up much of the family background variation controlled for in these earlier studies.

       Table 5 presents corresponding results for the entire sample, regardless of whether

students have fallen behind grade level. These results show a somewhat smaller effect of class

size on the probability of taking a college-ernrance exam, but the patterns are qualitatively

similar. For these samples, attending a small class is associated with a 2 percentage-point

increase in the test-taking rate for the full sample, and a 4 point increase for the sample of black


ApIAX = (1/n)   S {[exp(Z' + 5)]/[1-exp(Z'J3 + o)]} - (1/n) S {[exp(Z'3)J/[1-exp(Z')}J.
                                                   16
students. The smaller class-size effects found in Table 5 areprobably a result of greater

classification errors in the test taking data in the wider sample resulting from the fact thatonly

members of the Class of 1998 are included in the ACT and SAT databases, so all others are

automatically assigned a zero for the value of the dependent variable even though they may have

(or still might) take the ACT or SAT exam. Nonetheless, even in this sample, past attendance in

a small class is associated with a higher likelihood of taking the ACT or SAT exam.

        As mentioned, a majority of college-bound students in Tennessee take the ACT exam:

some 40 percent of on-grade-level STAR students wrote the ACT exam while fewer than 6

percent wrote the SAT exam. Table 6 presents results where the dependent variable in columns

1 and 3 is a dummy that equals one if the student took the ACT exam, and zero ifnot, and the

dependent variable in columns 2 and 4 is a dummy that equals one if the student took the SAT

exam, and zero if not. The disaggregated results in Table 6 indicate that, compared to students

assigned to regular-size classes, students assigned to small classes were more likely to take the

ACT exam, and were more likely to take the SAT exam.

        Although the STAR experiment was designed to measure the effect of being assigned to

one of two narrow class-size ranges, the actual number of students in the classes varied

substantially — from 11 to 20 in small classes, and from 16 to 30 in regular-size classes, over all

years of the experiment. We examined the impact on test-taking of the average number of

students in a child's class in grades K-3. That is, for a student who participated in the

experiment for all four years, we calculated his or her average actual class size over the four

years of the experiment. If a student was missing from the experiment in one or more years (e.g.,

because he or she moved to a school that was not participating in the experiment), we assigned

the average class size of regular classes to the student for that year, and calculated the student's

                                              17
 average class size over four years using the available data from the experiment for the other

 years. We then estimated the effect of average class size during these grades on the likelihood of

 taking the ACT or SAT exam by Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS), using a dummy variable for

initial assignment to a small class as the exogenous instrument. The 2SLS estimates indicate that

reducing average class size by one student resulted in a 0.7 (t= 2.8) percentage point increase in

the probability of taking a college entrance exam.19 Since the mean difference in4-year average

class size between regular- and small-classes was 4.4 students, this amounts to a 3.1 percentage

point increase in test taking rates in small classes — very close to the logit results reported in

Table 4.

         We do not know how many students who took the ACT or SAT exam have actually

enrolled in college, or how many years of higher education they will ultimately complete. But

based on an analysis of the 1992 wave of the High School and Beyond database, high school

students from the Class of 1982 who took the ACT or SAT exam completed an average of 1.7

more years of schooling than students who did not take one of the college entrance exams,

conditional on race and sex.




5. ACT and SAT Scores, With and Without Selection Adjustment

        Lastly, we examined the scores students achieved on the ACT and SAT exams. For
students who took the SAT but not the ACT exam, we converted their SAT score to an ACT-

equivalent score using a concordance developed jointly by ACT and the College Board.2° For

19The corresponding OLS estimate was 1.8 points higher test taking for a one student reduction. Thelarger OLS
estimate than 2SLS estimate suggests that Hawthorne effects were not a factor in the experiment.

20See http:i/www.collegeboard.orglsatihtmi/counselors/stats/sta[004.html The concordance maps re-centered SAT I
scores (verbal plus math) into ACT composite scores. For the 364 students in our sample who took both tests, the
correlation between their SAT and ACT scores is 0.89.


                                                  18
 any student who wrote the ACT exam we used their ACT score, even if he or she also took the
 SAT exam. For students who took an exam more than once, we used their first score. Naturally,

 any analysis of ACT and SAT scores can only be performed for the subset of students who took

 one of the exams. This creates a potential sample selection problem. For example, because a
higher proportion of students from small classes took the ACT and SAT exams, it is likely that
the group of students from small classes contains a higher fraction of relatively weak students;

that is, strong students are likely to take a college entrance exam regardless of their class
assignment, but marginal students who are induced to take the exam because they attended a

small class are likely to be relatively lower scoring students. Such a selection process would
bias downward the effect of attending a small class on average test scores. We first present

results for the selected sample of students who wrote an exam, and then provide two attempts to
adjust for potential sample selection bias.

        To simplify the analysis, we compare students who initially attended small classes to the
combined sample of those who initially attended regular or regular/aide classes, and we control

for school effects instead of school-by-wave effects. Also, because we later implementa
Heckman (1976) selection correction, we use raw ACT scores instead of percentile ranks. The
raw ACT scores in our sample range from 9 to 36, and are approximately normally distributed,
although the left tail of the distribution is thinner than the right tail. Our basic results are
summarized in Table 7. For the sample of test takers, the average ACT test scores were virtually

identical for students who were assigned to small and regular-size classes. The average student
in a small class scored 19.3 while the average student in a regular or regular/aide class scored
19.2. This 0.108 differential is statistically insignificant, and qualitatively small -- only one-
fiftieth as large as the standard deviation of raw scores for the full sample. Whenwe control for
school fixed effects in column 2, students from small classes still score a statistically
insignificant 0.02 standard deviation higher on the exam.

       Past studies of state-level data have found that average test scores tend to decline when

                                              19
 more students take a college entrance exam, most likely because the marginal test Lakers are

 weaker students than the average student (see Dynarski, 1987 and Card and Payne, 1998). In the

 STAR experiment, there were two confounding effects: selection and treatment. One might

 expect the treatment to result in small-class students scoring slightly higher on the ACT, as they
 did on previous tests through 8th grade. But students assigned to snail classes were also more

 likely to take the exam, suggesting that additional, weaker students in small classes were induced
 to write the test. Unfortunately, as a result it is difficult to interpret the score results because

 scores are reported conditional on taking the exam, and the treatment appears to have affected

the probability of taking the exam. Table 8 presents two types of estimation results thatattempt
to adjust for the sample selection problem. In column 1 for the full sample, and column 3 for
black students, we present results of a standard Hecknan-correction procedure. Identification in

these models is based on the assumption of normal errors, as there is no exclusion restriction.
         For comparison, in column 2 (and column 4 for black students) we present results of a

different approach for adjusting for selection. In these columns, we have artificially truncated
the sample of students from small classes so that the same proportion of students from small and

regular-size classes is represented in the test-taking sample. We accomplish this by dropping
from the sample the bottom X percent of students based on their. test results, where Xis

determined so that the proportion of students from small classes who took the examequals the

proportion from regular-size classes. This approach is valid if all the additional small-class
students induced to take the ACT exam are from the left tail of the distribution, and ifattending a
small class did not change the ranking of students in small classes. Although the first

assumption is clearly an extreme one, the results should provide an upper bound on the possible
impact of selection bias, and provide an interesting point of comparison for the Heckman-
selection results. We refer to this approach as the "linear-truncation" procedure.2' To compare


21Note that the linear truncation approach does not require normality.


                                                     20
the results to those in Table 7, in each column we calculated the "effect size" by dividing the

coefficient on the small class dummy by the standard deviation of ACT scoresamong all
students who took the exam (equal to 4.5).

          In principle, the Heckman procedure provides an estimate of the effect of attending a
small class on test scores for the entire population of students (including those who do not take

the test), whereas the linear-truncation approach provides an estimate of the effect ofattending a
small class on scores for students from regular classes who otherwise would have taken the ACT

or SAT. Of course, if there is a homogeneous treatment effect, these two parameters are equal.

         Interestingly, the results from both selection-adjustment procedures yield similar results.
For the full sample, the Beckman-selection-correction procedure indicates that students who
were assigned to a small class scored 0.13 standard deviation higher than those assigned to a

regular-size class, and the linear-truncation procedure yields a 0.12 standard deviation advantage.

For black students, the Beckman procedure indicates that students in small classes scored 0.20

standard deviation higher than those in regular-size classes, and the linear truncation adjustment
yields an effect size of 0.26 standard deviation. In view of the extreme (and different)

assumptions underlying the linear truncation and Heckman-correction procedures, it is

noteworthy that the two approaches yield quantitatively similar results. The similarity of the
estimates in this case follows mainly from the fact that the estimated correlation between the

unobservable error terms in the selection equation and the test score equation in the Heckman

procedure, denoted p, is close to one. The estimate of p is 0.96 for all students and 0.98 for
black students. The (scaled) coefficients from the selection equation are also similarto those
from the test score equation.22 These results imply that the same factors that determine whether
students are more likely to take the ACT or SAT test also determine how well they do on the test,

22Notice that a Tobit model imposes the assumptions that the errors in the selection equation and testscore equation
are equal, and that the coefficients in the selection and test equations are also equal. Thus, it is not surprising that a
Tobit model, in which those who do not take the ACT or SAT are treated as censored observations at the lowest
score achieved, yields similar results as the Ileckit and linear truncation models in this case.


                                                       21
 which is the key assumption of the linear truncation model. Consequently, the linear truncation

 procedure has approximately the same effect as the parametric-selection correction in this case.
         As a check on the procedures we used to adjust for sample selection, we performed the

following experiment using the sample of 8th grade students who were on grade level. We first
estimated the small-class effect size for the full samjile of 6,062 students who had available 8th

grade CTBS scores. Specifically, for this sample we regressed students' raw 8th grade CTBS
scores on an initial small class dummy, free lunch, sex, race, and school fixed effects. Although
this is a select sample because some students did not take the exam (e.g., because they moved out

of Tennessee), we think of the regression on this sample as providing an unbiased estimate of the
effect of class size on achievement in the population. We then restricted this sample to the
3,262 students who took either the ACT or SAT exam, and re-estimated the same regression

model. One can think of this as providing an estimate for the conditional sample, akin to the

results in Table 7. Finally, using the selected sample of 3,262 observations, we estimated a
Heckman-selection model and a linear truncation model (where the lowest-scoring students on

the CTBS were dropped until the proportion with test scores was equal in the two class types).
The results provide some limited support for the selection corrections. In particular, the effect
size is .10 s.d. for the full sample, .05 s.d. for the select sample, .06 s.d. for the Heckman-

correction estimate, and .15 s.d. for the linearly truncated sample.23 The Heckman procedure and
the linear truncation approach bound the estimate for the full sample.24 Moreover, neither

estimate based on the selection correction is significantly different from .10, the estimate for the
full sample. Although we would not want to push these results too far, they do suggest that the


23The effect size is about half as large if OLS is run on the full sample and school-by-wave effects are held constant
instead of school effects.

24Because the estimated p in the fleckit model is only .09 in this sample, results of the Heckman procedure and the
linear truncation procedure are further apart in this sample than they were in the ACT sample. A Tobit model, in
which non-test takers are treated as censored observations at the lowest score achieved, yields a small-class effect of
0.17 s.d.


                                                     22
sample selection correction estimates in Table 8 provide plausible estimates of the effect of
attending a small class in the early grades on ACT test scores. Furthermore, the estimated small-
class effect sizes on the college entrance exams are fairly close to the estimated effect sizeon the

eighth grade CTBS exam, which also raises the plausibility of the findings.

          As mentioned, if there are heterogeneous treatment effects, the linear truncation

procedure provides an estimate of the treatment effect for regular-class students who took the
ACT exam, not for the full population. We can provide lower and upper bound estimates of the

small-class effect for this subsample.25 Formally, let D5 and 1's denote the test-taking decision
and test score, respectively, if a student attends a small class, and let DR and YR denote the test-

taking decision and test score score if the student attends a regular-size class. D5 and D are

binary variables that equal one if students take the ACT or SAT exam, and zero if they do not.
The target parameter is E(YS —       DR = 1)

         Two assumptions are required to derive bounds: (1) a student in a regular class is no more
likely to take a college entrance test than if he was in a small class, i.e. DR Ds, where individual

student subscripts are not shown for simplicity; (2) students induced to take the test because they
attended a small class; on average, achieve lower scores than their classmates who would have
taken the test had they been assigned to a regular-size class. That is:
                                      E(Y5 JJ                        DR =1).

By the first assumption, E(YSDR) E(YsD5), so it follows that:


(4)
                                                                              Pr(D = 1)
                                      E(Y5 DR = 1) E(YS D5 =            1)
                                                                              Pr(DR =1)
And by the second assumption,
(5)                                   E(YS DR =1) E(YS                = 1).

Because average scores for small- and regular-class test takers, and test taking probabilities, are

25We are grateful to a referee for bringing this to our attention.


                                                       23
observable, equations (4) and (5) yield the following estimable bound for E(Y5 —         I DR   = 1):


 E(Y5 JD3 =l)—E(YR DR =1)E(Y5              R    DR              ID5 flPr(DS '—E(YR DR =1)
                                                                          Pr(DR =1)
        To take advantage of the within-school randomized assignment, we implement this

bounding approach using a balanced-within-school estimator, like the one in equation (3).

Specifically, we estimated lower and upper bounds of the treatment effect for each school using
the sample analog of the above formula, and then calculated the weighted average of the bounds

across schools, using as weights the number of regular-class students in each school. The
resulting bound of the small-class test score gain is between 0.02 and 0.47 standard deviation for
the full sample. For black students, the bound is from .07 to 1.08 standard deviations. These

bounds comfortably contain the linear truncation point estimates in Table 8, and provide an
alternative way to estimate the effect that attending a small class has on test scores for those who
would have taken the test even had they been assigned to a regular-size class.


6. Conclusion

       The benefit from being assigned to a small class in grades K-3 on test scores for

participants in the Tennessee STAR experiment appears to have declined by at least half after

students were returned to regular size classes in grade 4, although a persistent, positive effect still

can be measured through the eighth grade. More importantly, attendance in a small class in

grades K-3 appears to have raised the likelihood that students take either the ACT or SAT

college-entrance exam by the end of high school. Since most colleges in the United States

require students to take either the ACT or SAT exam to be admitted, these findings suggest that

lowering class size in the elementary school grades raises the prospect that students will attend

college. The beneficial effect of smaller classes on college aspirations appears to be particularly

                                             24
strong for minority students, and students on free or reduced-price lunch. Indeed, attendance in

small classes appears to cut the black-white gap in the probability of taking a college-entrance

exam in half. Students who attended small classes scored about as well on the ACT or SAT, on

average, as students in regular-size classes. The latter finding may be affected by the wider pool

of students from small classes who took the ACT or SAT exam, however. When we implement

a parametric Heckman-selection-conection procedure or linearly truncate the sample of small

class students to adjust for sample selection, we find that attending a small class in theearly

grades raises performance on the ACT exam by about 0.13 standard deviation overall, and by

0.20 to 0.26 standard deviation for black students.

        The question remains as to whether these are economically worthwhile effects. We can

estimate the internal rate of return from the test-score gain from lower class size based on the

STAR experiment by solving for r in the following equation:


(6)                            XC,/(1+rY =X(E,fl8)/@+rY,
                               t1                 t14

where C is the cost of reducing class size in year t, E is annual earnings in year t,   is a

parameter that converts a one standard deviation gain in test scores at the end of high school to a

proportionate increase in earnings, 6 is the gain in test scores from assignment to a small class,

and r is the discount rate that equates the present value of the benefits and costs. We assume

students start school at age 5, begin working at age 18, and retire at age 65. The left-hand side of

equation (6) is the present value of the cost of reducing class size, and the right hand side is the

present value of the benefits. We use national school cost and earnings data to illustrate these

magnitudes.

       To calculate the costs, note that in the STAR experiment classes were reduced from about

                                             25
 22 to about 15 students, so we assume that additional funds are required for 7/15 = 47 percent

 more classes. It is probably reasonable to approximate the cost of creating and staffing

 additional classrooms in proportion to annual per pupil expenditures. Therefore, we assume the

additional cost per pupil each year a pupil is in a small class is 47 percent of $7,502, which was

the total expenditures per student in the U.S. in 199798.26 Although the STAR experiment

lasted 4 years, the average student who was assigned to a small class spent only 2.3 years in a

small class, because half the sample entered the experiment after the first year and other students

exited from the experiment. We err on the side of overstating costs by assuming that additional

costs are borne fully in the first and second year, and 30 percent in the third year.

         To calculate benefits, we assume test scores are 0.13 standard deviation higher (5) by the

end of high school as a result of assignment to a small class, as we found for the ACT scores. A

key issue is: By how much do future earnings increase as a consequence of improved test scores

at the end of high school? One relevant estimate is from Neal and Johnson (1996), who use the

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to estimate the effect of students' scores on the Armed

Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) taken at age 15-18 (adjusted for age when the test was taken)

on their earnings at age 26-29. They find ihat a one standard deviation increase in scores is

associated with about 20 percent higher earnings for both men and women 11 years later. Neal

and Johnson do not condition on educational attainment, so their estimate should reflect the

effect of increased test scores on educational attainment as well. Another issue concernswage

growth over time. To forecast future earnings, we calculated average earnings at each age

between 18 and 65 in 1998 using the 1999 March Current Population Survey. These data display

the usual concave cross-sectional age-earnings profile. We use this age-earnings profile to

26See Digest of Education Statistics, 1998, Table 169.
                                                    26
forecast E, assuming that real wages will grow by one percent per annum in the future, whiph is

in line with the Social Security Trustees' forecast for the United States.27

         With these assumptions, the internal rate of return from the effect size found in the STAR

experiment is estimated at 5.5 percent. Because this calculation involves many important

assumptions, such as pace of future wage growth, and ignores fringe benefits as well as possible

social benefits from improved education, the estimated internal rate of return is best viewed as a

rough approximation rather than a precise point estimate. Nonetheless, this back-of-the-

envelope calculation suggests that there is a reasonable economic rate of return from reducing

class sizes at the early grades.

        Despite some encouraging signs, our findings on college test taking should be viewed as

preliminary because students who fell behind a grade level are not included in the ACT or SAT

files. Our ACT and SAT data only pertain to students who completed high school on schedule in

the Class of 1998. When data for the Class of 1999 are available, they could be added to the

sample. We also hope to continue to track Project STAR students by studying their economic

and social outcomes in the future, including their employment, pay, arrest rates, and welfare

utilization rates.




That is, earnings in the year workers turn age A are forecasted to equal EA(1.O1)'", where EA isaverage earnings
for workers age A in 1998 based on the 1999 CPS.


                                                   27
                                           References

Achilles, C. (1999). Let's Put Kids First, Finally: Getting Class Size Right. Thousand Oaks, CA:

       Corwin Press.

Barnett, S. (1992). "Benefits of compensatory preschool education." Journal of Human

       Reources, vol. 27, pp. 279-3 12.

Card, D. and Krueger, A. B. (1996). "Labor market effects of school quality: theory and

       evidence." In Does Money Matter? The Effect of School Resources on Student

       Achievement and Adult Success (ed. U. Burtless), Washington, D.C.: Brookings

       Institution, pp. 97-140.

Card, D. and Payne, A. A. (1998). "School finance reform, the distribution of school spending,

       and the distribution of SAT scores." U.C. Berkeley, Center for Labor Economics,

       Working Paper.

Dynarski, M. (1987). "The Scholastic Aptitude Test: participation and performance." Economics

       of Education Review, vol. 3, pp. 263-73.

Finn, J. D. and Achilles, C. M. (1990). "Answers and questions about class size: a statewide

       experiment." American Educational Research Journal, vol. 27, pp. 557-577.

Finn, S. D., Gerber, S., Achilles, C. M. and Boyd-Zaharias, 5. (1999). "Short- and long-term

       effects of small classes." SIJNY Buffalo, mimeo.

Folger, J. and Breda, C. (1989). "Evidence from Project STAR about class size and student

       achievement." Peabody Journal of Education, vol. 67, pp. 17-33.

Griliches, Z., Hall, B. and Hausman, J. (1978). "Missing data and self-selection in large panels,"

       Annales de L'Insee, vol. 30-31, pp. 137-176.

Grossman, S. B. and Sipe, C. L. (1992). "Summer Training and Education Program (STEP):

                                            28
        report on long term impacts," Public Private Ventures, Philadelphia, PA

Hanushek, E., Kain, J. and Rivkin, S. (1998). "Teachers, schools, and academic achievement,"

        NBER Working Paper No. 6691, Cambridge, MA.

Hanushek, E. (1999). "Some findings from the Tennessee STAR experiment and other

        inc'estigations of class size reductions," University of Rochester, mirneo.

Hausman, J., Abrevaya, J. and Scott-Morton, F.M. (1998). "Misclassification of the dependent

        variable in a discrete-response setting." Journal of Econometrics, vol. 97, pp. 239-69.

Beckman, 1. (1976). "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample

        Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models."

       Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, vol. 5, pp. 475-92.

Krueger, A. B. (1999). "Experimental estimates of education production functions." Quarterly

       Journal of Economics, vol. 114, pp. 497-532.

Lang, K. and Ruud, P.A. (1986). "Returns to schooling, implicit discount rates and black-white

       wage differentials." The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 68, pp. 41-47.

Mosteller, F. (1995). "The Tennessee study of class size in the early school grades." The Future

       of Children: Critical Issues for Children and Youths, vol. 5, pp. 113-27.

Neal, D. and Johnson, W. (1996). "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage

       Differentials." Journal of Political Economy 104, October, pp. 869-95.Nye, B., Zaharias,

J., Fulton, B. D., et al. (1994). "The lasting benefits study: a continuing analysi of the effect of

       small class size in kindergarten through third grade on student achievement test scores in

       subsequent grade levels." Tennessee State University, Center of Excellence for Research

       in Basic Skills.

Pate-Bath, H., Fulton, B. D., and Boyd-Zaharias, J. (1999), "Effects of class-size reduction in the

                                             29
       early grades (K-3) on high school performance," HEROS, Inc., mimeo.

Summers, A. A. and Wolfe, B. L. (1977). "Do schools make a difference?" American Economic

       Review, vol. 67, pp. 639-652.

Word, E., Johnston, J., Bain, H., et al. (1990). "The state of Tennessee's StudentITeacher

       Achievement Ratio (STAR) Project: technical report 1985-1990." Tennessee State

       Department of Education.




                                           30
                                                          rigure 1: Small-Class Effect, K-S
     10


     9


     8
                                            Black students

     7
                                             A'                                Switch from SAT to CTBS and
C,                                                                             return to regular-size'classes
C)
C                     Free-lunch students
C)
     6




           Isam
                                          IIlrII
     5


     4


     3


     2


     1



     0
                 K               1                2              3                4               5                6                7               8
                                                                              Grade level
         Note: Effect of class size after controlling for student's race, gender, free-lunch status and initial school-by-entry-wave fixed effects.
                                                 Figure 2: Small-Class Effect on All Students
     6




     5




o4
w
C
a)




a3
a)
0)
C
a)
0
C,
a.




     1




     0
                1               2               3               4                5.              6                7               8                  9
                                                                           Grade level
         Note: Effect of class size after controlling for students race, gender, free-lunch status and initiaL school-by-entry-wave fixed effects.
                                            Figure 3: Small-Class Effect on Black Students
  10




   0                                                                   I                 I


              K               1               2                3               4               5                6               7     8
                                                                           Grade level
Note: Effect of class size after controlling for students gender, tree-lunch status and initial school-by-entry-wave fixed effects.
                                         Figure 4
        Percentof Students Who Took the ACT or SAT
         College Entrance Exam by Initial Class Type

  H

   0
  H
  U                                                                                     • Small

  .                                                                                       Regular
                                                                                        J Reg/Aide
  H

  I.)


                  All            Whites            Blacks        Free Lunch

Notes: Figure shows percent of students who took either the ACT or the SAT exam, by their initial
class-size assignment. Sample consists of 9,397 STAR students who were on grade level. Free lunch
group includes students who ever received free or reduced-price lunch grade K-3.
                  Table 1: Selected Population Characteristics

                                         STAR             Tennessee          United States

                                           (1)                (2)                 (3)


Percent minority students                33.1      •
                                                             23.5                31.0


Percent black students                   31.7                22.6                16.1


Percent of children below
                                         24.4                20.7                18.0
poverty level

Percent of. teachers with
                                         43.4                48.0                47.3
master's degree or higher

AverageAClscore                          19.2                19.8                21.0

Average 3rd grade enrollment
                                         89.1                69.5                67.1
across schools

Average current expenditures
per student across schools              $3,423              $3,425              $4,477


Notes: With the following exceptions, data are from the 1990 Common Core of Data (CCD)
from the Department of Education. For comparability, the Project STAR characteristics were
calculated from the CCD. (Nevertheless, the characteristics were very similar when calculated
directly from Project STAA data.) Teacher education data are for 3rd grade teachers from
Project STAR data, and for 1993-94 public elementary and secondary school teachers from the
Digest of Education Statistics. Race and poverty statistics for the U.S. are from the Census
Bureau. ACT scores for Tennessee and U.S. are from ACT, Inc.
                                Table 2: Examination of Random Assignment
                       Linear Regressions, Dependent variable equals 1 for small classes

                                              A: Students                                     B: Teachers
 Explanatory
 Variable                       Means        (1)                                Means
                                                         (2)        (3)                      (4)         (5)        (6)
                                 (SD)                                            (SD)

 Intercept                                  0.255      0.311       0.278                    0.461      0.446      0.463
                                           (0.020)    (0.014)     (0.014)                  (0.131)    (0.151)     (0.172)

White/Asian (1=yes)             0631       0.025      -0.006      -0.011        0.814       0.006      -0.017      -0.032
                               (0.483)     (0.010)    (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.389)     (0.035)    (0.043)     (0.053)
Female (1=yes)                  0.471      0.001       -0.003      0.000        0.968      -0.057      -0.015     -0.011
                               (0.499)     (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.109)     (0.126)    (0.140)    (0.164)
Free Lunch (1=yes)              0.547      -0.018      -0.008     -0.016
                               (0.498)     (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.010)

Master's Degree or                                                              0.376      -0.047      -0.059    -0.069
Higher (1=yes)                                                                 (0.485)     (0.028)    (0.031)    (0.037)
Total Experience                                                               12.027      0.000      (0.000)    (0.001)
                                                                               (8.323)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)
Entry-Grade Fixed Effects                   No         Yes         No                        No        Yes         No

School Fixed Effects                        No         Yes         No                       No         Yes         No

School-by-Entry-Wave
Fixed Effects                               No          No         Yes           -—         No          No         Yes

A-Squared                                  0.00        0.03       0.08                      0.00       0.02       0.04
P-value ot significance of
                                           0.000      0.837       0.450                    0.560      13.392      0.380
explanatory variables

Note: white standard errors in parentheses. The tree lunch variable measures whether a student was on free or reduced-
price lunch during his or her entry year. For columns 1-3, the mean dependent variable is 0.26 and sample size is 11,294.
For columns 4-6, the mean dependent variable is 0.39 and sample size is 1330. For teachers, entry-grade and entry-wave
are the grade level they taught. Entry-grade fixed effects are three dummy variables indicating the grade the student fist
entered the program.
                          Table 3: Correlations of Percentile Scores, Various Tests

              .
                                                       A. Correlations
                                                           Grade
Grade               K           1            2           3            4           5              6       7     8


1                 0.65
2                 0.58        0.80
3                 0.51        0.71          0.80                            .

4                 0.56        0.67          0.75       0.80
5                 0.52        0.65          0.72       0.76         0.83
6                 0.51        0.64          0.70       0.75         0.82        0.84
7                 0.53        0.67          0.73       0.75         0.81        0.84            0.86
8                 0.52        0.66          0.73       0.74         0.80        0.82            0.84   0.88
ACT/SAT           0.42        0.57          0.65       0.65         0.71        0.74            0.75   0.79   0.81




                                    .                 B. Sample Sizes
                                                           Grade                                                     .


Grade              K            1
                                        •
                                             2          3            4            5              6      7      8


1                 4177
2                 3287       4687
3                 2904       3988           4724
4                 3810       4540           4232      4386
5                 4352       5092           4862      5028         6531
6                 4239       4951           4766      4924         6330         7447
7                 4178       4854           4642      4762         6216         7308        7174
8                 4221       4882           4624      4711         6023         7060        7024       7066
ACT/SAT           2351       2720           2666      2723         2905         3335


Note: Tests are Stanford Achievement Test (K-3), CTBS (4-8) and ACT or SAT normalized to ACT percentile
ranks (see   text). All correlations are statistically significant at the 0.05 percent level.
                Table 4: Effect of Class Size on the Probability of Taking the ACT or SAT
                                for Students on Grade Level, Logit Models
              Dependent  variable equals 1 if student took either SAT or ACT, and 0 otherwise

                                            All Students                                  Black Students
Explanatory
Variable                    Means         (1)         (2)        (3)        Means         (4)        (5)         (6)
                             (SD)                                            (SD)

Intercept                               -0.374      -0.035     0.812                    -0.759      0099       -0.091
                               ---                                            ---
                                        (0.035)    (0.288)     (1.476)                 (0.062)     (1.423)    (1.427)
                                       [-0.0931    [-0.007]    [0.151]                 [-0.184]    [0.020]    [-0.018]
Small Class                  0263        0.149      0.166      0.133         0.243      0.368       0.331      0.295
                            (0.440)     (0.054)    (0.059)    (0.062)       (0.429)    (0.097)     (0.104)    (0.112)
                                        [0.036]    10.035]    [0.027]                  [0.085]     [0.068]    [0.059]

Regular/Aide Class           0.364      0.003       0.041      0.042         0.378      0.107       0.150      0.119
                            (0.481)    (0.050)     (0.054)    (0.057)       (0.485)    (0.087)     (0.094)    (0.100)
                                       [0.001]     [0.008]    [0.008]                  [0.024]     [0.030]    [0.023]

White/Asian (1=yes)          0.651                  -0.242     -0.285
                            (0.477)       ---                                 ---         ---        ---        ---
                     •
                                                    (0.087)    (0.091)
                                                   [-0.050]   [-0.0571

Female (i=yes)               0.496                  0.678      0.664        0.504                  0.693       0.672
                            (0.500)       ---      (0.046)                                ---
                                                              (0.048)       (0.500)                (0.081)    (0.085)
                                                   [0.241]    [0.135]                              [0210]     [0.135]
Free Lunch (1=yes)          0.568                  -1.289     -1.229         0.843                 -0.868     -0.876
                            (0.495)       ---                                             ---
                                                   (0.055)    (0.058)       (0.364)               (0.115)     (0.123)
                                                   [-0.291]   [-0.265]                            [-0.193]    [-0.188]
School Axed Effects           ---        No         Yes         No            ---        No         Yes         No

School-by-Entry-Wave
 .                            ---                                             ---
                                         No          No         Yes                      No          No        Yes
Fixed Effects

Pseudo R-Squared              ---       0.00        0.11       0.14           ---       0,00        0.08       0.11

Log Likelihood                ---      -6189.9     -5543.2    -5310.4         ---      -2017.6    -1853.8    -1751.8

P-value for Small Class       ---       0.01        000        0.03           ---       0.00        0.00       0.01


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Marginal effects in brackets. Sample consists of students on grade level. The
mean of the dependent variable in columns (1) - (3) is 0.42 and the sample size is 9117. The mean of the dependent
variable in columns (4) -(6) is 0.35 and the sample size is 3133. There are 78 school fixed effects in column (2), and
56 in column (5). There are 293 school-by-entry-wave fixed effects in column (3), and 140 in column (6).
    Table 5: Effect of Class Size on the Probability of Taking the ACT or SAT for All Students,
                                           Logit Models
                  De pendent variable equals 1 if student took either SAT or ACT

                                         All Students                                   Black Students
Explanatory
Variable                   Means        (1)         (2)        (3)         Means        (4)            (5)       (6)
                            (SD)                                           (SD)
                                                                                                                         .




Intercept                             -0.692      -0.797     0.863                     -1.128     0.483        -0,117
                            ---                                              ---
                                     (0.033)     (0.348)     (1 .089)                 (0.059)    (1.437)      (1-417)
                                     [-0.167]    [-0.167]    [0.142]                  [-0.262]    [0.0761     [-'1020]
Small Class                0.262       0.122      0.117       0.093        0.240       0.340      0.293        0.235
                          (0.440)     (0.050)    (0.055)     (0.058)      (0.427)     (0.090)    (0.098)      (0.104)
                                      [0.028]    [0.022]     [0.017]                  [0.068]    [0.052]      [0.041]

Regular/Aide Class         0.365      0.003       0.036      0.036         0.376       0.126      0.162        0.117
                          (0.481)    (0.046)     (0.051)    (0.053)       (0.485)     (0.082)    (0.089)      (0.093)
                                     [0.001]     [0.007]    [0.007]                   10.024]    [0.028]      [0.020]

White/Asian (1=yes)        0.631                 -0.228      -0.269
                          (0.483)       ---      (0.083)                    ---         ---            ---      ---
                                                            (0.086)
                                                 [-0.044]   [-0.0501                              .




Female (1=yes)             0.471                 0.765       0.772         0.474                      0.788    0.783
                          (0.499)       ---                                             ---
                                                 (0.044)    (0.045)       (0.499)                (0.076)      (0.079)
                                                 [0.149]    [0.147]                              [0.141]      [0.137]
Free Lunch (1=yes)         0.605                 -1.354      -1.317        0.865                  -0.958      -0.982
                          (0.489)       ---      (0.052)                                ---
                                                            (0.054)       (0.341)                (0.107)      (0.114)
                                                [-0.286]    [-0.269]                             [-0.194]     [-0.194]
School Fixed Effects        ---        No         Yes         No            —-         No             Yes       No

School-by-Entry-Wave        ---                                             ---
 -
Fixed Effects                          No          No         Yes                      No              No      Yes

Pseudo R-Squared            ---       0.00        0.12       0.14           ---       0.00            0.09     0.12

Log Likelihood              ---      -7243.5    -6404.6     -6210.1         ---      -2393.6     -2172.8      -2074.3

P-value for Class Size      ---       0.02        0.03       0.11


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Marginal effects in brackets. Sample consists of all students. The mean of
the dependent variable in columns (1) -(3) is 0.34 and the sample size is 11,294. The mean of the dependent
variable in columns (4) -(6) is 0.27 and the sample size is 4117. There are 78 school fixed effects in column (2) and
56 in column (5). There are 292 school-by-entry-wave fixed effects in column (3) and 143 in column (6).
    Table 6: Effect ot Class Size on the Probability of Taking the ACT or SAT,
                                   Logit Models


                                         All Students                   Black Students
Explanatory
Variable:                        ACT                    SAT         ACT              SAT
                                  (1)                   (2)          (3)              (4)

Intercept                       -0.510              -0.446          -0.088           -0.230
                                (1.260)            (1.159)         (1.418)          (1.313)
                               [-0.105]            [-0.033]        [-0.018]         [-0.013]
Small Class                     0.100               0.303           0.272            0.464
                                (0.062)            (0.1.27)        (0.112)          (0.258)
                                [0.021]            [0.026]         [0.055]          [0.0291

Regular/Aide Class              0.038               0.133           0.088            0.367
                               (0.057)             (0.122)         (0.101)          (0.253)
                               [0.008]             [0.011]         [0.018]          [0.022]

White/Asian (1=yes)             -0.290              -0.327
                               (0.092)             (0.194)
                               [-0.0591            [-0.029]

Female (1=yes)                  0.642               0.446           0.644           0.953
                               (0.048)             (0.101)         (0.085)         (0.220)
                               [0.135]             [0.038]         [0.131]         [0.058]
Free Lunch (1=yes)              -1.221              -1.216         -0.839          -1.416
                               (0.058)             (0.138)         (0.123)         (0.242)
                               [-0.266]            [-0.104]       [0.182]          [-0.1221

School-by-Entry-Wave
Fixed Effects                    Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes

Pseudo R-Squared                0.13                0.16            0.10             0.13

Log Likelihood                 -5301.1            -1528.9         -1745.7           -404.5

P-value for Class Size          0.11                0.02            0.02             0.07

Note: Marginal effects in brackets. Sample consists of students on grade level. Columns (1) and
(2) have 9117 observations and the mean of the dependent variables are 0.40 and 0.06,
respectively. Columns (3) and (4) have 3133 observations, and the mean of the dependent
variables are 0.34 and 0.04, respectively. The number of school by entry-wave fixed effects in
columns (1) -(4) are 291, 168, 139 and 65, respectively.
                    Table 7: Effect of Class Size on ACT or SAT Score
                  Dependent variable equals ACT or ACT-eguivalen! score

                                      All Students                          Black Students
Explanatory
Variable                     Means         (1)         (2)         Means         (3)           (4)
                             (SD)                                  (SD)

Intercept                               19.215       17.957                    16.520         17.640
                                        (0.088)      (0.235)                   (0.132)       (0.317)
Small Class                  0.298       0.108       0.142         0.281        0.179         0.232
                            (0.449)     (0.161)      (0.144)      (0.450)      (0.234)       (0.240)

White/Asian (1 =yes)         0.709                    2.603                        .

                            (0.454)                  (0.262)

Female (1=yes)               0.580                   -0.058        0.614                     0.271
                            (0.494)                  (0.139)      (0.487)                 (0.232)
Free Lunch (1=yes)           0.389                   -1.446        0.739                   -1.760
              .

                            (0.488)                  (0.164)      (0.439)                 (0.296)
School Fixed Effects           ---        No          Yes            ---         No           Yes

A-squared                      ---       0.00         0.21          ---         0.00         0.11

Effect Size                    ---        0.02        0.03          ---         0.04         0.05
                                         (0.04)      (0.03)                    (0.05)        (0.05)
Note: White standard orrors are in parentheses. Sample consists of stu dents                     If
a student only took the SAT, that score is converted to its comparable ACT score (see text for
details). The mean (standard deviation) of the dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is
19.2 (4.5) and the sample size is 3,792. The mean (standard deviation) of the dependent
variable in columns (3) and (4) is 16.6 (3.6) and the sample size is 1,086. The effect size is the
coefficient on small divided by the standard deviation of test scores among the full sample of
students (4.5).
  Table 8: Effect of Class Size on ACT or SAT Score with Selection Correction
            Dependent variable equals ACT or ACT-equivalent score
    .                                   All Students                        Black Students
                                 Heckman            Linear            Heckman            Linear
Explanatory                      correction      truncation           correction      truncation
Variable                             (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)

Intercept                          14.488          18.088               8.107           17.835
                                  (0.632)          (0.236)             (3.886)          (0.315)

Small Class                        0.574           0.557                0.893            1.157
                                  (0.188)         (0.145)              (0.311)          (0.234)

White/Asian (1 =yes)               1.718           2.486                  --
                                  (0.328)         (0.262)

Female (1=yes)                     1.757           -0.101               2.128           0.120
                                  (0.174)         (0.139)              (0.283)         (0.231)
Free Lunch (1=yes)                -4.602           -1.485              -3.468           -1.897
                                  (0.216)         (0.164)              (0.375)         (0.292)
School Fixed Effects                Yes             Yes                 Yes              Yes

Number of observations             9117            3706                 3133             1032

Effect size                         0.13            0.12                 0.20            0.26
                                   (0.04)          (0.03)               (0.07)          (0.05)


Note: White standard errors are reported in parentheses for the linear truncation model. Sample
consists of students on grade-level. If a student only took the SAT, that score is converted to its
comparable ACT score (see text for details). The mean (standard deviation) of the dependent
variable in column (1) is 19.2 (4.5) with sample size 3,792, in column (2) it is 19.4 (4.5) with
sample size 3,706, in column (3) it is 16.6 (3.6) with sample size 1,086, and in column (4) it is
16.8 (3.6) with sample size 1,032. The effect size is the coefficient on small divided by the
standard deviation of test scores among the full sample of students (4.5).
