NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTMENT-CASH FLOW SENSITIVITIES ARE NOT
VALID MEASURES OF FINANCING CONSTRAINTS

Steven N. Kaplan
Luigi Zingales

Working Paper 7659
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7659
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

This research has been supported by the Center For Research in Security Prices and by the Olin Foundation
through grants to the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. Heitor Almeida, Andrei Shleifer,
Dick Thaler, and Rob Vishny provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Steven N. Kaplan and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities are not Valid
Measures of Financing Constraints
Steven N. Kaplan and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 7659
April 2000

ABSTRACT
Kaplan and Zingales [1997] provide both theoretical arguments and empirical evidence that
investment-cash flow sensitivities are not good indicators of financing constraints.

Fazzari,

Hubbard and Petersen [1999] criticize those findings. In this note, we explain how the Fazzari et
al. [1999] criticisms are either very supportive of the claims in Kaplan and Zingales [1997] or
incorrect. We conclude with a discussion of unanswered questions.

Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Luigi Zingales
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu

Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen [1988] (hereafter, FHP[1988]) introduce a methodology to
identify the presence of financing constraints based on the differential sensitivity of corporate investment
to cash flow. Kaplan and Zingales [1997] (hereafter, KZ) provide both theoretical arguments and
empirical evidence that this differential sensitivity is not a valid measure of financing constraints.
Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen [1999] (hereafter, FHP [1999]) criticize those findings. In this note, we
explain that the main arguments in FHP [1999] are, in fact, quite supportive of KZ’s main conclusion,
while the specific criticisms in FHP [1999] are unjustified.

I.

Points of Agreement
FHP [1999] admit that financially distressed firms are likely to have lower investment-cash flow

sensitivities than less financially constrained firms. This is exactly the point that the KZ model makes:
investment-cash flow sensitivities are not necessarily monotonic in the degree of financing constraints.
The only disagreement FHP [1999] have with KZ is how pervasive the non-monotonicity result is. But
this is ultimately an empirical question.
FHP [1999] also recognize that the literature on investment-cash flow sensitivities has not been
based on a solid theoretical foundation. As KZ point out, the practice of (1) splitting the sample
according to a measure of financing constraints and then (2) comparing investment-cash flow
sensitivities across groups is justified only if investment-cash flow sensitivities increase monotonically in
the degree of financing constraints. Neither FHP [1988], nor any other paper of which we are aware,
spell out the sufficient conditions for monotonicity.

II.

Points of Disagreement
We disagree with FHP [1999] on three specific points: (1) their comparative statics analysis; (2)

their criticism of the KZ classification scheme; and (3) their criticisms of the KZ empirical results.
A.

Comparative Statics

As we see it, there are two ways for a firm to be more constrained than another one.

1

First, a firm may have fewer internal funds than another. This corresponds to the parameter, W,
in KZ’s model. The appropriate comparative static is then obtained by computing d2I/dW2, as we did in
KZ. Our result is reproduced as equation (2) in FHP [1999].1 In this case, the appropriate condition for
monotonicity is the one we report rather than the one proposed by FHP [1999].
Alternatively, one firm may be more constrained than another because the firm’s intrinsic
characteristics make it more costly to raise a given amount of external funds. The appropriate
comparative statics exercise requires the explicit parameterization of intrinsic firm differences. This is
precisely what we did in KZ, where we introduced a parameter, k, in the cost function of external finance,
C(I-W, k). In the KZ model, k represents the extent to which a firm’s inherent characteristics make it
more or less constrained.2 In KZ, we discussed, but did not report, how the investment-cash flow
sensitivity varied with the extent to which a firm was constrained because of its intrinsic characteristics,
d2I/dkdW. The appropriate condition for monotonicity is that: ∂2I/ ∂W∂k > 0. This derivative can be
written as:
(1)

(-F11C112 - F11C111 (∂I /∂k) + F111C11 (∂I /∂k)) / (C11 - F11)2
FHP claim that C112 > 0 (firms with higher k have a higher slope of the external finance schedule)

is a sufficient condition for monotonicity, if F11 is homogeneous across firms. The equation above makes
it clear that this is only the case if we do not take into account the impact of the firm’s intrinsic
characteristics (k) on total investment (I). Notice that -F11C112 > 0 if C112 > 0, but the rest of the numerator
can be either positive or negative, depending on the signs of ∂I/∂k, F111, and C111. If these derivatives
were equal to zero, FHP would be correct, but this is hardly a reasonable case. In other words, the FHP
condition C112 > 0 does not guarantee monotonicity.
Substituting for ∂I/∂k in (1), the correct condition for monotonicity is:
(2)

d2I/dkdW = [ C112 F112 - C112C11F11 + C12 C111F11 - C12C11F111 ]/ (C11 - F11)3 > 0.

1

This formulation is relevant for papers in the literature that split firms on the basis of the availability of internal
funds, such as FHP[1988], who split on the basis of the amounts of dividends paid.
2
This formulation is relevant for papers in the literature that split firms by corporate grouping such as Hoshi,
Kashyap, and Scharfstein [1991].
2

It is difficult to argue that (2) is always satisfied – as FHP [1999] and the existing literature on financing
constraints would require. In fact, it is easy to construct examples in which this derivative is positive and
in which it is negative. For example, if the cost function and the production function are quadratic and
the cost of external finance is of the form C=ke2, then d2I/dkdW will be positive. Alternatively, if the
production function is of the form, F=Ia where 0<a<1, and the cost of external finance is of the form C=
ke + e2, then d2I/dkdW will be negative.
Finally, the FHP [1999] arguments assume that the cost of raising external funds C(.,.) is convex,
while KZ hypothesize and Stafford [1999] presents evidence that C11 is negative. This further weakens
the case for monotonicity.

B.

Classification Scheme

FHP [1999] also question the validity of the KZ classification scheme, which relies, at least in
part, on a company’s cash balances or unused lines of credit. FHP claim that large amounts of these
accounts indicate that a firm is taking the precaution of saving for fear of becoming constrained in the
future. Thus, according to FHP [1999], firms with more cash holdings are more financially constrained.
In fact, our methodology of considering management’s statements of liquidity was designed precisely to
reduce the ambiguity of “objective” criteria. Such a detailed analysis can distinguish between
precautionary savings and pure financial slack.
For example, in 1997, Microsoft had net income of $3.5 billion, capital expenditures of $0.5
billion, no investment in inventories, no dividends, and no debt, yet held almost $9 billion of cash – or 18
times capital expenditures. By the logic of both FHP [1988] (no dividends) and FHP [1999] (high cash
balances), Microsoft would be classified as financially constrained. This classification would be lent
support by Microsoft’s investment-cash flow sensitivity of 0.53 from 1986 to 1997 – higher than the
sensitivity of the most constrained group in FHP [1988]. In contrast, by our criteria, Microsoft would
qualify as not financially constrained. We believe that our classification is the more plausible one.

3

At the same time, the endogeneity of a firm’s financial position strengthens the theoretical
reasons why investment-cash flow sensitivities are not monotonically increasing in the degree of financial
constraints, as recently shown by Almeida (1999). He analyzes the response of investment to profitability
shocks when leverage is endogenously determined. Firms with more liquid assets borrow more and, thus,
are more sensitive to profitability shocks because of the well-known leverage effect. Less financially
constrained firms, then, exhibit higher investment-cash flow sensitivities than similar firms, which have
less liquid assets, and thus are more financially constrained.

C.

Empirical Results

Finally, FHP [1999] criticize the empirical findings in KZ on two primary dimensions.
First, they claim the KZ results are due to the lack of heterogeneity in the sample. While it is
possible that the KZ sample is homogeneous, Cleary [1999] obtains similar results for a large (over 1300)
and undeniably heterogeneous sample of firms.
Second, they claim the financially constrained firms in KZ are financially distressed and the nonfinancially constrained firms are, in fact, financially constrained. As we stressed earlier, we believe that
financial distress is a form of being financially constrained so that the distinction FHP [1999] make is not
relevant to our arguments. Nevertheless, it is difficult to claim that the firms KZ classify as possibly
financially (PFC), which exhibit the lowest sensitivity of all, are in fact distressed. For example, the
median interest coverage ratio in PFC firm-years is 4.2 – which is roughly the average coverage ratio for
firms rated BBB (investment grade) by Standard & Poor’s.3

III.

Questions for Future Research
The empirical analysis in KZ shows that less constrained firms exhibit a higher sensitivity of

investments to cash flow. KZ also shows that this is perfectly compatible with value-maximizing

3

FHP[1999] criticize Cleary [1999] on the same grounds. Yet Cleary [1999] also finds a relatively low sensitivity
for partially constrained (clearly not distressed) firms.
4

behavior by firms facing different degrees of financing constraints. But, in practice, is the nonmonotonicity we observe driven by the value-maximizing behavior assumed in the model?
Most of the papers in this literature assume value-maximizing behavior by firms, and then
attribute all observed deviations to financing constraints. In fact, it is hard to explain the high investmentcash flow sensitivities of firms like Hewlett-Packard (see KZ) and Microsoft as the result of financing
constraints. It is also difficult to explain them as the result of traditional agency problems, because both
Hewlett-Packard and Microsoft have high levels of managerial ownership.
FHP’s [1999] defense of investment-cash flow sensitivities as measures of financial constraints
distracts attention from the more important question: what causes this sensitivity? We do not pretend to
have given an answer to this. We conjecture that the sensitivities are at least partially caused by
excessive conservatism by managers, which may arise because of the way firms are organized internally
or because of non-optimizing behavior by managers as suggested by Hines and Thaler [1995].

References
Almeida, Heitor, “Financial Constraints, Asset Liquidity and Investment,” working paper, University of
Chicago, April 1999.
Cleary, Sean, “The Relationship Between Firm Investment and Financial Status,” Journal of Finance,
LIV (1999), 673-692.
Fazzari, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen, “Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1988), 141-195.
Fazzari, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen, “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities are Useful:
A Comment on Kaplan and Zingales,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, this issue.
Hines, James and Richard Thaler, “The Flypaper Effect,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 9,
No. 4 (1995), 217-226.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, “Corporate Structure Liquidity and Investment:
Evidence from Japanese Panel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVI (1991), 33-60.
Kaplan, Steven and Luigi Zingales, “Do Financing Constraints Explain Why Investment is Correlated with
Cash Flow?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 169-215.
Stafford, Erik, “Managing Financial Policy. Evidence from the Financing of Extraordinary Investments,”
Working paper, University of Chicago (1999).

5

