NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL CONTRACTING THEORY MEETS THE REAL WORLD:
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF VENTURE CAPITAL CONTRACTS

Steven N. Kaplan
Per Strömberg

Working Paper 7660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7660
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

This research has been supported by the Kauffman Foundation, by the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation and the
Olin Foundation through grants to the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, and by the Center For
Research in Security Prices. Alejandro Hajdenberg, Hwagyun Kim, Peter Lang, Lena Mercea, and Konstantin Semyonov
provided excellent research assistance. Amar Bhide, Francesca Cornelli, Mathias Dewatripont, Doug Diamond, Ron
Gilson, Paul Gompers, Rick Green, Oliver Hart, Thomas Hellman, Bengt Holmstrom, Randy Kroszner, Josh Lerner, John
Moore, Stew Myers, Rick Ruback, David Scharfstein, Jeremy Stein, Luigi Zingales, and seminar participants at the CEPR
Summer Symposium, CIAR, the International Franqui Conference on the Economics of Contracting, Maryland, the NBER
Summer Institute, NYU, Stanford, the Stockholm School of Economics, Texas, and the Utah Winter Finance Conference
provided helpful comments. We are grateful to the venture capital partnerships for providing data. Ted Meyer was
particularly helpful. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Steven N. Ka plan and Per Strömberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World:
An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts
Steven N. Kaplan and Per Strömberg
NBER Working Paper No. 7660
April 2000
JEL No. G24, G32

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we compare the characteristics of real world financial contracts to their counterparts
in financial contracting theory. We do so by conducting a detailed study of actual contracts between
venture capitalists (VCs) and entrepreneurs. We consider VCs to be the real world entities who most
closely approximate the investors of theory. (1) The distinguishing characteristic of VC financings is that
they allow VCs to separately allocate cash flow rights, voting rights, board rights, liquidation rights, and
other control rights. We explicitly measure and report the allocation of these rights. (2) While convertible
securities are used most frequently, VCs also implement a similar allocation of rights using combinations
of multiple classes of common stock and straight preferred stock. (3) Cash flow rights, voting rights,
control rights, and future financings are frequently contingent on observable measures of financial and nonfinancial performance. (4) If the company performs poorly, the VCs obtain full control. As company
performance improves, the entrepreneur retains / obtains more control rights. If the company performs
very well, the VCs retain their cash flow rights, but relinquish most of their control and liquidation rights.
The entrepreneur’s cashflow rights also increase with firm performance. (5) It is common for VCs to
include non-compete and vesting provisions aimed at mitigating the potential hold-up problem between the
entrepreneur and the investor. We interpret our results in relation to existing financial contracting theories.
The contracts we observe are most consistent with the theoretical work of Aghion and Bolton (1992) and
Dewatripont and Tirole (1994). They also are consistent with screening theories.
Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Per Strömberg
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
per.stromberg@gsb.uchicago.edu

1.

Introduction.
There is a large academic literature in financial contracting theory. The papers in this

literature often begin with a situation in which an investor negotiates with an entrepreneur over
the financing of a project or company. These theoretical papers typically make a number of
different assumptions concerning the nature of these negotiations. These assumptions concern
observability of actions, contractibility of actions, the ability to renegotiate, and the nature of
information and uncertainty. Given the assumptions and the models, the papers then generate
predictions. For example, a key assumption in Hart and Moore (1998) is that firm output is
observable by outsiders, but not verifiable. As a result, it is not possible to write contracts on
output.
Despite the large volume of theory, relatively little empirical work exists that compares
the characteristics of real world financial contracts to their counterparts in financial contracting
theory.

In this paper, we attempt to inform theory by conducting a detailed study of actual

contracts between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs. Venture capitalists (VCs) are real world
entities who most closely approximate the investors of theory. VCs have strong incentives to
maximize value, but, at the same time, receive few or no private benefits of control. In
describing these contracts, we consider the appropriateness of different assumptions and
predictions in financial contracting theory.
In this paper, we study detailed information on 200 venture capital investments in 118
portfolio companies by fourteen venture capital firms.1 For each portfolio company investment,
the VC firm provided the contractual agreements governing each financing round in which the

1

We use the terms venture capital firm and venture capital partnership interchangeably.

2

firm participated. The VC firm also provided (if available) the company’s business plan, internal
analyses evaluating the investment, and information on subsequent performance.
We describe the contracts between the portfolio companies / entrepreneurs and the VCs
in great detail. We then consider how well these contracts are described by the assumptions and
predictions embodied in five different types of financial contracting theories. The theories
interpret financial contracts as the solution to conflicts of interest or agency problems between
investors and the entrepreneur.2 A conflict exists because the entrepreneur must transfer a
portion of the profits generated by the project back to external investors in return for their
financing. The entrepreneur will not take the optimal action because he does not get all the
monetary benefits from taking that action, while alternative actions give other benefits to the
entrepreneur. The different financial contracting theories assume different types of conflicts of
interest in choice of actions. These include: (1) not exerting the optimal amount of costly effort;
(2) taking actions that yield private benefits rather than monetary benefits; (3) spending
resources on perks or stealing; (4) holding up investors by threatening to leave the project.
The traditional principal-agency approach, pioneered by Holmstrom (1979), assumes that
the agent’s effort is unobservable to the principal. The optimal incentive contract ensures that
the agent puts in enough effort by making the agent’s compensation dependent on the outcome
of the signals. In the context of a financing problem, the signal is typically output or profits.
Harris and Raviv (1979) show that with a risk-neutral principal and agent, and no wealth
constraints, the optimal financing contract is to give a fixed payment to the investor and make
the manager the residual claimant. These theories stress the importance of providing monetary
incentives or cash flow rights to the entrepreneur. Ownership is relevant only as it affects pure
cash-flow rights.

3

The control theories change the assumptions in the traditional principal-agent models by
assuming that actions are indeed observable, but not verifiable. Output and monetary benefits
are contractible. As a result, control rights that determine who chooses which action to take will
be important. The control theories build on the incomplete contracting literature, pioneered by
Grossman and Hart (1986). Two important papers that take this approach to security design are
Aghion and Bolton (1992) and Dewatripont and Tirole (1994).
In Aghion and Bolton (1992), the project yields both monetary benefits, i.e. profits, that
are verifiable and can be transferred to outside investors, and private benefits or actions that are
non-verifiable and only go to the entrepreneur. The magnitude of these benefits, in turn, depends
on what (non-verifiable) action that is taken with respect to the project. This introduces a
conflict of interest. Aghion and Bolton show that it is optimal to give the investor control in the
worst states of the world where profits are likely to be low. Aghion and Bolton (1992) point out
that a debt contract that transfers control to investors in default states has this feature.
Dewatripont and Tirole (1994) build on Aghion and Bolton (1992) by focusing on the
optimal correlation between control rights and cash flow rights. They show that the party in
control should look more and more like a debtholder (because debtholders prefer less risk) when
things get worse, while more control should be transferred to the entrepreneur or to an
equityholder (because equityholders prefer more risk) as performance improves.
A different set of control theories that we call “stealing theories” make the assumption
that which cash flows are either not observable or not verifiable. These papers include Hart and
Moore (1998), Gale and Hellwig (1982), Bolton and Scharfstein (1990), and Fluck (1998). The
optimal financial claim in these models is a debt-like claim in which (1) the entrepreneur
promises a fixed payment to the investor; and (2) the investor takes control of the project and
2

Extensive theoretical overviews can be found in Allen and Winton (1995) and in Harris and Raviv (1992).
4

liquidates the assets if the payment is not made. Liquidation rights, therefore, are crucial in these
models.
A fourth set of theories, beginning with Hart and Moore (1994), relax the stealing
assumption and develop a model that has an intuition similar to those of the stealing theories.
Hart and Moore (1994) focus on the inalienability of human capital. They assume that (1) the
firm’s value with the entrepreneur exceeds its liquidation value and (2) the entrepreneur /
manager cannot commit not to leave firm. Because the firm is worth less without him, the
entrepreneur can threaten to leave the firm unless any promised payment is negotiated down
closer to the liquidation value. The optimal contract calls for a debt security, where control is
transferred to the investor if the promised payment is not fulfilled, in which case the firm is
liquidated. The size of the promised debt payment is limited by the liquidation value of the assets
and by the relative bargaining power of the investor.
Whereas the models described above analyze general financial contracts, a number of
other papers focus specifically on venture capital contracts. These include Admati and Pfliederer
(1994), Berglof (1994), Cornelli and Yosha (1998), Garmaise (1998), Hellman (1998), and
Repullo and Suarez (1999). Most of these theories try to explain the use of convertible securities
in venture capital financings (based on the results in Sahlman (1990)).
The models described above are largely agency / moral hazard models. Lazear (1986)
shows that in a traditional principal-agent framework, contracts also can be used as a screening
device if the ability of the entrepreneur / manager is uncertain. By setting the agent’s
compensation as increasing function of performance, the venture capitalist discourages less able
agents from accepting the contract.

5

We obtain the following findings. First, a key feature of VC financings is that they allow
VCs to separately allocate cash flow rights, voting rights, board rights, liquidation rights, and
other control rights. We explicitly measure and report the allocation of these rights. We
believe our measurements are more comprehensive and substantially more detailed than those in
any previous work.
Second, while convertible securities are used most frequently, VCs also implement the
same set of rights using combinations of multiple classes of common stock and straight preferred
stock. We also note that VCs use a variant of convertible preferred called participating preferred
in roughly 40% of the financings. Participating preferred, under most circumstances, behaves
more like a position of straight preferred stock and common stock than a position of convertible
preferred.
Third, cash flow rights, voting rights, control rights, and future financings are frequently
contingent on observable measures of financial and non-financial performance. These state
contingencies are more common in first VC financings and early stage financings.
Fourth, these rights are allocated such that if the company performs poorly, the VCs
obtain full control. As company performance improves, the entrepreneur retains / obtains more
control rights. If the company performs very well, the VCs retain their cash flow rights, but
relinquish most of their control and liquidation rights.
Fifth, we find that it is common for VCs to include non-compete and vesting provisions
aimed at mitigating the potential hold-up problem between the entrepreneur and the investor.
Vesting provisions are more common in early stage financings where it is more likely that the
hold-up problem is more severe.

6

Finally, we find that cash flow incentives, control rights, and contingencies implemented
in these contracts are used more as complements than as substitutes.
Our results have the following implications:
First, cash flow rights matter in a way that is consistent with the principal-agent models.
Second, control rights matter, strongly suggesting that contracts are incomplete.
Third, cash flow rights and control rights can be separated and made contingent on
observable and verifiable measures of performance. This is most supportive of theories that
predict shifts of control to investors in bad states – Aghion and Bolton (1992) and Dewatripont
and Tirole (1994).
Finally, we think our results suggest fruitful avenues for future theoretical research. In
particular, our results indicate that the allocations of cash flow, control and liquidation rights
shift gradually with performance and are interrelated. In many theoretical models, these rights
are all-or-nothing and are not interrelated.
In comparing financial contracting theories to real world contracts, we believe this paper
breaks new ground. In describing venture capital contracts, our paper extends previous work by
Sahlman (1990), Gompers (1998), and Black and Gilson (1998).
Sahlman (1990) describes the basic deal structures used in venture capital investments
and the economic rationales for them. His is the first detailed discussion of these issues that we
are aware of. We extend Sahlman (1990) in several ways. First, Sahlman bases his analysis on
forty stock-purchase agreements from a broad range of VCs. His analysis, however, is almost
entirely qualitative. He does not present any systematic description and analysis of those
agreements. Second, Sahlman focuses on the typical set of terms and does not report or analyze
the broad range of terms and contingencies. This is particularly important for considering the

7

appropriateness of the assumptions and predictions of the theories that distinguish between cash
flow rights, control rights, and liquidation rights.3
The data and approach in this paper are perhaps most closely related to those in Gompers
(1998). His paper is similar to ours in that he describes aspects of venture capital contracts. He
also concludes that the covenants in the contracts allocate control rights independently of cash
flow rights. Our paper differs, however, in a number of respects. First, Gompers’had access to
only a subset of the contracts and information that we have analyzed. He does not analyze data
on ownership (cash flow rights), voting rights, liquidation rights, or descriptions of the
underlying businesses (from the business plans). Second, Gompers selected his sample to
consist entirely of investments in convertible preferred stock, therefore, eliminating some of the
important variation that we find.
Black and Gilson (1998) consider explanations for the greater vitality of the venture
capital market in stock market- versus bank-centered capital markets. In so doing, they describe
different aspects of venture capital contracts. They make the argument, which we confirm as
important, that automatic conversion provisions provide important non-monetary incentives to
entrepreneurs because they transfer control from the VC to the entrepreneur if the entrepreneur
performs well. Like Sahlman (1990), however, they do not present any systematic evidence on
the contracts themselves.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our sample. Section 3 describes the
venture capital contracts. Section 4 describes the assumptions and predictions of a number of
prominent financial contracting theories and discusses our results in relation to them. Section 5

3

Because much of the new financial contracting theory had yet to be written, it is not surprising that Sahlman
(1990) did not address these issues.

8

presents some cross-sectional results that further describe the contracts and attempt to distinguish
among theories. Section 6 summarizes and discusses our results.

2.

Sample
We analyze 200 VC investments in 118 portfolio companies by fourteen venture capital

partnerships.

2.1

Description

To obtain this sample, we asked each VC to provide detailed information on as many of
their portfolio company investments as they were willing to provide. For each of these
companies, we asked the VC to provide the term sheet as well as the stock purchase and security
purchase agreements for each financing round in which they participated. These documents
typically include the financing terms, the firm’s equity ownership – investors, founders,
management, etc. – and any contingencies to future financing. We also asked the VC to provide
(if available) the portfolio company’s business plan at the time of the financing, the VC’s
internal analysis of the investment, and the subsequent portfolio company financial performance.
Finally, we also requested that the VC provide the private placement memoranda / offering
documents for the funds that they have managed over the sample period.
Table 1 presents summary information for our sample. As mentioned above, panel A
indicates that we have 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by fourteen VC firms.
Seventy-three of these investments are pre-revenue (which we will refer to as early stage)
rounds. I.e., the firms receiving financing either did not have revenues or were not yet operating.
The remaining investments are later stage rounds in which the firms had revenues and were

9

already operating. We have contractual documents for all 200 investments; some internal VC
description of the investment for ninety-three investments; and business plans for ninety-three
investments. As a result, we do not have complete information for all 200 investments. The
sample sizes in our results will vary according to the availability of the relevant information.
Panel B shows that 159 of the financing rounds were completed between 1996 and 1999.
We view the young age of the sample as positive for two reasons. First, our findings will reflect
current practice in venture capital financing. Second, it is unlikely that the VCs selected many of
these the companies based on the final outcome because the final outcome of most of the
investments was unresolved when the VCs provided the companies to us.
Panel C shows that the portfolio companies were provided by fourteen venture capital
firms with no more than twenty-two companies from any one VC.
Panel D indicates the amounts of the sample financings. The VCs committed a median of
$4.8 million in equity in each financing round. (This amount is the total for all VCs investing in
the round.) The VCs actually disbursed a median $3.8 million at the time the round closed.
Panel E presents the geographical distribution of the portfolio companies in our sample.
The distribution is fairly uniform across California (29%), the Midwest (20%), the Northeast
(26%), and elsewhere. Relative to the venture capital industry as a whole, this represents a slight
undersampling of California firms and an oversampling of Midwest firms. According to Venture
Economics4, 41% of overall VC investments were in California firms and only 14% in Midwest
firms.
Panel F presents the industry distribution of the portfolio companies in our sample.
Consistent with the venture capital industry, the greatest percentage of companies, 36%, are in

4

Venture Economics maintains an extensive database on venture capital investments in portfolio companies. These
figures are for the period between 1996 and 1999.

10

the information technology and software industries. An additional 13% are in
telecommunications. Both of these industries include a number of internet related investments.
This concentration is roughly consistent with the industry distributions reported in Venture
Economics.
Before we present our results, it is worth pointing out that while we have a great deal of
data, we do not have complete data on every financing round. As a result, the number of
observations will vary from analysis to analysis.

2.2

Sample selection issues

In this section, we discuss potential selection issues concerning our sample. Our sample
of portfolio companies and financings is not a random sample in that we obtained the data from
fourteen venture capital firms with whom we have a relationship.
We do not believe that this selection is of much concern to our results because we are not
attempting to measure performance. Rather, we are attempting to characterize what contracts
look like in general and, perhaps more importantly, what contracts are possible.
It is worth emphasizing that the contracts represent financings by more than the fourteen
VC firms that provided data. The 118 companies in our current sample received VC financing
from over 90 additional VC firms either in the financing round in our sample or in other
financing rounds. A total of over 100 different VC firms, therefore, invested under the terms of
the contracts in our sample. This suggests that the financings in our sample are likely to be
representative of VC contracts in general.
The more likely bias in our sample is that we have selected VC firms that are better than
average and that the contracts in our sample may be above average in some sense. If this is so,

11

we believe this strengthens our results because we are more likely to have identified
sophisticated, value maximizing principals.

3.

Results
In this section, we describe the contracts between the portfolio companies / entrepreneurs

and the VCs in great detail. We first describe the securities issued. We then describe how these
contracts allocate cash-flow rights, voting rights, board rights, and liquidation rights. Last, we
consider in more detail the contingencies involved in allocating those rights.
In the analysis, we distinguish between early stage financings and later stage financings.
We consider a financing to be early stage if the company is pre-revenue – does not have any
revenue – at the time of the financing. Later stage or post-revenue rounds are financing rounds
that are completed when the company has revenue. This distinction is an interesting one because
uncertainty about viability, inalienability, and verifiability of the company should be greater in
early stage than in later stage rounds. This will be important in distinguishing among financial
contracting theories. In our sample, 77 of the 194 rounds we can classify are pre-revenue.
We also distinguish whether a round is the first one in which the company utilizes VC
funding. This distinction is an interesting one because asymmetric information between the VC
and the founders should be greater in the first VC round than in subsequent rounds. Again, this
will be important in distinguishing among financial contracting theories. In our sample, 88 of
the 200 rounds represent the first round in which a venture capitalist invested.

12

3.1

Securities

Panel G of table 1 reports the types of securities used in the 200 financing rounds.
Consistent with Sahlman (1990) and Gompers (1998), convertible preferred stock is the most
commonly used security, appearing in 189 of 200 financing rounds. Panel G also indicates,
however, that VC financings (1) do not always use convertible preferred stock; and (2)
frequently include securities in addition to convertible preferred stock. Seven of the 200
financing rounds do not use any form of convertible security. Instead, they use multiple classes
of common stock or a combination of straight preferred and common stock.
Panel G also reports that in 72 of the financings, the VCs use a variant of convertible
preferred called participating preferred. Upon the liquidation or exit of a participating
convertible preferred, investors receive both the principal amount of the preferred – as they
would in an investment of straight preferred – and they receive common stock. As a result,
participating convertible preferred is better categorized as a position of straight preferred stock
and common stock. than as a position of convertible preferred.5 In some instances, the
participating preferred does not receive a return of principal if the company return is sufficiently
high.
While the VC financings utilize different types of securities, the financings are similar in
that they allow for different allocations of cash flow, voting, board, and liquidation rights. For
example, in the financings that use multiple classes of common stock, the VCs receive a different
class of common stock than the founders who receive two or more classes of common stock.
The VC class of common stock has voting, board, and liquidation rights that are different from
those of the founders’classes of common stock. The cash flow rights of the classes of common

5

Gompers (1998) describes participation provisions and refers to them as superpriority provisions.

13

stock also differ in that the founders’stock classes vest under different conditions than the VC
class (which vests immediately). Hence our focus is on the allocation of different rights rather
than on the use of a particular security.

3.2

Cash flow rights

Table 2 presents our results on cash flow rights. By cash flow rights, we mean the
fraction of a portfolio company’s equity value that different investors and management have a
claim to. Measuring cash flow rights is not trivial, however, because many of the cash flow
rights accorded to founders and management are contingent either on subsequent performance
(through performance vesting) or on remaining with the company (through time vesting).
Table 2, therefore, present three measures of cash flow rights. The first – minimum VC
ownership – measures cash flow rights under the assumption that management meets all
performance and time vesting milestones or contingencies. The second – maximum founders
and employees vesting – measures cash flow rights under the assumption that all nonperformance / time-vesting stock and options vest. The third – maximum VC ownership –
measures cash flow rights if management does not meet any performance or time vesting
milestones. Under each of the three measures, VC%, founders% and other% are, respectively,
the percentage of cash flow rights owned by the venture capitalists, the founders, and others.
Founders include the founding management team. Others include employees and previous nonVC investors.
The ownership numbers are imperfect because we do not always have complete
information on the vesting terms for issued options. When we do not have such information, we

14

assume that the issued options are vested. This means that our results surely understate the true
extent of state contingent cash flow rights.
Panel A indicates that the VC controls roughly half the cash flow rights on average;
founders roughly 30%; and others, roughly 20%. These suggest that substantial equity
ownership on the part of founders / managers is desirable. On the other hand, it also indicates
that founders / managers give up a large fraction of ownership.
Table 2 also indicates that there are meaningful state-contingencies built into the cash
flow rights. The VC stake is a median of 3.5% lower (average of 8.1%) lower under full vesting
and good performance compared to the minimum vesting, bad performance state. For earlystage companies, the average and median are 11.9% and 6.1%, respectively. The statecontingency (i.e. the use of performance benchmarks and vesting) is significantly higher (at the
1% level) in earlier stage, pre-revenue financings compared to later stage, post-revenue ones.
State-contingencies are also greater in first VC rounds compared to subsequent ones.

3.3

Voting rights

Table 3 reports post-round voting rights. Voting rights measure the percentage of votes
that investors and management have to effect corporate decisions. Most decisions are based on
majority rule. As such, voting rights provide one measure of control rights. Board rights,
described in the next section, provide another.
In table 3, minimum (maximum) VC votes represents the minimum (maximum) votes the
venture capitalists control based on subsequent management performance and stock vesting
milestones or contingencies. % VC, % Founder, and % Neither control are, respectively, the
percentage of instances in which voting control is held by the venture capitalists, the founders, or

15

neither. Switch in control indicates the percentage of instances in which voting control can
switch based on subsequent performance.
Table 3 indicates that VCs have a voting majority in 56% of all financings in the
minimum contingency case. Panel B shows that VCs control a majority of votes in 66% of the
early stage financings (in the minimum contingency case) versus 49% for later stage financings.
Panel C indicates that VCs control a majority of the votes in 44% of first VC rounds and 65% of
subsequent VC rounds. In the maximum VC vote contingency cases, VCs control a voting
majority in 71% of the financings with greater percentages in the early stage rounds.
Importantly, our results indicate that state-contingent control rights (i.e. not only in case
of default on a debt payment) exist. In 17.5% of the financings, we see voting control switching
depending on state-contingencies. This state-contingency result as well as those that follow are
important in light of several of the financial contracting theories we describe in section 4. Statecontingent voting control is more likely in early stage rounds and first VC rounds.

3.4

Board rights

Board rights and board seats also have an effect on the rights to control corporate
decisions. While they tend to be related to voting rights, they need not be identical. We
distinguish between normal board rights that reflect the board rights or composition at the
completion of the financing from adverse state board rights that reflect board rights or
composition if the portfolio company performs poorly or reaches an adverse state.
We distinguish between three kinds of board members – VCs, founders, and outsiders.
VC seats are board seats that are reserved for or controlled by venture capitalists. Founder seats
are board seats that are reserved for or controlled by the founders / entrepreneurs. Outsider seats

16

are board seats that are to be filled by individuals mutually agreed upon by the VCs and the
founders / entrepreneurs.
Table 4 reports the board results. The boards have an average of 6.1 members and a
median of 6 members. These boards are appreciably smaller than those of public companies.6
Overall, the VC has the majority of the board seats in 26% of the cases, the founders in 12% of
the cases, and neither in 62% of the cases. Interestingly, the VCs are less likely to have board
control than they are to have voting control. VC board control is less common for early-stage
financings compared to later stage. State-contingent board provisions (i.e. the VC gets full
control of the board in the bad state) are present in 15% of the cases. This provides another
important example of state-contingent control rights.
VC board control does not tend to differ much across early versus later stage rounds. VC
board control does tend to increase, however, with subsequent VC rounds. This is not surprising
given that new VCs often invest in each round and request a board seat as a condition of the
investment.

3.5

Liquidation rights

Much of the theoretical security design literature stresses the importance of liquidation
rights. In these models, an investor’s ability to liquidate, or threaten to liquidate, the firm’s
assets if the firm defaults is the main way for an investor to ensure repayment. In this subsection
and in table 5, we describe the liquidation rights in VC financings.

6

For example, see Yermack (1998) or Gertner and Kaplan (1996).

17

First, it is clear that VCs have claims that in liquidation are senior to the common stock
claims of the founders. This is true in all but one of the sample financings. In that financing, the
VC firm bought common stock.
Second, the claims of the VCs in liquidation are typically at least as large as the original
investments. Panel A of table 5 indicates that this is true in 98% of the financings.
Even though most of the financings give liquidation claims to the venture capitalists,
there are some cross-sectional differences in how strong these are for different deals. One
common way of making the liquidation rights stronger is by giving the investor cumulative
preferred dividends. Even though these are dividends, and strictly speaking do not have to be
paid out, they will accumulate and be added to the liquidation claim. Cumulative preferred
dividends are present in 46% of our financings.
Optional redemption and put provisions also are commonly used to strengthen the
liquidation rights of the venture capitalist's investment. These provisions give the venture
capitalist the right after some period time to demand that the firm redeems the venture capitalists
claim, typically at liquidation value (or occasionally, at the maximum of the liquidation value
and "fair market value"). This is very similar to the right to repayment of principal at the
maturity of a debt claim. Without this provision, the liquidation right loses much of its bite
because there are no other contracted payments to the venture capitalist that the firm could
default on. Panel C indicates that optional redemption or put provisions are present in 84% of
our financings. The maturity of these provisions is typically five years.

18

3.6

Contingencies

As mentioned earlier, different theories make different assumptions concerning what it is
and is not possible to write contracts on. For example, it is common among some financial
contracting theorists – e.g., Hart and Moore (1998) – to assume that the entrepreneur and outside
investors can observe firm output, but they cannot write contracts on that output because output
cannot be verified in court.
In this section, we report the extent to which contracts between venture capitalists and
entrepreneurs are written contingent on subsequent output, performance, or actions. We also
detail the types of output that such contracts are written on.
Table 6 reports specific examples of contingencies in the VC financings in our sample.
Panel A shows that 41 of the financing rounds (roughly 20%) include provisions that are
contingent on subsequent financial performance. In one financing round, the VCs contractually
obtain voting control from the entrepreneur if the firm’s EBIT -- earnings before interest and
taxes -- falls below a mutually agreed upon amount. In another financing round, VCs obtain
board control if a firm’s net worth falls below a threshold. Net worth, in this instance, is a
measure of a company’s cumulative cash flow. These examples indicate that VCs are able to
write (and presumably enforce) contracts in which control rights are contingent on subsequent
output quite independently of cash flow rights.
Panel B shows that 25 of the financing rounds (12.5%) include contingencies based on
subsequent non-financial performance. In one instance, share vesting is contingent on product
functionality or performance. In several others, vesting is contingent on FDA or patent
approvals. The disbursal of committed funding also can be contingent on non-financial

19

performance. For example, one financing was contingent on successfully completing clinical
tests.
Panel C reports that 28 of the financing rounds (14%) include contingencies based on
certain actions being taken. For example, in different rounds, the disbursal of committed funding
is contingent on hiring new executives, developing new facilities, and completing a new business
plan. Presumably, these actions are both observable and verifiable.
Finally, panel D indicates that contingencies based on the sale of securities are included
in almost ten percent of the financings. In particular, ownership and vesting are commonly
linked to a subsequent initial public offering or sale of the company.
Overall, table 6 generates two strong results. First, investors (VCs) commonly write (and
presumably enforce) contracts in which control rights are contingent on subsequent measures of
financial and non-financial performance or output. Second, there is a great deal of variation in
the contingencies in these contracts. The contingencies appear to be related to the performance
measure that is most important to the investors and the company.
Table 7 quantifies the qualitative information on contingencies in table 6. Panel A
indicates that contingencies based on subsequent financial or non-financial performance, actions,
or sales of securities are used in 36.5 percent of the financings.
Table 7 also indicates that 15% of the sample financings themselves are partially
contingent on the attainment of some milestone. In these financings, the VCs provide only a
portion of the total funding commitment at the closing or signing of the financing. Additional
funding is provided contingent on subsequent performance and actions. In two financings, the
VC provided only 5% of its total commitment at closing with the rest being contingent. This was

20

more common in early stage than in later stage financings and more common in first VC rounds
than in subsequent rounds.

3.7

Other terms

VC financings include a number of additional terms and conditions. Bartlett (1995) and
Levin (1998) detail many of these. In this section, we describe several of the terms and
conditions that we believe are relevant to the financial contracting theories.

3.7.1 Automatic conversion
It is common for securities in venture capital financings to include automatic conversion
provisions. Under these provisions, the security held by the venture capitalists – convertible
preferred stock, convertible debt, or a class of common stock – automatically converts into
common stock under certain conditions. These conditions generally, although not exclusively,
relate to an initial public offering (IPO) and require the IPO to exceed a designated common
stock price, dollar amount of proceeds, and / or market capitalization for the company.
As Black and Gilson (1998) are the first to argue, the effect of these provisions is to
require the venture capitalists to give up the superior control, voting, board, and liquidation
rights associated with their securities if the portfolio company attains a desired level of
performance.7 Upon superior performance, the VCs retain only those rights associated with
their ownership of common stock. If the company does not deliver that performance, the VCs
retain their superior control rights. This provides the entrepreneur an incentive to increase the
value of the firm over and above the monetary incentive.

7

Gompers (1998) also discusses the automatic conversion provision.

21

Panel A of table 8 indicates that an automatic conversion provision was present in almost
94% of the financing rounds. Panel A also shows that the financings in rounds that included an
automatic conversion provision required that the company complete an IPO at an IPO stock price
a median 3.0 times greater than the stock price of the financing round. The ratio is significantly
higher in early stage rounds – 4.0 times – than in later stage rounds – 2.7 times.
It is worth noting that at the median ratio of 3.0 times, the VCs are not willing to give up
any control unless they triple their money. Over a four-year horizon, this works out to a return of
31% per year.

3.7.2 Antidilution protection
Venture capital financings also frequently include antidilution protection which protects
the venture capitalist against future financing rounds at a lower valuation than the valuation of
the current protected round. In the extreme case, known as full ratchet antidilution protection,
the protected security obtains a claim to enough additional common shares to effectively reduce
the price of the protected issue to that of the new issue. In a convertible issue, this is
accomplished by decreasing the conversion price on the protected issue to the same conversion
price or common stock price of the new issue. The other common type of antidilution protection
is the weighted average ratchet. Under a weighted average ratchet, the reduction in the
conversion price (or common stock price) of the protected issue is a function of the number of
shares issued and the conversion price of the new issue.
Panel B of table 8 indicates that the financings in almost 95% of the rounds receive
antidilution protection. Almost 76% of the financings utilize the weighted average method rather
than the full ratchet method.

22

3.7.3 Vesting and non-compete clauses
The inalienability of human capital theories of Hart and Moore (1994) assume that the
entrepreneur cannot contractually commit to stay with the firm. Even though it is not possible to
write enforceable contracts that force the entrepreneur to stay with a firm, there are contractual
provisions that make it more costly for the entrepreneur to leave. In real-world contracts, two
methods are commonly used to make it costly for the entrepreneur to leave the firm.
First, the entrepreneur’s shares can vest over time. This means that the company receives
or can buy back any unvested shares for some low value if the entrepreneur leaves. The earlier
the entrepreneur leaves, the more shares are still unvested. Second, the VCs can require the
entrepreneur to sign a non-compete contract with the firm that prohibits him from working for
another firm in the same industry for some period of time in case he leaves. Both of these
provisions improve the bargaining power of the VCs if the entrepreneur tries to hold up the VC.
Table 8 shows that the VC financings in our sample commonly utilize both founder
vesting and non-compete clauses. Founder vesting is used in almost 42% of financing rounds.
Such vesting is significantly more frequently in early stage financings than in later stage ones
with vesting present in almost 55% of pre-revenue financings, but in only 33% of post-revenue
financings. Non-compete clauses are used in approximately 70% of the portfolio companies.

3.8

Evolution of Contracts over Time and Rounds

The analyses in the previous sections assume in some sense that each financing round is
independent. This is, of course, not the case. Accordingly, in table 9, we report cash flow rights,
voting rights, board rights, liquidation rights, and other terms as a function of the financing

23

round. We distinguish between first round financings in which future financing is contingent on
performance (ex ante staging) and those that are not.
Table 9 indicates that founders’cash flow, voting, and board rights decline over
financing rounds while VC rights increase.8 The most notable pattern involves voting rights.
Founders relinquish voting control by the second VC round in all but 11.5% of the financing
rounds. Analogously, the VCs obtain explicit voting control in over 60% of the second VC
rounds.
The increase in VC cash flow and control rights over financing rounds is consistent with
the VC demanding more and more equity and control as compensation for providing additional
funds to the venture. Interestingly, the allocation of cash-flow and voting rights in the ex-ante
staging contracts are very similar to later stage rounds, although the allocations are more
sensitive to performance.

3.9

Summary

We make several general observations concerning the descriptive results in this section..
First, VC financings allow VCs to separately allocate cash flow rights, voting rights,
board rights, liquidation rights, and other control rights.
Second, while VCs use convertible securities most frequently, they also implement the
same allocation of rights using combinations of multiple classes of common stock and straight
preferred stock. Furthermore, participating convertible preferred is used frequently. This is
significant because participating preferred is the equivalent of a position of preferred stock and
common stock rather than a position of convertible preferred.

8

We do not report liquidation rights because they remain roughly constant across rounds.

24

Third, we find that cash flow rights, voting rights, control rights, and future financings
are frequently contingent on observable measures of financial and non-financial performance.
These state contingent rights are more common in first VC and early stage financings.
Fourth, rights are allocated such that if the company performs poorly, the VCs obtain full
control. As company performance improves, the entrepreneur retains / obtains more cash flow
rights and control rights. If the company performs very well, the VCs relinquish most of their
control and liquidation rights. This occurs when the VC’s investment automatically converts
into common stock.
Fifth, we find that it is common for VCs to include non-compete and vesting provisions
aimed at mitigating the potential hold-up problem between the entrepreneur and the investor. The
vesting provisions are more common in early stage financings where it is more likely that the
hold-up problem is more severe.
Finally, there is a tendency for VCs to use greater state-contingencies in early stage
financings and in first venture capital financings.

4.

Relation of Results to Financial Contracting Theories

In this section, we interpret our results in relation to the financial contracting theories described
in the introduction. We do so by examining the extent to which the contract provisions we have
examined are consistent with the assumptions and predictions of the theories.

4.1

The "traditional" principal agent problem

The traditional principal-agent models assume that actions or efforts of the entrepreneur
are unobservable. However, signals – i.e., firm performance – are correlated with those actions

25

or efforts. These signals can be contracted on. The division of cash-flow rights is designed to
affect the pay-performance sensitivity of the entrepreneur. In general (in the absence of riskaversion), the investor will want to maximize this pay-performance sensitivity, which can be
achieved by giving the entrepreneur a substantial part of the firm’s equity. Moreover, it is in the
investor’s interest to make the entrepreneur’s compensation contingent on as many verifiable
signals correlated with effort as possible. Also, the larger the incentive conflict between the
investor and entrepreneur, the higher the pay-performance sensitivity should be.
Our results are clearly consistent with the theoretical assumptions in that cash flow rights
are contingent on a number of performance-based results, both financial and non-financial. On
the other hand, we do find that some actions or efforts are observable and are contracted on.
Our results also are consistent with some of the predictions. In all our financings, the
entrepreneur gets a substantial fraction of equity in the firm. Furthermore, the entrepreneur’s
equity stake increases with firm performance. This sensitivity is greater in early stage firms
where observability problems presumably are the largest. Moreover, the contracts often
condition the entrepreneur’s equity compensation on a multitude of signals, both financial and
non-financial.
It is clear, however, that the traditional principal agent models do not completely explain
the contracts we observe because the principal agent models make no predictions about the
allocation of control rights. In the contracts we study, control rights are important and separate
from cash flow rights.

26

4.2

"Control theories": cash-flow verifiable but not actions

The control theories make assumptions and predictions concerning cash flow rights that
are consistent with those made in traditional principal agent models. Higher pay-performance
sensitivity increases the weight entrepreneurs put on monetary benefits rather than private
benefits.
At the same time, control rights are central to the theories of Aghion and Bolton (1992)
and Dewatripont and Tirole (1994). Because giving up control rights is costly for the
entrepreneur in terms of private benefits, the entrepreneur will try to avoid doing so as much as
possible. As the external financing capacity of the project increases (e.g. the later the stage, the
higher the verifiable monetary benefits, etc.), these theories predict a movement from more
investor control to more entrepreneur control. Moreover, if the entrepreneur has to give up
control rights, he will do so first in the states where control rights are most valuable to the
investor. Finally, to the extent that actions are contractible, the entrepreneur will find it useful to
precommit to take certain actions.
The extensive use and contracting on control rights in our sample is broadly consistent
with the assumptions and predictions of these theories. Allocating state-contingent voting and
board control rights is a common feature in these contracts. This state-contingent contracting is
much more elaborate than the control rights inherent in ordinary debt contracts that only give
liquidation rights in case of default on a promised payment. As shown in Table 6, control can be
made contingent on financial performance relative to projections or cumulative cash-flow, or on
non-financial events such as the termination of the manager, quite independently of the division
of cash-flow rights.

27

Hence, our results provide empirical support to the incomplete contracting approach
pioneered by Grossman and Hart (1986). The control theories, however, do not fully explain VC
financings. In particular, the shift of control in these theories is all-or-nothing and is determined
by whether performance does or does not exceed a certain level. In practice, control shifts along
a number of dimensions –voting rights, board rights, liquidation rights, redemption rights, etc. –
and shifts at different levels of performance. 9 At extreme poor performance, VCs get liquidation
rights in default. For “normal” performance, VCs and the entrepreneur share voting rights and
board rights, although they shift toward the entrepreneur as performance goals are met. Finally,
for extremely good performance, the VC relinquishes all special control rights (generally through
automatic conversion at an IPO).

4.3

“Stealing theories”: cash flows neither observable nor verifiable

The “stealing” theories of Hart and Moore (1998), Gale and Hellwig (1982), and others
are less successful in our data. First, these theories do not explain the division of residual cashflow rights in VC financings. Because they assume the entrepreneur can expropriate all the
residual cash-flow of the firm, these models implicitly assume that the entrepreneur owns all the
equity. Second, these models assume that it is not possible to write contracts on profits or other
measures of financial performance is assumed impossible in these models. Third, the only
control rights that matter in these theories are liquidation rights.
In all our financings, investors accept claims with equity features -- such as convertibles,
warrants or common stock – that promise residual cash-flow rights in the future. More
importantly, contracts are frequently written contingent on both financial and non-financial

9

Dewatripont and Tirole (1994) come closest to capturing this in that control shifts to different parties as
performance changes.

28

measures of performance. Finally, in these theories, the only verifiable signal to contract on is
default on promised payments. While these theories are consistent with the use of ordinary debt
contracts, they do not explain the rich state-contingent contracting that we find in venture capital
contracts.
In the models of outside equity financing in Myers (forthcoming) and Fluck (1998), the
liquidation right is replaced by the right to fire management, which will occur if dividends are
too low. Here it is essential, then, that outside equity investors have this right, which in turn
implies that they need to hold a majority of the votes. Moreover, in these models, the firm has to
pay out dividends. Both of these assumptions are frequently violated in our venture capital
financings. For a significant fraction of our observations, 43% of our cases, the venture capitalist
lacks voting control. Moreover, very few of our firms are required to pay cash dividends.
Hence, these theories do not seem to be able to explain the structure of our venture capital
financings.
There is, however, an important sense in which the “stealing theories” are successful.
Our results indicate that liquidation rights are allocated to VCs. If the company is liquidated, the
liquidation proceeds go to the VCs ahead of the entrepreneur. Furthermore, the VCs do have
some power to liquidate through redemption rights, explicitly through ex ante staging and,
implicitly through the ability to not fund a subsequent round.

4.4

Inalienability of human capital

The inalienability of human capital theories of Hart and Moore (1994) assume that the
entrepreneur cannot contractually commit to stay with the firm. Because the firm is worth more

29

with the entrepreneur than without him, this leads to a hold-up problem where the entrepreneur
will threaten to leave the venture unless the investor’s claim is written down.
Our results suggest that this is an important issue. Venture capitalists frequently use
contractual remedies, such as non-compete clauses and time vesting of founder shares to make it
more costly for the entrepreneur / manager to leave.10 Both of these provisions improve the
bargaining power of the VCs versus the entrepreneur in any subsequent renegotiation because
the entrepreneur has relatively more to lose.
Furthermore, vesting provisions also are more common in early stage firms. These
provisions explicitly make it more costly for the entrepreneur the earlier he leaves. This is
consistent with Hart and Moore (1994) if the entrepreneur is more crucial for the firm’s
operations in the earlier stage. As time passes, and the firm becomes less and less dependent on
the specific skills of the original founder, more and more of the founder’s shares vest. This
scheme also gives some protection to the entrepreneur from being completely held up by the
venture capitalist at the point when the entrepreneur is no longer needed to run the business.

4.5

Venture Capital-Specific Theories

The venture capital-specific theories are arguably less successful overall in explaining
our results. Among these theories, the predictions in Hellman (1998) are the most consistent
with our results.
Berglof (1994) predicts that control rights will be allocated based on firm performance.
At the same time, however, he also predicts that cash flow rights will not be allocated based on

10

The vesting provisions also provide an incentive for the entrepreneur to exert effort and succeed. It is very costly
to the entrepreneur if he is fired by the VC before his shares have vested.

30

firm performance and that the entrepreneur receives private benefits not cash flow rights. These
latter two predictions are clearly at odds with the data.
Similarly, the key prediction in Cornelli and Yosha (1998) that the cash flow rights
allocated to VCs upon conversion increase with the signal of firm performance is contradicted by
our data. In our data, VC cash flow rights (as a fraction of all rights) decline with firm
performance.
The assumptions and predictions in Repullo and Suarez (1998) meet with mixed success
in our data. Repullo and Suarez correctly predict that entrepreneurs and venture capitalists will
both have equity ownership and, therefore, share the cash flow rights of the company. They also
predict a contract that looks somewhat like convertible preferred for start-up financings.
However, they predict that later stage financings will be done with all common stock. Our
results indicate that financings at all stages – early and later – utilize convertible preferred stock
or multiple classes of common stock. We also question their assumption that the VCs primarily
add value in the expansion stage rather than the start-up stage.
Garmaise (1998) develops a model in which venture capitalists who have privately
observed signals about a project bid for the entrepreneur's venture using different contract
provisions. The optimal strategy for the venture capitalist involves offering to take a debt claim
when the private signal is low, and an equity claim when the private signal is high. Because we
do not observe VCs offering straight debt contracts or straight equity contracts, our results do not
appear consistent with Garmaise’s model.
In Hellman (1998), the optimal financing contract calls for: (1) giving the entrepreneur all
equity compensation to increase his effort and decrease his resistance towards replacement; and
(2) giving the venture capitalist control if the benefits from replacing the entrepreneur are high

31

enough. Although entrepreneurs do not receive all equity compensation, it is safe to say that the
larger part of their compensation comes from the upside associated with their equity stake.
Furthermore, it is common in our data for the VCs to have voting control at the close of the
financing. This is consistent with Hellman if the expected benefits of replacing the entrepreneur
are higher in early stage deals.
While Hellman (1998) is consistent with some of our findings, the model fails to capture
the contingent nature of control rights in our results. In Hellman (1998), control rights are set at
the beginning and do not shift as a function of performance.

4.6

Screening Models.

It also is apparent venture capital contracts perform important screening functions.
Lazear (1986) provides the most relevant theoretical treatment of these issues. Prendergast
(1999) also describes and summarizes these models. For example, those provisions that make
cash flow rights contingent on performance not only motivate entrepreneurs to provide effort, but
also discourage entrepreneurs with bad projects from accepting the contract.
Similarly, anti-dilution provisions also penalize entrepreneurs with bad projects or bad
skills because the current VC investment will be re-priced downward if a future financing is
completed at a lower price.
The use of participating convertible preferred compared to straight convertible preferred
also provides a screening function. Assume that a VC places a particular distribution of values
on an entrepreneur’s company. Assume next that the VC offers a convertible preferred contract
and a participating convertible preferred contract to the entrepreneur with the same expected
payout to the VC. Because the VC obtains a return of principal in the participating preferred

32

contract, the participating preferred will require a lower percentage ownership than the
convertible preferred for the same expected value to the VC. Now take the entrepreneur’s
perspective. All else equal, entrepreneurs who know or believe they will succeed will prefer the
participating preferred over the convertible preferred. Thus, participating preferred is potentially
useful in screening entrepreneurs who are better or more optimistic.

5.

Cross-sectional Tests and Relationships
In this section, we report the results of cross-sectional tests. We investigate how the

contracts vary as a function of different proxies for the severity of the agency problem between
the VC and the entrepreneur as well as for information differences between them. We then
interpret these results in relation to the predictions of the different theories.

5.1

Dependent variables

The potential conflicts of interest between the entrepreneur and the VC should depend on
the degree of uncertainty about the project's economic viability. This uncertainty should be
higher at the early stages of a project’s life, when the quality and value of the project are still
highly uncertain. To capture this, we use the "Pre-revenue venture" variable, taking the value of
one if the company had no revenues at the time of financing, and zero otherwise.
We expect this variable to be related to the agency problem for a number of reasons. At
the early stage in the project's life, the input of the entrepreneur is arguably more crucial to the
project's success. Hence, providing incentives to the entrepreneur to "work on the right things"
becomes crucial. Also, asymmetric information problems are also likely to be higher, in
particular regarding the viability of the business idea and the entrepreneur's skills. Similarly,

33

when the uncertainty about the project viability is higher, the VCs are more likely to find
themselves in the situation where they want to shut down the project or replace the management
team, leading to potential conflicts with the entrepreneur.
The VC may have prior information on the quality of the founders which reduces the
likelihood of adverse selection and the uncertainty of the venture. To measure this, we form a
dummy variable, "repeat entrepreneur", taking the value of one if the founders had previously
founded a company that was either taken public or was acquired by another public company
before the financing round, and zero otherwise. We use the company business plan and the VC
analysis to obtain this information. This variable may also capture the degree to which the
entrepreneur is financially constrained. It is likely that a previously successful entrepreneur will
have acquired some wealth that can be invested in the project, reducing the need for VC
financing.
The extent to which the VC needs to protect itself from agency problems, and the
required stake that the VC needs to be allocated to invest in the venture, will also in general
depend on the amount of funds the VC invests in the project. Including the dollar amount
invested by the VCs directly as a dependent variable would be problematic, however. First, it is
an endogenous variable, since the amount invested by the VC in a particular round potentially
will be lower when agency problems are more severe.11 Second, the financing amount should be
measured in relation to the total financing need of the project and the expected future cash flow
which are difficult to determine.
Instead, we try to capture this effect by including the financing round number, which is
correlated with the accumulated financing provided by the VC, but suffers less from endogeneity

11

Results in Gompers (1995) suggest that this is likely to be the case.

34

and normalization problems. One potential problem with this variable, however, is that it might
also capture the degree of uncertainty about the project in a similar way to "Pre-revenue
venture".
To control for possible effects of industry, geographical location, and the identity of the
particular VC firm, we also include dummy variables for these in some of our specifications.

5.2

Determinants of cash-flow right allocations

The allocation of cash-flow rights to the entrepreneur will affect the pay-performance
sensitivity of the entrepreneurs’claims. The classical principal agent theories predict that payperformance sensitivity should be higher when agency problems are more severe (i.e. when the
return to managerial effort is high, see e.g. Prendergast (1999)).
Table 10 examines the cross-sectional determinants of pay-performance sensitivity using
two different measures. The first measure is simply the share of equity allocated to the
entrepreneur. This measure is essentially the pay-performance measure introduced by Jensen and
Murphy (1990) and applied to venture-capital financed IPO firms by Baker and Gompers (1999).
The cross-sectional results in table 10 using this measure are quite weak. If anything, the results
go against the predictions of theory since the founders’equity stake is lower for pre-revenue
ventures and higher for successful entrepreneurs (even though the coefficients are not significant
in all specifications).
The problem with this as a measure of pay-performance sensitivity is that it is very much
related to the overall value of the venture relative to the amount of funding the VC is providing.
When uncertainty and agency problems are high, the VC will require more cash-flow rights in
return for the financing provided, driving down the founders’equity stake. The significantly

35

negative effect of the round of VC investment is consistent with this interpretation. For each
financing round, the VC puts more funds into the venture and requires a higher equity stake. This
suggests that the founder equity stake is not a useful measure of incentive provision for
entrepreneurial firms.
Even if the VC demands a large equity stake, it can still increase the pay-performance
sensitivity for the entrepreneur by making the allocation more state-contingent. This is addressed
by our second measure of pay-performance sensitivity, the difference in the founder equity stake
between the best and the worst case state. In the second set of regressions in table 10, the
founders’equity percentage is significantly more sensitive to performance for pre-revenue
ventures. In addition, the equity percentage of previously successful entrepreneurs is somewhat
less sensitive to performance, although the relationship is not statistically significant when
location, industry, and VC firm controls are included, or when we restrict the sample to first VC
financings.
Overall, these results support the prediction of the classical principal agent theories. They
also are consistent with a screening model (e.g. along the lines of Lazear (1986)) where payperformance sensitivity is used to screen out bad entrepreneurs, since more able entrepreneurs
will benefit more from state-contingent cash-flow allocations.

5.3

Determinants of control right allocations

The incomplete contracting theories of Aghion and Bolton (1992) and others focus on the
allocation of control between the investor and the entrepreneur. Aghion and Bolton (1992) show
that as the external financing capacity of the project increases (e.g. the later the stage, the higher
the verifiable monetary benefits, etc.), control moves from more investor control to more

36

entrepreneur control. In particular, for projects with high external financing capacity (i.e. small
agency problems or small required investment) the entrepreneur always should have control. As
external financing capacity decreases there should be state-contingent control. Finally, for
projects with low external financing capacity, the investor should always be allocated control.
Table 11 tests this prediction using two measures of control -- voting control and board
majority. Panel A estimates an ordered logit regression of voting control on our proxies for
agency problems. The dependent variable takes the value of zero if the entrepreneur always
controls a majority of the votes, one if the VC has voting control only in the worse state, and two
if the VC always has voting control.
Panel A of table 11 shows that the pre-revenue variable is significantly positively related
to VC control in all of the specifications. The repeat entrepreneur variable is negatively related
to VC control, significantly so in two of the regressions. Finally, the amount of VC funding, as
measured by the round of financing, is strongly positively related to VC control. These results
are generally consistent with the predictions in Aghion and Bolton (1992).
In panel B, we repeat the exercise using board rights as our measure of control. Here we
define the VC control variable as zero if the founders control a majority of the board seats, one if
neither the VC nor the founders have board control, and two if the VC controls the board. Here
the results are similar, but not as strong as for voting rights.12

12

We had to exclude industry and VC fixed effects because of collinearity problems. In particular, one VC firm
(with more than 10 deals) had no case where the VCs had board majority. Similarly, in one industry (retail) there
were no cases where the VCs had a board majority.

37

5.4

Determinants of liquidation rights and claims

Most of the financial contracting theories predict that the investor should have a senior
claim compared to the entrepreneur. The other important characteristic of liquidation rights is
the ability to liquidate the firm when performance is bad. According to the "Stealing Theories",
the investor's ability to liquidate when a contracted payment has not been met is critical to be
able to recoup the investment. Table 5 showed that the VC is almost always senior to the
entrepreneur in liquidation, while contracted payments are largely absent from the contracts, with
the exception of redemption rights.
Table 12 investigates the cross-sectional determinants of liquidation rights. Because
liquidation rights typically do not change over time, we restrict attention to the first financing
round available for each company only to avoid "double-counting" of observations.
First, redemption rights are unrelated to the pre-revenue variable, but are significantly
less likely to be present when the entrepreneur has previously founded a successful venture.
Second, cumulative preferred dividends are negatively related to the repeat entrepreneur variable
and insignificantly related to the pre-revenue dummy. 13 This provides some evidence that
redemption clauses and cumulative preferred dividends are used when the adverse selection
problem with respect to the entrepreneur is more severe.
Third, the presence of participating preferred stock cannot be explained by either of our
two proxies for agency problems. Both the pre-revenue and the repeat entrepreneur dummy are
generally insignificant.
To sum up, our results for liquidation rights are not incredibly strong. While the presence
of redemption rights and cumulative dividends does seems somewhat related to agency problems

13

The repeat entrepreneur dummy is significant in all specifications, except when location dummies are included.
On the other hand, the location dummies are not jointly significant.

38

as measured by the repeat entrepreneur variable, the use of participating preferred stock does not.
Also, the pre-revenue variable that was critical in explaining the use of cash-flow incentives and
the allocation of control rights does not at all relate to the liquidation rights.

5.5

Determinants of contingencies / contracting space

The results in table 6 showed that VCs contract on a number of different measures of
financial and non-financial performance, all presumably observable and verifiable. As noted
earlier, this result is at odds with the strong contracting assumptions made in Hart and Moore
(1998) and others. On the other hand, a large fraction of the contracts in our sample do not
include any performance contingencies.
In this section, we consider the potential determinants of such contingencies. One
possibility is that state-contingencies are less appropriate for more uncertain environments where
it is more difficult to define and verify future contingencies.
This interpretation, however, does not get much support in the data. In the first three
columns of table 13, the dependent variable takes the value of one if there is any contingent
contracting in the deal (on cash-flow, control, liquidation rights, or future financings) and zero
otherwise. The degree of contingent contracting is unrelated to whether the venture has revenues
or not. Instead, the extent of contingent contracting is related to the round of VC investment.
Contingent contracting is significantly more common in earlier financing rounds and somewhat
more common for entrepreneurs without a previous record of success (when the degree of
uncertainty should be higher). This suggests that the use of contingent contracts is more closely
related to VC screening of companies and entrepreneurs.

39

In the last two columns of panel A, contingencies are divided into those based on
financial and non-financial performance. Contingent contracting on non-financial performance
is more common in earlier stage financings. This suggests that VCs find other observable and
verifiable signals when financial measures are unavailable.

5.6

Determinants of ex-ante staging

Table 14 examines the presence of ex-ante staging in the initial VC financing contracts.
In an ex-ante staged deal, part of the VC’s committed funding is released at a later date
contingent on explicit financial or non-financial performance milestones. These provisions can
be interpreted as another type of liquidation right. By giving the VC the ability to withhold the
rest of the financing if performance is unsatisfactory, the VC essentially gets the right to
liquidate the venture in the bad state of the world.
Most VC financings are at least implicitly staged, in the sense that even when all the
funding in the initial round is released immediately, it is understood that future financing rounds
will be needed to support the firm until the IPO. Hence, the same mechanism is present
implicitly in most VC financings. The ex-ante staging, however, makes this liquidation right
stronger and more explicitly related to performance.
Table 14 looks at two different measures: logit regressions on a dummy variable
indicating ex-ante staging, as well as tobit regressions on the fraction of future committed
financing to total financing committed. The results are very similar for both measures and mimic
the results for liquidation rights. While the pre-revenue venture variable is not significant, the
repeat entrepreneur dummy is negatively related to ex-ante staging and generally significant.
Again, the ability to withhold part of the VC financing is used more when the uncertainty about

40

the entrepreneur's type is higher. Table 14 also indicates significant differences across
industries.14

5.7.

Complementarity and substitutability of contract provisions

So far, we have examined the different contractual rights and provisions one at a time.
One important finding, however, is that VCs use several different governance mechanisms, such
as pay-performance compensation, board and voting control, and liquidation rights,
simultaneously in their contracts. This section takes an exploratory step in examining the
interaction between these rights. Here, theoretical predictions are largely absent because
financial contracting models typically focus on one mechanism in isolation.15 We restrict the
comparison to initial financing rounds in order to "purge" the comparison from effects due to the
evolution of the contracts over time documented in table 9.
Table 15 considers contracting provisions for the initial VC investments in our sample
along three different dimensions – the degree of VC voting control16, the extent of payperformance sensitivity in the founder's equity stake, and whether the next financing round is
specified in the contract and contingent on performance. Similar patterns emerge in all three
panels.
First, panel A shows that voting control and board control are significantly positively
correlated. Hence, these two control mechanisms seem to be complementary. They also are
strongly positively related to the amount of equity that the VC holds in the firm. Despite the fact
that they are separately contracted upon and not perfectly correlated, cash-flow rights and control
14

This result should be interpreted cautiously because collinearity precluded VC dummies from being included
directly in the regressions. In a separate analysis, VC firm effects were significant (in a Kruskal-Wallis chi-square
test).
15
Notable exceptions are Dewatripont and Tirole (1994) and Hellmann (1998).

41

rights largely go together. Also, when VCs have control, they are more reluctant to relinquish it.
The stock price (relative to the current price) at which the automatic conversion provision is
significantly higher when VCs have control.
Second, panel A shows that the performance sensitivity of the founder's equity claim is
positively related to the degree of VC control in general, and state-contingent control in
particular. When the VC has voting control, roughly one-third of the founders’equity stake is
contingent on performance versus only three percent when the founders always have voting
control. The results are similar for board control and founder vesting provisions. Founders’
pay-performance incentives and VC control, therefore, seem to be more complements than
substitutes.
Third, the relationship between liquidation rights and the other rights is less clear-cut.
Cumulative dividends and redemption clauses are largely independent of control rights, while the
use of participating preferred stock is more common the higher the degree of VC voting control.
On the other hand, both redemption rights and cumulative dividends are significantly positively
related to founders’pay-performance sensitivity, while participating preferred is not related.
Fourth, panel A shows that the use of explicit contracting on different measures of
performance is positively related to VC control, and in particular to voting control. The use of
any contingencies occurs in 57.5% of the financings in which the VCs always have a voting
majority, but in only 28% of the financings in which the founders control the majority of the
votes. The differences are even greater for contracts with contracting on financial or nonfinancial performance. Hence, the contracting space seems to be larger when VCs are in control
compared to when the entrepreneur is in control.

16

The results are similar for board control. We do not present them due to space considerations.

42

Finally, panel C shows that the allocation of rights is strongly related to the presence of
ex-ante staged financing. In financing rounds with ex-ante (contingent) staging: VCs are much
more likely to have voting and board control; founders have more contingent pay-performance
sensitivities; vesting provisions are more common; automatic conversion prices are a larger
multiple of the stock price of the round; and default board provisions and full ratchet antidilution protection are more common.
To sum up, to the extent the different governance mechanisms are related, they are more
complements than substitutes.

6.

Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we have compared the characteristics of real world financial contracts to

their counterparts in financial contracting theory by conducting a detailed study of actual
contracts between venture capitalists (VCs) and entrepreneurs.

6.1

Findings

Our main findings include:
(1) The distinguishing characteristic of VC financings is that they allow VCs to
separately allocate cash flow rights, voting rights, board rights, liquidation rights, and other
control rights. We explicitly measure and report the allocation of these rights.
(2) While convertible securities are used most frequently, VCs also implement a similar
allocation of rights using combinations of multiple classes of common stock and straight
preferred stock. Also, participating convertible preferred is effectively straight preferred and
common stock.

43

(3) Cash flow rights, voting rights, control rights, and future financings are frequently
contingent on observable measures of financial and non-financial performance. These state
contingencies are somewhat more common in first VC and early stage financings.
(4) If the company performs poorly, the VCs obtain full control. As company
performance improves, the entrepreneur retains / obtains more control rights. If the company
performs very well, the VCs retain their cash flow rights, but relinquish most of their control and
liquidation rights. The entrepreneur’s cash flow rights also increase with firm performance.
(5) It is common for VCs to include non-compete and vesting provisions aimed at
mitigating the potential hold-up problem between the entrepreneur and the investor. The vesting
provisions are somewhat more common in early stage financings where it is more likely that the
hold-up problem is more severe.
(6) Cash flow incentives, control rights, and contingencies implemented in these
contracts are used more as complements than as substitutes.

6.2

Implications for theory

Many of the theories we consider explain different aspects of the results we find.
However, several theories stand out. First, our results are most consistent with the control
theories – such as Aghion and Bolton (1992) and Dewatripont and Tirole (1994). These control
theories make predictions concerning cash flow rights that are similar to those made in
traditional principal agent models – e.g., higher pay-performance sensitivity increases the weight
entrepreneurs put on monetary benefits rather than private benefits. At the same time, these
theories emphasize control rights that are contingent on measures of performance. The extensive
use of and contracting on control rights in our sample is broadly consistent with these theories.

44

Second, inalienability of human capital appears to be important as argued in Hart and
Moore (1994). However, contractual remedies exist to mitigate the problems associated with
inalienability. Also, these theories do not explain residual cash flow and control rights.
Third, various aspects of VC contracts clearly have the effect of helping VCs screen good
entrepreneurs and companies from bad ones.
Finally, no one theory explains the multi-dimensional nature of the allocation of control
rights we observe in these financings. Control rights are allocated across a number of
dimensions – voting rights, board rights, liquidation rights. In addition, we find that those
different control rights shift from VC to entrepreneur at different levels of performance. At very
low levels of performance, the VC has the right to liquidate. At low levels of performance, the
VC will typically have voting control and board control. As performance improves, the
entrepreneur gains more cash flow rights as well as voting and board rights. As performance
reaches a high level – i.e., a successful initial public offering – the VC’s investment
automatically converts into common stock and the VC relinquishes all the special control rights
associated with its initial investment.

45

References
Admati, Anat and Paul Pfleiderer, 1994, "Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of Venture Capitalists",
Journal of Finance, 49, 371-402.
Aghion, Phillippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, "An incomplete contracts approach to financial contracting", Review of
Economic Studies, 77: 338-401.
Allen, Franklin, and Andrew Winton, 1995, "Corporate financial structure, incentives, and optimal contracting", in:
Jarrow, R., V. Maksimovic, and W. T. Ziemba, eds. Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, Volume
9: Finance,(North-Holland).
Baker, George, and Brian Hall, 1998, “CEO Incentives and Firm Size”, working paper, Harvard Business School.
Baker, Malcolm, and Paul Gompers, 1999, "An Analysis of Executive Compensation, Ownership, and Control in Closely Held
Firms", working paper, Harvard Business School.
Bartlett, Joseph, 1995, Equity Finance: Venture Capital, Buyouts, Restructurings and Reorganizations. (New
York: John Wiley & Sons).
Bergemann, Dirk, and Ulrich Hege, 1998, "Venture Capital Financing, Moral Hazard, and Learning", Journal of Banking
and Finance 22, 703-735.
Berglöf, Erik, 1994, "A Control Theory of Venture Capital", Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 10, 247267.
Black, Bernard and Ronald Gilson, 1998, “Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks versus stock markets,”
Journal of Financial Economics.
Bolton, Patrick, and David Scharfstein, 1990, "A theory of predation based on agency problems in financial
contracting", American Economic Review, 80: 94-106.
Cornelli, Francesca, and Oved Yosha, 1998, "Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Debt", working paper,
London Business School.
Dewatripont, Matthias, and Jean Tirole, 1994, " A theory of debt and equity: Diversity of securities and managershareholder congruence", Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 1027-1054.
Diamond, Douglas, 1984, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring, Review of Economic Studies 51, 393-414.
Duffie, Darrell, and Peter Demarzo, 1999, "A Liquidity Based Model of Security Design", Econometrica 67, 65-99.
Fluck, Zsusanna, 1998, "Optimal financial contracting: debt versus outside equity", Review of Financial Studies
11:2, 383-418.
Gale, Douglas, and Martin Hellwig, 1985, "Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period problem", Review
of Economic Studies 52: 647-663.
Gertner, Robert, and Steven Kaplan, 1996, "The Value-Maximizing Board", working paper, University of Chicago.
Gompers, Paul, 1995, Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital, Journal of Finance 50,
1461-1490

46

Gompers, Paul, 1998, “An Examination of Convertible Securities in Venture Capital Investments,”
working paper, Harvard Business School.
Gompers, Paul and Josh Lerner, 1999, The Venture Capital Cycle. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Gorman, M. and William Sahlman, 1989, "What Do Venture Capitalists Do?", Journal of Business Venturing 4,
231-248.
Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart, 1982, “Corporate Financial Structure and Managerial Incentives,” in:
J.J. McCall, ed., The Economics of Information and Uncertainty (Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1982).
Grossman, Sanford, and Oliver Hart, 1986, “The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral
integration”, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1979, "Optimal incentive contracts with imperfect information", Journal of
Economic Theory 20: 231-259.
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, 1992, “Financial contracting theory”, in: J. Laffont, ed., Advances in Economic
Theory: Sixth World Congress, Vol.II (Cambridge University Press).
Hart, Oliver, “Theories of optimal capital structure: A principal agent perspective,”
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, “Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of debt”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113, 1-41.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109, 841-879.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1995, “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard Claims in
Constraining Management,” American Economic Review, LXXXV, 567-585.
Hellman, Thomas, 1998, "The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts", Rand Journal of Economics,
29:1, 57-76
Hellman, Thomas and Manju Puri, forthcoming, “The interaction between product market and financial strategy:
The role of venture capital”, Review of Financial Studies.
Hellman, Thomas and Manju Puri, 1999, “Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms: Empirical
Evidence,” working paper, Stanford Business School.
Holmström, Bengt, 1979, "Moral Hazard and Observability", Bell Journal of Economics 10, 74-91.
Innes, R., 1990, "Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices", Journal of Economic
Theory 52: 45-67.
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling, 1976, “The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs, And Ownership Structure", Journal of Financial Economics, III, 305-360.
Jensen, Michael and Kevin J. Murphy, 1990, "Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives", Journal of Political
Economy 98, 225-264.
Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg. 2000a, “How do venture capitalists choose and manage their investments?”
work in progress, University of Chicago.
Kaplan, Steven and Per Strömberg. 2000b, “The valuation and staging of venture capital investments,” work in

47

progress, University of Chicago.
Lazear, Edward, 1986, "Salaries and Piece-Rates", Journal of Business 59, 405-431.
Lerner, Josh, 1995, “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms,” Journal of Finance 50, 301-318.
Levin, Jack, 1998, Structuring Venture Capital, Private Equity and Entrepreneurial Transactions (Aspen Law and
Business Series, Aspen Publishers).
Myers, Stewart, forthcoming, "Outside Equity Financing", Journal of Finance.
Myers, Stewart and Nicholas Majluf, 1984, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms
Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, XIII, 187-221.
Nachman, David, and Thomas Noe, 1994, "Optimal design of securities under asymmetric information", Review of
Financial Studies 7, 1-44
Neher, Darwin, 1999, "Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective", Review of Economic Studies 66, 255-274.
Prendergast, 1999, “The Provision of Incentives in Firms”, Journal of Economic Literature 37, 7-63.
Repullo, Rafael, and Javier Suarez, 1999, "Venture Capital Finance: A Security Design Approach", working paper,
CEMFI.
Sahlman, William, 1990, “The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organizations” Journal of Financial
Economics 27, 473-521.
Smith, Cliff and Jerold Warner, 1979, “On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants”, Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 117-161.
Yermack, David, 1996, "Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of directors", Journal of
Financial Economics, 40:2, 185-211.

48

Table 1
Summary Information
Summary information for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships.
Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Pre-revenue stage rounds are financing rounds for companies that
had no revenues before the financing. Pre-profit stage rounds are financing rounds for companies that did not have
positive profits before the financing. Business plan is the plan provided by the portfolio company at the time of the
financing. Total financing committed is the total amount of equity financing committed to by the venture capitalists
at the time of the financing round. Total financing provided is the total amount of equity financing provided to the
portfolio company at the closing of the financing.

A.:

Portfolio
Companies

Financing
Rounds

Number of observations
First venture capital round
Pre-revenue stage rounds (N=194)
Pre-profit stage rounds (N=186)

118
88
53
94

200
88
77
158

B.:

Year round financed:

# rounds
# 1st VC round

C.:

Pre-1992

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

12
5

2
1

3
1

11
6

13
4

48
26

50
18

58
27

3
2

VC Firm

1

# portfolio companies in current draft 9

D.:

2

3

19 3

4

5

6

7

8

9

22 9

6

4

2

10 4

11 10 8

1 118

Mean

Median

N

Total financing committed ($ millions)
Total financing committed pre-revenue rounds ($ millions)
Total financing committed post-revenue rounds ($ millions)

7.1
7.8
6.6

4.8
5.0
4.1

197
76
116

Total financing provided ($ millions)
Total financing provided pre-revenue rounds ($ millions)
Total financing provided post-revenue rounds ($ millions)

5.3
4.7
5.7

3.8
4.0
3.3

197
76
116

E.

Financing Amounts

10 11 12 13 14 Total

Geographical Distribution of Companies
California

Midwest

Northeast

Companies

34

24

31

29

Financing
rounds

53

35

63

49

49

Other

F.

Industry Distribution of Companies
Biotech

IT/Software

Telecom

Healthcare

Retail

Other

17
31

43
73

15
16

14
19

11
22

18
39

Companies
Financing
rounds

G.

Securities

Convertible preferred stock
Convertible debt
Convertible preferred stock and convertible debt
Multiple classes of common stock
Convertible preferred stock and common stock
Convertible debt and common stock
Straight preferred stock and common stock
Convertible preferred stock and straight preferred stock
Convertible preferred stock, straight preferred stock, and common stock
Convertible preferred is participating
Common stock
Any of the above plus warrants

50

Financing
rounds
159
4
4
3
16
1
3
6
4
72
1
39

Table 2
Post-round cash flow rights
Post-round cash flow rights for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships.
Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Minimum VC ownership if management meets all performance
and vesting milestones or contingencies. Max founders and employees vesting occurs if non-performance based
management stock and options vest. Maximum VC ownership occurs if management does not meet performance
milestones and stock and options do not vest. VC%, founders% and other% are, respectively, the percentage of cash
flow rights owned by the venture capitalists, the founders, and others. Others include employees and previous
investors. Pre-revenue rounds differ from post-revenue rounds at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

A.

Max founder
and employee
vesting cont.

Maximum
VC ownership

Difference,
Min. and
max. VC own.

Mean

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

Mean

Median

48.7
29.8
21.5

49.2
27.1
20.0

55.7
24.2
20.0

57.5
20.1
16.9

-8.1
6.6
1.5

-3.5
0.0
0.0

54.5
27.4
18.1

55.2***
27.1
17.7***

64.9
19.5
15.5

65.9***
14.8***
11.6***

-11.9
9.3
2.6

-6.1***
3.3***
0.2

45.1
31.1
23.7

45.9
27.1
22.4

49.6
27.8
22.6

51.4
23.0
20.7

-5.4
4.2
1.2

-2.2
0.0
0.0

43.5
36.9
19.5

44.5***
37.3***
17.6**

53.0
29.7
17.3

51.6**
27.2***
12.5***

-11.3
8.9
2.4

-6.2***
2.7*
0.0

53.0
23.9
23.1

56.5
19.6
21.4

58.0
19.7
22.3

60.9
16.4
19.3

-5.5
4.7
0.8

-2.3
0.0
0.0

Median

All rounds, N=199

VC %
Founders %
Others %
B.

Minimum
VC ownership
contingency

47.6
30.8
21.6

47.9
29.3
20.0

Early vs. later stage ventures:
Pre-revenue rounds, N=76

VC %
Founders %
Others %

53.0
28.8
18.2

55.2***
28.5
17.7***

Post-revenue rounds, N=117
VC %
Founders %
Others %
C.

44.2
32.0
23.8

45.4
28.7
22.4

First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=90

VC %
Founders %
Others %

41.7
38.6
19.7

42.7***
37.2***
17.9*

Subsequent VC rounds, N=109
VC %
Founders%
Others %

52.5
24.4
23.1

55.2
19.6
21.4

51

Table 3
Post-round voting rights
Post-round voting rights for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships.
Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Minimum (maximum) VC votes represents the minimum
(maximum) votes the venture capitalists control based on subsequent management performance and vesting
milestones or contingencies. % VC, % Founder and % Neither control are, respectively, the percentage of instances
in which voting control is held by the venture capitalists, the founders, or neither. Switch in control indicates the
percentage of instances in which voting control can switch based on performance. Pre-revenue rounds differ from
post-revenue rounds at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.
Minimum
VC votes
contingency
A.

Switch
in
control

70.8
11.6
17.6

17.5

86.8***
3.9***
9.2***

20.8

59.0
17.1
23.9

14.5

64.4*
21.1***
14.4

24.4**

76.1
3.7
20.2

11.8

All rounds, N=199

% VC control
% Founder control
% Neither control
B.

Maximum
VC votes
contingency

55.8
23.1
21.1

Early vs. later stage ventures:
Pre-revenue rounds, N=76

% VC control
% Founder control
% Neither control

65.8**
14.5**
19.7

Post-revenue rounds, N=127
% VC control
% Founder control
% Neither control
C.

48.7
28.2
23.1

First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=90

% VC control
% Founder control
% Neither control

44.4***
37.8***
17.8

Subsequent VC rounds, N=109
% VC control
% Founder control
% Neither control

65.1
11.0
23.8

52

Table 4
Post-round board representation.
Post-round board representation for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships.
Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Normal board is the board at the completion of the financing.
Adverse state board is the board that will result if the portfolio company performs poorly or reaches an adverse state.
VC seats are board seats that are reserved for venture capitalists. Founder seats are board seats that are reserved for
or controlled by the founders / entrepreneurs. Outsider seats are board seats that are to be filled by individuals
mutually agreed upon by the VCs and the founders / entrepreneurs. Pre-revenue rounds differ from post-revenue
rounds at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

A.

Normal board
Mean
Median

Adverse state board
Mean Median

6.1

6.4

6.0

45.8
32.6
21.5
35.8
11.0
53.2

42.9
33.3
20.0

6.2

6.0

47.4
32.0
20.5
36.0
5.3**
58.7

42.9
33.3
20.0

6.5

6.0

45.1
32.9
22.1
36.4
15.4
48.2

40.0
33.3
20.0

All rounds, N=190

Number of board seats

6.0

% VC seats
41.4
40.0
% Founder seats
34.7
33.3
% Outsider seats
23.7
20.0
% VC board majority
25.8
% Founder majority
12.1
% neither board majority
62.1
% of cases with adverse state board provisions
B.

15.3%

Early vs. later stage ventures:
Pre-revenue rounds, N=75

Number of board seats

6.1

6.0

% VC seats
43.2
40.0
% Founder seats
34.5
33.3
% Outsider seats
21.9
20.0
% VC board majority
28.0
% Founder majority
6.7*
% neither board majority
65.3
% of cases with adverse state board provisions

14.7%

Post-revenue rounds, N=110
Number of board seats

6.2

6.0

% VC seats
40.3
40.0
% Founder seats
33.3
34.7
% Outsider seats
25.0
20.0
% VC board majority
24.5
% Founder majority
16.4
% neither board majority
59.1
% of cases with adverse state board provisions

16.4%

53

C.

First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=88

Number of board seats

Normal board
Mean
Median
5.8
5.0***

Adverse state board
Mean Median
6.0
5.0***

% VC seats
37.4
40.0***
% Founder seats
38.0
40.0***
% Outsider seats
24.6
20.0
% VC board majority
11.4***
% Founder majority
18.2**
% neither board majority
70.5**
% of cases with adverse state board provisions
17.0%

42.5
40.0**
35.6
40.0**
21.9
20.0
26.1**
15.9**
58.0

Subsequent VC rounds, N=102
Number of board seats

6.4

6.0

% VC seats
44.9
43.7
% Founder seats
31.9
33.3
% Outsider seats
23.0
20.0
% VC board majority
38.2
% Founder majority
6.9
% neither board majority
54.9
% of cases with adverse state board provisions

13.7%

54

6.7

7.0

48.7
30.1
21.2
44.1
6.9
49.0

50.0
28.6
19.1

Table 5
Post-round liquidation rights
Post-round liquidation rights for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships.
Investments were made between 1986 and 1999. Liquidation rights are the proceeds accruing to the party upon a
liquidation or bankruptcy. Pre-revenue rounds differ from post-revenue rounds at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% *
levels.

Panel A: VC liquidation rights
1.

All rounds, N=180
Number
of rounds

Fraction
of total

VC liquidation rights < investment
VC liquidation rights = investment
VC liquidation rights > investment

Median

8.0%

8.0%

7.7%

8.0%

8.2%

8.0%

2.2%
23.3%
74.4%

Cumulative accruing dividend
Dividend rate
Participating preferred stock
Common/Conv. plus straight preferred
Other cases with liq. rights > inv.

2.

Mean

46.2%
39.4%
7.0%
11.1%

Early vs. later stage ventures:
Pre-revenue rounds, N=72

VC liquidation rights < investment
VC liquidation rights = investment
VC liquidation rights > investment

2.8%
26.4%
70.8%

Cumulative accruing dividend
Dividend rate
Participating preferred stock
Common/Conv. plus straight preferred
Other cases with liq. rights > inv.

38.9%**
41.7%
10.4%
2.8%***

Post-revenue rounds, N=103
VC liquidation rights < investment
VC liquidation rights = investment
VC liquidation rights > investment

1.0%
21.4%
77.7%

Cumulative accruing dividend
Dividend rate
Participating preferred stock
Common/Conv. plus straight preferred
Other cases with liq. rights > inv.

52.4%
37.9%
5.1%
17.5%

55

3.

First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=80

VC liquidation rights < investment
VC liquidation rights = investment
VC liquidation rights > investment

1.2%
25.0%
73.8%

Cumulative accruing dividend
Dividend rate
Participating preferred stock
Common/Conv. plus straight preferred
Other cases with liq. rights > inv.

51.2%
8.0%

8.0%

8.1%

8.0%

30.0%**
11.1%**
10.0%

Subsequent VC rounds, N=100
VC liquidation rights < investment
VC liquidation rights = investment
VC liquidation rights > investment

3.0%
22.0%
75.0%

Cumulative accruing dividend
Dividend rate
Participating preferred stock
Common/Conv. plus straight preferred
Other cases with liq. rights > inv.

42.2%
47.0%
3.6%
12.0%

56

Panel B: VC seniority

1.

All rounds, N=194
Mean
Claims senior to VC / VC Cumul. Investment
0.035
Claims senior or at par with VC / VC Cumul. investment 0.193

2.

Median
0.000
0.008

Early vs. later stage ventures:
Pre-revenue rounds, N=76
Mean
Claims senior to VC / VC Cumul. investment
0.020
Claims senior or at par with VC / VC Cumul. investment 0.085

Median
0.000
0.000*

Post-revenue rounds, N=114
Mean
0.045
0.270

Median
0.000
0.031

Mean
Claims senior to VC / VC Cumul. investment
0.053
Claims senior or at par with VC / VC Cumul. investment 0.169

Median
0.000
0.000*

Claims senior to VC / Cumul. investment
Claims senior or at par with VC / Cumul. investment
3.

First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=87

Subsequent VC rounds, N=108

Claims senior to VC / Cumul. investment
Claims senior or at par with VC / Cumul. investment

57

Mean
0.020
0.212

Median
0.000
0.017

Panel C: Redemption rights
1.

All rounds, N=186

Redemption / put rights
Maturity
Redemption including cumul. div.
Redemption at FMV
Other redemption > face value
2.

Fraction
of total

Mean

Median

84.3%
4.8 5.0
45.5%
9.7%
13.0%

Early vs. later stage ventures:
Pre-revenue rounds, N=71

Redemption / put rights
Maturity
Redemption including cumul. div.
Redemption at FMV
Other redemption > face value

80.3%
4.9 5.0
39.1%
8.4%
2.8%***

Post-revenue rounds, N=109
Redemption / put rights
Maturity
Redemption including cumul. div.
Redemption at FMV
Other redemption > face value
3.

88.1%
4.8 5.0
51.0%
11.0%
19.3%

First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=81

Redemption / put rights
Maturity
Redemption including cumul. div.
Redemption at FMV
Other redemption > face value

87.7%
5.4 5.0
50.6%
16.0%**
8.6%

Subsequent VC rounds, N=104
Redemption / put rights
Maturity
Redemption including cumul. div.
Redemption at FMV
Other redemption > face value

81.7%
4.4 5.0***
41.4%
4.8%
16.3%

58

Table 6
Contingencies and the contracting space
Contingencies for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. Investments were
made between 1987 and 1999. Table measures extent to which venture capital contracts include contingencies
based on observable and verifiable characteristics or states.
Type of contingency

A. Contract contingent
on financial measures of
performance

Number
of
rounds
41

B. Contract contingent on
non-financial measures of
performance

25

C. Contract contingent on
certain actions being
aken

28

D. Contract contingent
on sale of securities

19
(excl.*
which
are
standard)

Examples
• Employee shares vest if revenue goal attained.
• VC can only vote for all owned shares if realized EBIT below threshold value, in which
case VC gets voting control.
• VC dividend on preferred shares, payable in common stock, is suspended if revenue and
operating profit goals attained.
• If net worth below threshold, VC will get 3 more board seats.
• Exercise price on warrants is fraction of net worth: 50% of net worth/share for first 3
years, then 100% of net worth/share.
• VC warrants expire if revenue goal attained.
• Committed round of financing contingent on no material deviation from business plan.
• Committed round of financing contingent on no material deviation from non-financial
aspects of business plan.
• Employee shares vest when company secures threshold number of customers who have
purchased the product and give positive feedback.
• Employee shares vest with release of second major version of the product that
incorporates significant new functionality.
• Founder shares vest contingent on FDA approval of new drug.
• Founder shares vest contingent on new corporate partnership found.
• Founder shares vest contingent on approved patents.
• Founder loses voting right for shares if terminated for cause.
• Committed funding paid out when new clinical tests completed.
• Committed funding paid out when new strategic partnership completed.
• Committed funding paid out subject to new business plan for entering new markets
completed and approved by board
• Vesting of shares contingent on hiring new key executives.
• Committed funding paid out subject to hiring new key executives or CEO
• Committed funding paid out subject to developing new facilities.
• Founder ownership increasing non-linear function of share price obtained in sale or IPO.
• Founder vesting accelerates upon sale or IPO of certain minimum value.*
• Cumulative dividend (in cash or stock) suspended upon sale or IPO of certain minimum
value*
• Conversion price of VC convertibles higher if company completes sale of new securities
where proceeds exceed minimum amount.
• VC warrants expire if company manages to raise alternative funds where proceeds and
price of securities exceed threshold.
• VC warrants expire upon IPO of minimum value.
• Committed funding paid out when new vendor financing agreements secured
• Committed funding paid out when new construction loans secured
• VC dividend on preferred shares, payable in common stock, is suspended if company
manages to raise certain amount of new funding above minimum price per share.

59

Table 7
Contingencies
Contingencies for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Table
measures extent to which venture capital contracts include contingencies based on observable and verifiable characteristics or states. Financing contingent on
future performance occurs if the financing round is staged. I.e., some of the funding committed in the round will be funded contingent on meeting certain
milestones. Examples of the different classes of contract provisions can be found in table 6. Pre-revenue rounds differ from post-revenue rounds at the: 1%
***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.
Number
of rounds

%
of total

A. All rounds, N=199

State-contingent contracting on:
Financial measures of performance
Non-financial measures of performance
Certain actions being taken
Sale of securities, raising new funds
Any of the above
Financing contingent on future performance

41
25
28
19
73
30

20.6
12.6
14.1
9.5
36.5
15.0

Number
of rounds

%
of total

B. Stage
Pre-revenue rounds, N=77

11
16
14
6
24
16

14.3*
20.8***
18.2
7.8
31.2
20.8*

Number
of rounds

%
of total

Post-revenue rounds, N=116

30
9
14
13
49
13

25.9
7.8
12.1
11.2
41.9
11.1

C. First vs. subsequent investments:
First VC rounds, N=90
Subsequent VC rounds, N=109
State-contingent contracting on:
Financial measures of performance
Non-financial measures of performance
Certain actions being taken
Sale of securities, raising new funds
Any of the above
Financing contingent on future performance

23
14
15
10
40
21

25.8*
15.7
16.9
11.2
44.4**
23.3***

18
11
13
9
33
9

16.4
10.0
11.8
8.2
30.0
8.2

Table 8
Other Terms
Other terms for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Terms include extent
to which venture capital contracts include (1) automatic conversion provisions; (2) antidilution protection; (3) time-vesting of founder shares and (4) non-compete
clauses for the founder. Conversion price is the IPO or sale price per share of common stock at which the venture capital securities automatically convert into common
stock. Round price is the price per share of common stock at which the securities issued in the current round convert or are priced. If a company subsequently issues
equity at a lower price per share than the current round: under a full ratchet provision, the conversion price on the currentround drops to the new issue price; under a
weighted-average provision, the conversion price of the current round declines to a value between the current round and the new issue price. Seed and start-up rounds
differ from later stage rounds at the: 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.
1. Early vs. later stage ventures:
All Rounds
Number %

Mean

Med.

N=196
A.

B.

Automatic Conversion Provision
Included
Conversion price / round price

Antidilution Protection
Full ratchet
Weighted average ratchet

C.

D.

Founder vesting

Non-compete clauses
Non-compete clauses,
excluding California firms

184

Pre-revenue
Number %

Mean

Med.

N=76
93.9%

73

Post-revenue
Number %

96.0%

106

93.0%

6.0 4.0***
(N=65)

3.6
3.0
(N=96)

N=175
166
94.8%

N=69
66

95.6%

N=103
97

94.2%

34
132

12
54

17.4%
78.3%

21
76

20.4%
73.8%

54.5%***

N=115
38

N=198
83
41.9%

N=77
42

All Firms
Number %

Pre-revenue
Number %

N=84
59
43

N=41
29
19

70.2%
75.4% (N=57)

Med.

N=114

4.5
3.0
(N=164)

19.4%
75.4%

Mean

70.7%
76.0% (N=25)

33.0%

Post-revenue
Number %
N=40
28
23

70.0%
74.2% (N=31)

2. First vs. subsequent investments:
All Rounds
Number %

Mean

Med.

N=196
A.

B.

Automatic Conversion Provision
Included
Conversion price / round price

Antidilution Protection
Full ratchet
Weighted average ratchet

C.

Founder vesting

184

First VC round
Number %

Mean Med.

N=109

N=87
93.9%

79

Subsequent VC round
Number %
Mean Med.

90.8%

4.5
3.0
(N=164)

105

96.3%

6.4 3.0***
(N=65)

3.1 2.7
(N=92)

N=175
166
94.8%

N=84
76

91.6% *

N=102
90

97.8%

34
132

20
56

24.1%
67.5% **

14
76

15.2%
82.6%

19.4%
75.4%

N=198
83
41.9%

N=90
42

46.7%

N=108
41
38.0%

Table 9
Evolution of the contracts over time
Contract terms by financing round for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. Investments
were made between 1987 and 1999.
(1)
Round 1
Cont.
financing

(2)
Round 1
No cont.
financing

(3)
Round 2

(4)
Round 3

(5)
Round 4

(N=34)
Mn. Med.

(N=53)
Mn. Med.

(N=53)
Mn. Med.

(N=27)
(N=16)
Mn. Med. Mn. Med.

3.9
3.0
12.5 6.8
51.5 50.0
100.0

3.9
3.9
0.0
0.0

3.0
3.0
0.0

5.7 5.0
6.5 5.6
13.0 0.0
24.5

7.9 6.1
8.5 6.6
8.2 0.0
22.2

31.2
21.2
10.2
38.5

43.9
35.5
8.3
19.9

42.0
39.0
0.0
0.0

27.6
22.3
5.2
21.8

23.6
19.7
3.7
11.0

KW
Chi-sq.
statistic
columns
(1)-(5)

KW
Chi-sq.
statistic
columns
(2)-(5)

6.6 4.3
6.7 4.3
2.3 0.0
12.5

6.22
14.54***
71.31***
69.26***

4.24
9.43**
5.50
5.40

20.6
16.6
3.9
7.5

36.13***
18.31***
10.64**
12.84**

36.39***
17.23***
3.18
3.96

Financing:
$ financing up front
$ financing committed
% future committed fin.
% Contingent future fin.
Cash-flow incentives:
Fndr best case eq., %
Fndr worst case eq., %
Fndr best - worst case, %
Fndr (best - worst) / best, %

32.5
14.0
5.0
38.8

25.0
20.5
0.0
6.2

20.0
18.0
0.0
0.0

15.0
13.5
0.0
0.0

Voting control ( % of cases)
VC control good state
VC control bad state
Fndr control good state
Fndr control bad state
Switch in control

63.9
77.8
19.4
5.6
19.4

30.2
54.7
49.1
30.2
28.3

61.5
75.0
11.5
3.8
15.1

63.0
70.4
7.4
3.7
7.4

75.0
81.2
6.2
0.0
6.2

13.64***
5.33
16.21***
7.93*
3.39

12.41***
4.42
16.03***
7.46*
3.36

VC control
Founder control
Neither control

17.1
8.6
74.3

5.8
25.0
69.2

28.3
8.7
63.0

34.6
7.7
57.7

56.2
6.2
37.5

11.66**
3.13
5.20

11.22**
2.85
3.82

Automatic conv.
price / stock price

10.3

Board control ( % of cases)

5.0

3.8

3.0

3.6

3.0

2.6

2.1

2.5

2.1

27.22*** 13.80***

Contingent contracting:
Any contingencies
Cont. financial performance
Cont. non-financial perf.

63.9
34.3
31.4

32.1
20.8
5.7

37.7
20.8
13.2

25.9
7.4
11.1

63

18.8
12.5
6.2

10.70**
3.67
4.63

1.64
1.27
0.52

Table 10
Determinants of cash-flow incentives
Linear regression of percentage point difference in founder cash-flow rights between best and worst case scenario on various
independent variables for 200 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. Investments were made
between 1987 and 1999. VC dummies include dummies for the 8 venture capital partnerships with more than 10 observations in our
sample. T-statistics are in parentheses and are calculated using White (1980) robust standard errors. Asterisks indicate statistical
significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

% Founder
CF rights in
max state

% Founder
CF rights in
max state

% Founder
CF rights in
max state

% Founder
CF rights in
max state
First-VC
rounds only

Max - min
% founder
CF rights

Max - min
% founder
CF rights

Max - min %
founder CF
rights

Max - min
% founder
CF rights
First-VC
rounds only

Constant

44.06***
(13.32)

Pre-revenue
venture

-6.57**
(-2.35)

-4.54
(-1.43)

-0.14
(-0.04)

1.17
(0.24)

5.49***
(2.60)

7.05***
(2.84)

8.70***
(3.61)

13.37***
(3.17)

Repeat
entrepreneur

4.29
(1.31)

6.18
(1.62)

5.96*
(1.73)

2.67
(0.36)

-3.34*
(-1.71)

-3.36
(-1.41)

-0.32
(-0.14)

-0.34
(-0.06)

Round of VC
investment

-5.14***
(-5.54)

-5.42***
(-4.82)

-4.96***
(-5.55)

-0.47
(-0.66)

-0.28
(-0.32)

-0.67
(-1.03)

N

-3.50
(-0.78)
1.68
(0.35)
1.92
(0.40)
40.90
(6.98)
46.79
(9.60)
42.96
(5.83)
36.28
(4.33)
44.68
(7.85)
42.68
(6.33)
N

Y

-1.37
(-0.22)
5.91
(0.87)
-2.84
(-0.40)
32.91
(4.01)
41.29
(6.86)
36.22
(3.40)
22.47
(3.36)
39.60
(4.08)
39.22
(4.20)
N

N

-3.56
(-1.32)
-2.15
(-0.70)
3.95
(1.27)
5.16
(1.42)
8.14
(2.82)
6.40
(1.83)
2.78
(1.27)
6.53
(1.38)
-0.91
(-0.22)
N

Y

-1.70
(-0.37)
1.60
(0.39)
0.65
(0.15)
2.17
(0.36)
0.89
(0.29)
-0.50
(-0.10)
-2.53
(-0.65)
11.83
(1.74)
0.34
(0.10)
N

167

167

167

75

167

167

167

75

0.14

(0.78)

(0.79)

(0.83)

0.05

(0.27)

(0.45)

(0.39)

California
Midwest
Northeast
Biotech
IT/Software
Telecom
Healthcare
Retail
Other
industries
VC-firm
dummies
Number of
observations
Adj. Rsquared
Wald test,
location
dummies
Wald test,
industry
dummies
Wald test, VC
dummies

6.05***
(2.92)

F = 1.21
P = 0.30

F = 0.96
P = 0.39

F = 1.95
P = 0.14

F = 0.17
P = 0.84

F = 0.62
P = 0.69

F = 2.11
P = 0.08

F = 1.64
P = 0.15

F = 0.90
P = 0.48

F = 2.30**
P = 0.02

F = 3.49***
P = 0.00

64

Table 11
Determinants of control allocation
A.

Determinants of voting control

Ordered logit regressions of degree of VC voting control on various independent variables for 201 investments in 118 portfolio
companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. The dependent variable takes the value of 0 if the VCs never have control, 1 if the VCs
have control only in the bad state, and 2 if the VCs always have control. Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. Z-statistics
are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

Pre-revenue
venture
Repeat
entrepreneur
Round of VC
investment
California

Degree of
VC voting
control

Degree of
VC voting
Control

Degree of
VC voting
control

Degree of
VC voting
control
First-VC
rounds only

1.33***
(3.69)
-0.61
(-1.52)
0.45***
(3.21)

0.87**
(2.00)
-1.33**
(-2.44)
0.54***
(3.41)

1.73***
(2.91)
0.35
(0.44)

N

1.39***
(3.27)
-0.99**
(-2.07)
0.68***
(4.20)
-0.92
(-1.58)
-1.87***
(-3.03)
-1.49***
(-2.74)
0.97
(1.50)
0.49
(0.90)
2.25***
(2.59)
2.17**
(2.56)
0.83
(1.23)
N

Y

-2.20**
(-2.59)
-2.23**
(-2.56)
-1.40*
(-1.75)
0.19
(0.18)
0.19
(0.83)
2.28*
(1.90)
2.23*
(1.93)
0.05
(0.04)
N

167

167

167

75

0.07

0.16

0.15

0.20

Midwest
Northeast
Biotech
IT/Software
Telecom
Healthcare
Retail
VC-firm
dummies
Number of
observations
Pseudo Rsquared
Wald test,
location
dummies
Wald test,
industry
dummies
Wald test, VC
dummies

F=11.07**
P=0.01

F=8.33**
P=0.04

F=12.00**
P=0.03

F=8.98
P=0.11
F=22.08***
P=0.00

65

B.

Determinants of board control

Ordered logit regressions of degree of VC board control on various independent variables for 201 investments in 118 portfolio
companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. The dependent variable takes the value of 0 if the founder has board majority, 1 if the
neither the VCs or the founder has board majority, and 2 if the VCs have board majority. Investments were made between 1987 and
1999. Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.
Degree of
VC board
control

Degree of
VC board
Control

Degree of
VC board
Control
First-VC
rounds only

Pre-revenue
venture
Repeat
entrepreneur

0.68*
(1.93)
-0.10
(-0.24)

0.68*
(1.89)
0.12
(0.27)

0.94*
(1.69)
0.42
(0.51)

Round of VC
investment
California

0.49***
(3.88)

159

0.49***
(3.74)
0.22
(0.45)
1.23
(2.34)
0.58
(1.24)
159

0.09
(0.12)
0.80
(1.09)
0.50
(0.66)
73

0.06

0.08

0.04

F=6.23*
P=0.10

F=1.49
P=0.68

Midwest
Northeast
Number of
observations
Pseudo Rsquared
Wald test,
location
dummies

Note: Industry and VC fixed effects were excluded because of collinearity problems. In particular, one of our VC firms (with more
than 10 deals) had no case where the VCs had board majority. Similarly, in one of our industries (retail) there were no cases where the
VCs had board majority and in two more industries (telecom and healthcare) there were only one case of founder board majority.

66

Table 12
Determinants of liquidation rights
Probit regressions on different measures of VC liquidation rights for 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital partnerships.
Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. T-values are in parentheses and are calculated using White (1980) robust standard
errors. Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.
A.

Regression results
VC
redemption
rights

VC cumul.
dividend

VC cumul.
dividend

VC cumul.
dividend

VC partic.
preferred
Claim

VC partic.
preferred
claim

VC partic.
preferred
claim

Constant

2.29***
(4.54)

0.34
(1.08)

2.63***
(2.88)

1.98**
(2.52)

-0.78***
(-2.58)

0.12
(0.13)

-1.80***
(-2.81)

Pre-revenue
venture
Repeat
entrepren.

-0.11
(-0.17)
-1.77***
(-2.77)

-0.12
(-0.27)
-1.22**
(-2.07)

-0.53
(-0.86)
-1.10
(-1.54)

-0.46
(-0.79)
-1.45**
(-2.06)

0.43
(1.00)
0.40
(0.75)

0.55
(0.95)
1.25*
(1.78)

0.41
(0.79)
0.46
(0.59)

N

-1.44*
(-1.94)
-0.71
(-0.99)
-0.86
(-1.11)
-0.81
(-0.72)
-2.76***
(-2.73)
-0.48
(-0.40)
-0.82
(-0.80)
-1.29
(-1.27)
N

N

-0.91
(-1.20)
-0.27
(-0.35)
-2.73***
(-3.00)
-1.36
(-1.31)
-1.07
(-1.19)
0.14
(0.14)
3.34
(2.74)
0.07
(0.06)
N

Y

California
Midwest
Northeast
Biotech
IT/Software
Telecom
Healthcare
Retail
VC firm
Dummies
Wald test,
location
dummies
Wald test,
industry
dummies
Wald test,
VC firm
dummies
Number of
observations
Pseudo Rsquared

N

-0.93
(-0.83)
-2.95***
(-3.19)
-0.67
(-0.66)
-0.74
(-0.70)
-1.28
(-1.26)
N

F=3.95
P=0.27
F=12.29**
P=0.03

F=10.27**
P=0.02
F=16.00***
P=0.01

F=19.85***
P=0.00
F=13.31
P=0.10

91

88

88

88

100

100

100

0.10

0.04

0.23

0.20

0.01

0.28

0.16

67

B.

Differences across VC firms

VC firm no

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

All
CA
VCs

All
NonCA
VCs

22

18

10

9

8

9

11

10

6

4

4

3

2

1

96

22

Fraction of
deals with
redemp. rights

0.95

0.88

0.78

0.78

0.75

0.44

0.91

0.90

1.00

1.00

0.75

1.00

0.50

1.00

0.88

0.62***

Fraction of
deals with
cumul. div.

0.55

0.44

0.50

0.50

0.50

0.11

0.89

0.70

0.00

0.50

0.00

0.33

0.00

0.00

0.53

0.25**

Fraction of
deals with
partic. pref.

0.32

0.33

0.40

0.40

0.25

0.56

0.27

0.90

0.17

0.50

0.25

0.00

0.50

0.00

0.36

0.45

KWTest
industry

Number
portfolio
companies of
firm

C.

Number
portfolio
companies
Fraction of
deals with
redemp.
rights
Fraction of
deals with
cumul. div.
Fraction of
deals with
particip.
preferred

Differences across location and industry
Calif.

Midwest

North
east

Other
Loc.

34

24

31

28

0.70

1.00

0.73

0.96

0.25

0.57

0.46

0.67

0.35

0.42

0.23

0.57

KWTest,
location

χ2=5.63
P=0.13

χ2=7.72*
P=0.05

χ2=5.41
P=0.14

Biotech

IT/
Softw.

Telecom

Health

Retail

Oth.
Ind.

17

43

15

14

11

18

0.75

0.86

0.79

0.86

0.80

0.88

0.50

0.23

0.57

0.64

0.54

0.71

0.24

0.26

0.53

0.93

0.36

0.28

68

χ2=0.68
P=0.98

χ2=10.76*
P=0.06

χ2=17.18***
P=0.00

Table 13
Determinants of contingencies
Logit regressions of use of contingencies as a function of various independent variables for 201 investments in 118 portfolio
companies by 14 venture capital partnerships. Contingencies are based on financial performance, non-financial performance, action, or
future financing. Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. T-statistics are in parentheses and are calculated using White (1980)
robust standard errors. Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

Any
contingencies

Any
contingencies

Any
contingencies

Cont. on
financial
performance

Cont. on nonfinancial
performance

-0.69
(-1.53)
-0.40
(-0.95)
-1.47*
(-1.89)

-1.84***
(-3.88)
1.21**
(2.49)
-0.90
(-1.28)

-0.17
(-0.95)

-0.21
(-1.33)

First-VC
rounds only
Constant
Pre-revenue
venture
Repeat
entrepreneur
Round of VC
investment
California

0.28
(0.73)
-0.31
(-0.90)
-0.86*
(-1.85)

1.69
(2.25)
-0.51
(-1.15)
-0.26
(-0.44)

-0.27*
(-1.89)

168

-0.40***
(2.62)
-0.74
(-1.20)
0.64
(1.12)
-0.16
(-0.32)
-1.30**
(-2.02)
-2.04***
(-3.41)
-0.70
(-0.94)
0.11
(0.15)
-0.96
(-1.42)
168

-1.54*
(-1.72)
0.26
(0.35)
-0.28
(-0.38)
-2.12**
(-2.04)
-1.94**
(-2.14)
-0.07
(-0.06)
0.53
(0.48)
-1.33
(-1.17)
75

168

168

0.04

0.17

0.23

0.05

0.08

F=4.90
P=0.18

F=3.96
P=0.26

F=18.94***
P=0.00

F=13.68**
P=0.02

Midwest
Northeast
Biotech
IT/Software
Telecom
Healthcare
Retail
Number of
observations
Pseudo Rsquared
Wald test,
location
dummies
Wald test,
industry
dummies

1.40
(1.73)
-0.19
(-0.30)
0.06
(0.06)

69

Table 14
Determinants of ex-ante staging
Logit regressions of use of committed future financing and tobit regressions of fraction of committed future financing to total financing
committed as a function of various independent variables for 201 investments in 118 portfolio companies by 14 venture capital
partnerships. Contingencies are based on financial performance, non-financial performance, action, or future financing. Investments
were made between 1987 and 1999. T-statistics are in parentheses. Logit standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity according
to White (1980). Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% * levels.

Committed
future
financing

Committed
future
financing

Committed
future
financing
First-VC
rounds only

Committed
future
financing
First-VC
rounds only

Percent of
financing
committed

Percent of
financing
committed

Percent of
financing
committed
First-VC
rounds only

Percent of
financing
committed
First-VC
rounds only

Constant

0.05
(0.13)

-0.17
(-0.23)

-0.27
(-0.74)

0.39
(0.49)

9.39
(0.67)

-5.84
(-0.29)

-7.69
(-0.60)

15.35
(0.78)

Pre-revenue
venture

0.23
(0.61)

-0.01
(-0.01)

0.35
(0.66)

0.04
(0.05)

9.38
(0.74)

4.06
(0.35)

14.68
(0.90)

4.64
(0.34)

Repeat
entrepreneur

-1.50**
(-2.44)

-1.74**
(-2.32)

-2.32*
(-1.95)

-2.42
(-1.38)

-49.51***
(-2.64)

-40.34**
(-2.46)

-73.16**
(-2.35)

-44.97*
(-1.82)

Round of VC
investment

-0.34**
(-2.30)

-0.21
(-1.31)

-16.84***
(-3.00)

-8.19*
(-1.70)

California
Midwest
Northeast

Biotech
IT/Software
Telecom
Healthcare
Retail

Number of
observations
Pseudo Rsquared
Wald test,
location
dummies
Wald test,
industry
dummies

-0.14
(-0.24)
0.33
(0.54)
-0.05
(-0.10)

-1.33
(-1.49)
-0.57
(-0.66)
-0.11
(-0.14)

-14.41
(-0.88)
8.43
(0.54)
-1.39
(-0.09)

-46.54**
(-2.24)
-15.90
(-0.94)
0.29
(0.02)

0.42
(0.63)
-0.29
(-0.52)
0.45
(0.60)
2.66***
(2.84)
-2.17*
(-1.90)

-0.17
(-0.16)
-0.67
(-0.16)
0.89
(0.86)
3.00***
(3.06)
-1.91
(-1.33)

14.59
(0.79)
0.38
(0.02)
34.26
(1.59)
73.57***
(3.65)
-65.55***
(-2.15)

-13.22
(-0.54)
-16.65
(-0.82)
38.45
(1.61)
45.86**
(2.03)
-62.04**
(-1.96)

168

168

74

74

166

166

73

73

0.08

0.21

0.07

0.28

0.09

0.25

0.06

0.31

F=0.78
P=0.86

F=2.30
P=0.51

F=0.71
P=0.55

F=2.05
P=0.12

F=15.63***
P=0.01

F=19.79***
P=0.00

F=5.48***
P=0.00

F=4.22***
P=0.00

70

Table 15
Complementarity and substitutability of contractual provisions
Complementarity/substitutability between different control and cash-flow rights for 90 first-round investments by 14 venture capital
partnerships. Investments were made between 1987 and 1999. The last columns report results from Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared tests
and/or Mann-Whitney tests for differences between groups. Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 1% ***; 5% **, and 10% *
levels.
A. VC voting control
VC always
has voting
majority
(N=40)

VC voting
maj. only in
worst case
(N=18)

VC never
has voting
majority
(N=32)

All groups,
KruskalWallis
Chi-sq.
statistic

VC never maj.
vs. others,
Mann-Whitney
Z-statistic

Financing:

Mean Median Mean

Median Mean

Median

Amount of financing up front
Amount of financing committed
% committed staged financing
Ex-ante staging ( % of cases)

5.1
11.9
33.5
58.9

4.0
6.0
33.6

2.5
3.3
12.4
27.8

1.8
2.2
0.0

3.3
3.6
8.4
25.0

3.0
3.0
0.0

9.46***
21.29***
9.83***
7.09**

0.31
1.47
2.77***
2.82***

24.9
17.6
7.4
35.5

24.0
12.5
3.0
30.4

50.8
22.6
28.1
53.1

51.0
20.5
21.1
57.4

48.9
48.8
0.1
3.0

47.0
49.5
0.0
0.0

38.14***
32.62***
29.02***
22.52***

5.30***
6.04***
3.37***
3.59***

2.73
5.99**
4.24
0.19

0.87
3.22***
2.12**
0.75

0.32
3.03
0.62
6.24**

0.08
1.19
0.93
1.21

9.22***

2.00**

Cash-flow incentives:
Founder best case equity stake, %
Founder worst case equity stake, %
Founder best minus worst case stake, %
Founder (best - worst) / best case stake, %
Board control ( % of cases)
VC board control
Founder board control
Neither has board control
Default board provision

22.5
7.5
70.0
38.5

0.0
5.9
94.1
11.8

3.2
38.7
58.1
19.3

Liquidation rights ( % of cases)
Redemption rights
Maturity, years
Cumulative preferred dividend
Participating preferred stock

89.2
5.6
56.8
50.0

Automatic conversion price / stock price

7.9

5.0

4.6

80.0
4.7
46.7
33.3
7.1

5.0

5.0

89.7
5.3
50.8
15.6
3.2

5.0

3.0

Contingent contracting:
Any contingencies
Contingent on financial performance
Contingent on non-financial performance

57.5
37.5
27.5

44.4
27.8
16.7

28.1
9.7
0.0

4.55*
4.04
3.92

1.58
2.19**
2.04**

31.6
60.5
77.4
55.0

12.5
81.2
78.6
88.9

20.7
69.0
65.2
12.5

1.37
1.46
0.71
21.43***

0.06
0.88
1.30
3.89***

Other terms ( % of cases)
Full ratchet anti-dilution
Weighted average anti-dilution
Non-compete clauses
Founder vesting, % of cases

71

B. Founder pay-performance sensitivity
Founder equity
stake statecontingent
(N=40)

Founder equity
stake not statecontingent
(N=48)

Financing:

Mean Median

Mean

Median

Amount of financing up front
Amount of financing committed
% committed staged financing
Ex ante staging

4.0
9.4
26.2
50.0

3.3
4.0
0.0

3.8
4.7
12.7
28.2

2.9
3.0
0.0

0.09
1.17
2.10**
2.07**

37.9
20.1
17.7
52.7

37.0
12.5
11.5
54.9

40.0
41.7
-2.1
-5.1

38.0
40.0
0.0
0.0

0.22
4.61***
(8.19***)
(8.14***)

Mann-Whitney
Z-statistic

Cash-flow incentives:
Founder best case equity stake, %
Founder worst case equity stake, %
Founder best minus worst case stake, %
Founder (best - worst) / best case stake, %
Voting control ( % of cases)
VC control in good state
VC control in bad state
Founder control in good state
Founder control in bad state
Switch in control in bad state

48.0
82.0
36.0
8.0
42.0

40.0
42.5
37.5
35.0
2.5

0.75
3.87***
0.15
3.16***
4.31***

10.2
12.2
77.6
14.3

12.8
25.6
61.5
20.5

0.38
1.61
1.63
0.77

Board control ( % of cases)
VC board control
Founder board control
Neither has board control
Default board provision
Liquidation rights ( % of cases)
Redemption rights
Maturity, years
Cumulative preferred dividend
Participating preferred stock

93.2
5.6
64.4
38.0

81.1
5.1
34.3
30.0

Automatic conversion price / stock price

8.9

Contingent contracting:
Any contingencies
Contingent on financial performance
Contingent on non-financial performance

54.0
45.3
24.0

32.5
23.1
5.1

2.03**
0.52
2.41**

24.4
64.4
74.4
84.0

23.7
71.1
72.4
0.0

0.08
0.64
0.18
(7.90***)

5.0

5.0

3.1

5.0

3.0

1.64*
1.66*
2.66***
0.79
3.89***

Other terms ( % of cases)
Full ratchet anti-dilution
Weighted average anti-dilution
Non-compete clauses
Founder vesting, % of cases

72

C. Ex-ante staging
Ex-ante
staging
(N=34)

No ex-ante
staging
(N=53)

Financing:

Mean Median

Mean

Median

Amount of financing up front
Amount of financing committed
% committed staged financing
Contingent future financing ( % of cases)

3.9
3.0
12.5 6.7
51.5 50.0
100.0

3.9
3.9
0.0
0.0

3.0
3.0
0.0

0.31
(3.32***)
-

31.2
21.2
10.2
38.5

43.9
35.5
8.3
19.9

42.0
39.0
0.0
0.0

3.18***
2.94***
1.79*
2.35**

Mann-Whitney
Z-statistic

Cash-flow incentives:
Founder best case equity stake, %
Founder worst case equity stake, %
Founder best minus worst case stake, %
Founder (best - worst) / best case stake, %

32.5
14.0
5.0
38.8

Voting control ( % of cases)
VC control in good state
VC control in bad state
Founder control in good state
Founder control in bad state
Switch in control in bad state

63.9
77.8
19.4
5.6
19.4

30.2
54.7
49.1
30.2
28.3

17.1
8.6
74.3
31.4

5.8
25.0
69.2
7.7

3.13***
2.21**
2.82***
2.82***
0.94

Board control ( % of cases)
VC board control
Founder board control
Neither has board control
Default board provision

1.70*
1.93*
0.51
2.86***

Liquidation rights ( % of cases)
Redemption rights
Maturity, years
Cumulative preferred dividend
Participating preferred stock

92.9
5.7
69.0
36.1

84.6
5.1
42.0
34.0

Automatic conversion price / stock price

10.3

Contingent contracting:
Any contingencies
Contingent on financial performance
Contingent on non-financial performance

63.9
34.3
31.4

32.1
20.8
5.7

2.94***
1.41
3.22***

41.9
41.9
82.1
58.3

13.7
82.4
66.7
39.6

2.87***
3.75***
1.40
1.73*

5.2

5.0

3.8

5.0

3.0

1.06
2.29**
2.30**
0.21
2.64***

Other terms ( % of cases)
Full ratchet anti-dilution
Weighted average anti-dilution
Non-compete clauses
Founder vesting, % of cases

73

