                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 EVALUATING THE SPECIFICATION
                                ERRORS OF ASSET PRICING MODELS


                                              Robert J. Hodrick
                                               Xiaoyan Zhang


                                             Working Paper 7661
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w7661

                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         April 2000




We are very grateful to Ken French who provided data for the portfolios returns and the Fama-French
factors. We thank seminar participants at Columbia and the London School of Economics for their
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Robert J. Hodrick and Xiaoyan Zhang All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Evaluating the Specification Errors of Asset Pricing Models
Robert J. Hodrick and Xiaoyan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 7661
April 2000
JEL No. G10, E21




                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper examines the specification errors of several asset pricing models using the methodology
of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) and a common data set. The models are the CAPM, the Consumption
CAPM, the Jagannathan and Wang (1996) conditionalCAPM, the Campbell (1996) dynamic asset pricing
model, the Cochrane (1996) production-based model, and the Fama-French (1993) three-factor and
five-factor models. We use returns on the Fama-French twenty-five portfolios sorted by size and
book-to-market ratio and the risk-free rate as our test assets. The sample is 1952 to 1997. We allow the
parameters of the models' pricing kernels to fluctuate with the business cycle which we measure in two
ways. One uses the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter applied to either industrial production for monthly
models or real GNP for quarterly models. The second approach for quarterly models uses the
consumption-wealth measure developed by Lettau and Ludvigson (1999). While we cannot reject correct
pricing for Campbell's model, a stability test indicates that the parameters may not be stable. None of the
models correctly prices returns that are scaled by the term premium.


Robert J. Hodrick                                                Xiaoyan Zhang
Columbia Business School                                         Columbia Business School
Uris Hall 605b                                                   Uris Hall 313
3022 Broadway                                                    3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027                                               New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                                         xz61@columbia.edu
rh169@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

Throughout the 1970’s and 1980’s, financial economists investigated the pricing implications of the
capital asset pricing model (CAPM) developed by Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965). The well-
known prediction of the CAPM is that the expected excess return on an asset equals the covariance
of the return on the asset with the return on the market portfolio times the market price of risk,
which is the ratio of the expected excess return on the market portfolio to the variance of the return
on the market portfolio. The expected return prediction of the CAPM can equivalently be stated
as the beta of the asset times the expected excess return on the market portfolio, where the beta is
the covariance of the asset’s return with the return on the market portfolio divided by the variance
of the market return.
    As empirical research began to uncover a number of expected-return anomalies that the CAPM
could not explain, Roll (1977) argued that the model was not testable. Because investors and
firms assessing their costs of capital want to know the determinants of expected returns, empirical
research continued, but it was necessarily conducted under the recognition that the tests involve a
joint hypothesis on the model and the choice of the market portfolio. Even before the anomalies
began to accumulate, theorists such as Merton (1973) noted that the CAPM is a static model, and
they developed intertemporal models that demonstrated how covariances of returns with variables
other than the market return could influence expected returns if the consumption and investment
opportunity sets of investors vary over time. By examining the solution to dynamic portfolio
optimization problems, Hansen and Singleton (1982) developed an empirical consumption-based
capital asset pricing model (CCAPM) in which an expected return depends on the covariance of
the return with the marginal utility of consumption.
    The empirical failure of the CCAPM and the theoretical appeal of the Merton logic led Campbell
(1993, 1996) to develop a dynamic asset pricing model in which an expected return depends on the
covariances of the return with the market portfolio and with the innovation in the present discounted
value of future expected market returns. In the Campbell model, anything that forecasts market
returns becomes a risk factor for asset returns.
    Jagannathan and Wang (1996) noted that it is possible for the CAPM to hold as a conditional
model of expected returns with conditional betas, but the unconditional model would be more
complicated since betas could vary over time. They developed an empirical model of this beta-



                                                   3
premium sensitivity by taking a stand on the nature of the predictability of market returns.
       Cochrane (1996) responded to the failure of the CCAPM by noting that the production side
of the economy also must satisfy dynamic Euler equations. This logic led him to develop the
implications of a production-based asset pricing model in which covariances of asset returns with
macroeconomic measures of investment are important risk factors.
       Finally, the empirical failure of the CAPM and the theoretical appeal of multi-factor models
led Fama and French (1992, 1993, 1995, 1996) to develop a three-factor model. It is fair to say
that this new model, or some extended variant of it, is now the workhorse for risk adjustment in
academic circles.
       The variety of the above models and the alternative data sets on which they have been tested
pose a severe diﬃculty for someone who is trying to understand if any of these models is a reasonable
replacement for the CAPM. The purpose of this paper is to compare these models on a common data
set. We do this using the methodology proposed by Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), who develop
a distance metric we call the HJ-distance. The Hansen-Jagannathan (1997) methodology begins
with the recognition that the absence of arbitrage opportunities implies the existence of a common
pricing kernel or stochastic discount factor that prices all assets. The HJ-distance measures the
distance between the implied pricing proxy of each model and the true pricing kernel. It can also
be interpreted as the normalized maximum pricing error of the model for portfolios formed from
that set of assets. If the model is correct, the HJ-distance is zero, and there are no pricing errors.2
We test whether HJ-distance equals zero using the statistical test developed in Jagannathan and
Wang (1996). Although the measurement of HJ-distance solves a Generalized Method of Moments
(GMM) problem, it is not the optimal GMM of Hansen (1982). We also report results from optimal
GMM tests of the models.
       Because there is considerable evidence that expected returns fluctuate over time, we want to
allow for time-varying prices of risks. We do this by allowing the parameters of the models to
fluctuate with the business cycle. We measure the business cycle in two ways. One uses the
Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter applied to either industrial production for monthly models or real
GNP for quarterly models. The second approach for quarterly models uses the consumption-wealth
measure developed by Lettau and Ludvigson (1999). Also, because Loughran (1997) and Daniel and
   2
       Glasserman and Jin (1998) provide an alternative way of comparing models of stochastic discount factors (SDF)
by examining the physical probability measures of asset prices and the implied measures of the SDF’s.



                                                          4
Titman (1997) argue that return characteristics are diﬀerent in January than outside of January,
we use a January dummy variable to allow the parameters of the models to diﬀer across this month
and the other months.
    Both HJ-distance and optimal GMM assume that the parameters of the model are stable over
time. If a model is misspecified because its parameters are not stable, it may nevertheless pass
the test of HJ-distance equal zero, but it would not predict well out of sample. This situation can
characterize both conditional and unconditional models. Ghysels (1998) finds that using condition-
ing variables to improve asset pricing models may actually worsen their performance out-of-sample
because of parameter instability. We therefore follow Ghysels (1998) who uses the supLM test
developed by Andrews(1993) to investigate instability in parameters.
    The common returns that we require each of the models to price are the returns on the twenty-
five portfolios constructed by Fama and French (1993) in which firms are sorted by the market
value of their equity (size) and the ratio of the book values of their equities to the market values of
their equities (the book-to-market ratio). We use returns in excess of the Treasury bill return, and
we also require the models to price the Treasury bill return. The sample period is 1952 to 1997
with either monthly or quarterly data.
    Because asset pricing involves conditional expectations, any variable that is in the investors’
information set can be used to condition returns. We use this insight to provide a robustness check
on the models. The one variable that we use to condition returns is the term spread between the
yields on long-term and short-term government bonds.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a discussion of the econometric
aspects of the paper including the derivations of HJ-distance, and the test that HJ-distance equals
zero. Section 3 discusses the data and the parameterization of the diﬀerent models. Section 4
contains the empirical results. Section 5 provides concluding remarks.



2     HJ-distance and Conditional Asset Pricing Models

2.1   Model Setup

Assume we have n assets to be priced. It is well-known that in the absence of arbitrage opportunities
there exists a set M of stochastic pricing kernels m which price every asset correctly. That is,




                                                  5
                           Et (mt+1 Rj,t+1 ) = pj , ∀ j, t > 0, ∀ mt+1 ∈ Mt+1 ,                        (1)

where mt+1 is the stochastic pricing kernel at time t + 1, Mt+1 is the set of correct pricing kernels,
Rj,t+1 is the return for portfolio j at time t + 1, and the price for return Rj,t+1 at time t is pj . If
Rj,t+1 is a gross return for a portfolio, then pj = 1; if Rj,t+1 is an excess return for a portfolio, then
pj = 0. Because equation (1) holds conditioned on the information set at t, denoted Φt , by the law
of iterated expectations the unconditional version of equation (1) is


                            E(mt+1 Rj,t+1 ) = pj , ∀ j, t > 0, ∀ mt+1 ∈ Mt+1 .                         (2)

We use equation (2) to estimate and test the various asset-pricing models.
   As Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) note, an asset pricing model provides a pricing proxy, yt+1 .
If the model is true, then yt+1 ∈ Mt+1 . We will examine models in which the pricing proxy yt+1 is
                                                                                 0
                                                                                           £
                                                                                           0
                                                                                                   ¤
a linear function of a constant and a vector of variable factors, ft+1 . Define Ft+1 = 1, ft+1 , and
define the vector of parameters b0 = [b0 , b01 ] . Then the pricing proxy is


                                                0
                                      yt+1 = b Ft+1 = b0 + b01 ft+1 ,                                  (3)

where Ft+1 is the k × 1 factor vector, and b is the k × 1 coeﬃcient vector. The parameter vector
b provides the information of whether one factor is an important determinant of the pricing ker-
nel. For ease of presentation, we drop the time subscript when it is not necessary for clarity of
presentation.
   Cochrane (1996) notes that if the model is true, equation (2) holds for all n assets with yt+1
substituted for mt+1 . Then, if p is the n × 1 vector of pj ’s, the pricing model has an equivalent
representation in terms of multivariate betas and prices of risks:


                                          E(R) = R0 p + β 0 Λ,                                         (4)

where


                                                     1       1
                                         R0 =            =          ,                                  (5)
                                                    E(y)   E(b0 F )


                                      β = cov(f, f 0 )−1 cov(f, R0 ),                                  (6)

                                                        6
and


                                         Λ = −R0 cov(f, f 0 )b1 .                                   (7)

   In equation (4), R0 is the unconditional riskfree rate or the zero-beta rate, the β’s are the projec-
tions of the returns onto the factors, and the Λ’s are the prices of beta risks. All of the parameters
can be calculated once we know b. To answer whether the jth factor significantly influences the
expected returns on a particular set of portfolios, we must assess whether the corresponding Λj
is significantly diﬀerent from zero. Notice Λj = 0 does not mean b1,j = 0, and vice versa. Only
when cov(f, f 0 ) is diagonal are the two statements equivalent. The derivations and proofs of these
statements can be found in Cochrane (1996).
   In discussing prices of factor risks, one must be clear about whether it is beta risk or covariance
risk. Campbell (1996), for example, uses covariance decomposition of equation (2) to write


                                    E(R) = R0 p − R0 cov(m, R).                                     (8)

By substituting yt+1 for mt+1 in equation (2), we have

                                  E(R) = R0 − R0 cov(R, f 0 )b1
                                                     k
                                                     X
                                          = R0 +           qj cov(fj , R).                          (9)
                                                     j=1

Thus, the price of the jth covariance risk is

                                             qj = −R0 b1,j .                                       (10)

Since R0 is not very diﬀerent from 1, we do not report statistics for qj .


2.2   HJ-distance

Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) note that when the asset pricing model is true, y ∈ M, but if the
model is false, y ∈
                  / M . Thus, for false models there is a strictly positive distance between y and
M. Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) define the distance, which we call HJ-distance, as


                               δ = min2 ky − mk , where E(mR) = p,                                 (11)
                                   m∈L




                                                    7
                 p
and kxk =          E(x2 ).3 The problem defined in equation (11) can be rewritten as the following
Lagrangian minimization problem:

                                                n                                              o
                               δ 2 = min sup
                                        2
                                                  E (y − m)2 + 2λ0 [E (mR) − p] .                                (12)
                                     m∈L λ∈Rn

       The value of δ is the minimum distance from the pricing proxy y to the set of true pricing
kernels M. Let m     e be the solution to equation (12). One can think of y − m
               e and λ                                                        e as the minimal

adjustment to y to make it a true pricing kernel. Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) solve equation
(12) to find
                                                         e R,          0
                                                      e =λ
                                                    y−m                                                          (13)

where


                                                    ¡
                                            e = E RR0           ¢−1
                                            λ                         E(yR − p).                                 (14)

Thus, the HJ-distance is
                                                        °        °     h            i1/2
                                                 ° e0 °   e 0 E(RR0 )λ
                                                                     e
                                             e = °λ
                                    δ = ky − mk      R° = λ                                .

                              e from equation (14) gives
Substituting for the value of λ
                                        h                   ¡         ¢−1           i1/2
                                   δ = E(yR − p)0 E RR0                     E(yR − p)      .                     (15)

       By solving the conjugate problem to equation (11), Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) also provide
an important alternative interpretation to δ. It is the maximum pricing error for the set of asset
payoﬀs with norm equal to one. With n basic assets, R, the maximum pricing error δ is achieved
                                                                      °      °
by a portfolio of those assets with weights θ, where °θ0 R° = 1. After simplification, θ is given by
                                           1 ¡    ¢−1            1e
                                        θ = E RR0     E(yR − p) = λ.                                             (16)
                                           δ                     δ
       Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) note that bb, the estimate of b, can be chosen to minimize δ.
To see the relation of this problem to a standard Generalized Method of Moment(GMM) problem,
define the pricing error vector g = E(yR − p), and its sample counterpart
                                                           T
                                                        1X
                                                gT =          Rt yt − p,                                         (17)
                                                        T t=1
   3
       Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) also consider a distance measure in which m is required to be strictly positive.
If the problem is solved without the constraint and yt+1 > 0 for all t, the two solutions coincide. In their empirical
analysis, Hansen and Jagannathan (1997) find this additional restriction does not make a big diﬀerence.


                                                                8
and let W = E(RR0 )−1 . Then, by squaring equation (15), bb can be chosen as


                                  b
                                  b = arg min δ2 = arg min gT0 W gT .                             (18)

While equation (18) is a standard GMM problem, it is not the optimal GMM of Hansen (1982)
which uses as the weighting matrix a consistent estimator of

                                       W ∗ ≡ [T · var(gT )]−1 .                                   (19)

Hansen (1982) demonstrates that W ∗ is optimal in the sense that the estimates bb have the smallest
asymptotic covariance. In general, the optimal weighting matrix assigns big weights to assets with
small variances in their pricing errors, and it assigns small weights to assets with large variances of
their pricing errors. It is obvious that W ∗ changes with diﬀerent models. This makes it unsuitable
for the task of making comparisons among competing models. The alternative weighting matrix
of Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), W = E(RR0 )−1 , is invariant across competing asset-pricing
models. Using a common weighting matrix allows us to have a uniform measure of performance
across models for a common set of portfolios. The only assumption needed is that W is non-
singular. Cochrane (1996) argues that E(RR0 ) may be nearly singular in which case the inversion
is problematic, but as we discuss later, we did not encounter inversion problems.
   A big advantage of linear factor models is that they can be solved analytically. To demonstrate
the solution, we first introduce some notation. Let the sample moment of the pricing errors, as in
equation (17), be

                                                   T
                                                1X      ¡     ¢
                                     gT (b) =         Rt b0 Ft − p,                               (20)
                                                T t=1
let the gradient with respect to the parameters be

                                                         T
                                                ∂gT   1X
                                      DT =          =       Rt Ft0 ,                              (21)
                                                 ∂b   T t=1
and let the inverse of the estimated second moment matrix of the returns be

                                                     T
                                                  1X
                                       WT = (           Rt Rt0 )−1 .                              (22)
                                                  T t=1
Also, define


                                                WT∗ = ST−1 ,                                      (23)

                                                     9
where ST is a consistent estimate of var [T · gT (b)]. The analytical solution for bb from the first
order condition of equation (18) is given by


                                             b
                                             b = (DT0 WT DT )−1 (DT0 WT p).                         (24)

From Hansen (1982), the asymptotic variance of bb is


                                    1 0
                        var(bb) =    (D WT DT )−1 DT0 WT ST WT DT (DT0 WT DT )−1 .                  (25)
                                    T T
For optimal GMM, equation (25) reduces to


                                                             1 0 −1
                                              var(bb) =       (D S DT )−1 .                         (26)
                                                             T T T
   One purpose of this paper is to determine whether any of our candidate models of the stochastic
discount factor has an HJ-distance equal zero. We construct our test statistics following Theorem
3 in Jagannathan and Wang (1996). The distribution of δ is not standard under the assumption
that the true δ equals zero. Jagannathan and Wang (1996) demonstrate that the distribution of
T δ 2 involves a weighted sum of n − k χ2 (1) statistics, where n is the number of assets and k is the
number of estimated parameters. The weights are the n − k non-zero eigenvalues of

                               1     1                 1                           10   1   1
                                         0                                                      0
                        A = ST2 WT2 [In − WT2 DT (DT0 WT DT )−1 DT0 WT2 ]WT2 ST2 .                  (27)
                    1          1
In equation (27), ST2 and WT2 are the upper-triangular matrices from the Cholesky decompositions
of ST and WT , and In is the n-dimensional identity matrix. It can be demonstrated that A has
exactly n − k nonzero eigenvalues, which are positive and are denoted by θ 1 , ..., θ n−k . Then, the
asymptotic sampling distribution of the HJ-distance is

                                                           n−k
                                                           X
                                                   d
                                             T δ2 →              θj υj as T → ∞,                    (28)
                                                           j=1

where υ 1 , ..., υn−k are independent χ2 (1) random variables. We simulate the statistics 10,000 times
to determine the p-value for the estimated HJ-distance.
   We also consider additional model diagnostics. The covariance matrix of the pricing errors for
the model is




                                                                  10
                      h   ³ ´i
                  var gT bb
                  1h                             i  h                             i0
              =     In − DT (DT0 WT DT )−1 DT0 WT ST In − DT (DT0 WT DT )−1 DT0 WT .
                  T
                                                                                                (29)

Thus, we can construct a Wald test statistic for the null hypothesis that gT = 0 as
                                  ³ ´    h    ³ ´i−1        ³ ´
                                                             d
                              gT0 bb var gT bb         gT bb → χ2 (n − k).                      (30)
          h   ³ ´i
Since var gT bb      only has rank n − k, we use the pseudo inverse, following Cochrane (1996)
footnote 6. When we do optimal GMM, this Wald test reduces to the well-known J-test, with
                                  ³ ´    h    ³ ´i−1        ³ ´         ³ ´   ³ ´
                     J = gT0 bb var gT bb              gT bb = T gT0 bb WT∗ gT bb
                              d
                              → χ2 (n − k).                                                     (31)

From equation (14) the covariance matrix of the Lagrange multipliers is

                                                        h     ³ ´i
                                        e = WT var gT b
                                    var(λ)            b              WT .                       (32)

                                                               e
Since the maximum pricing error δ is achieved by θ0 R with θ = λ/δ, we can examine the importance
                                                                           e j = 0.
of individual assets to the pricing error by examining the null hypothesis λ
   Finally, it is important to distinguish which pricing errors are under discussion. We defined the
pricing errors of the models in equation (20). It is the sample average for the diﬀerences in prices
when we use y to price R minus the correct prices which should be zero for an excess return and
one for a gross return. As in other research, we can also define average return errors as
                                                   T
                                                1X
                          π = R − E(R) =              Rt − R0 [pn − cov(y, R)]
                                                T t=1
                              = R0 gT (bb).                                                     (33)

   To avoid confusion, we refer to gT (bb) as model errors, and π as the pricing errors of the basic
assets. Since R0 diﬀers across models, the two do not provide the same information. We look at
gT (bb) mainly for details associated directly with δ. We examine π to compare pricing errors for the
basic assets across models.




                                                   11
2.3   Conditional Models and Stability Tests

Examining the unconditional implications of linear factor models has two inherent problems. One
is that only unconditional risk premiums are estimated. The second is that the models force
prices of fundamental risks to be constant across business cycles. Cochrane (1996), Ferson and
Harvey (1999), and others try to solve these two problems by using macroeconomic variables as
conditioning variables. In equation (3), all parameters in b are constant. To allow them to vary
with some element zt in Φt , we write

                          yt+1 = b0 (zt )Ft+1
                                                        h                i
                                = (b0,1 + b0,2 zt ) + b01,1 + (b1,2 zt )0 Ft+1

                                = b0,1 + b0,2 zt + b01,1 Ft+1 + b01,2 (Ft+1 zt ).               (34)

The last equal sign demonstrates Cochrane’s (1996) point, scaling the prices of factors is equivalent
to scaling the factors.
   If prices of risks fluctuate over the business cycle, we can capture this eﬀect by using variables
that are associated with business cycles. There are three requirements for macroeconomic variables
to be legitimate instruments. First, they must be included in the time t information set. Second,
they should summarize the status of the business cycle. Third, since the number of the parameters
increases geometrically with the number of conditioning variables, which can make the estimates
unreliable, we can only allow one conditioning variable each time. Because the previous literature
has focused on both monthly and quarterly horizons, we would like a similar conditioning variable
for each horizon.
   Daniel and Torous (1995) find that the cyclical element in industrial production (IP ) is pre-
dictive for common stock returns. We adopt their use of IP as one instrument for the monthly
models. For quarterly models, we use the cyclical component of real GNP . Because the cyclical
components are not observable, we derive both series by using the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter
applied recursively. We will elaborate on the construction of our data in the next section.
   Lettau and Ludvigson (1999a) provide an alternative to these output-based measures of the
business cycle. Lettau and Ludvigson (1999a) demonstrate that the cyclical element in the log
consumption-aggregate wealth ratio (CAY ) is strongly predictive for excess stock returns. This
argument is consistent with the CCAPM. Lettau and Ludvigson (1999b) test the CCAPM and the
CAPM using CAY as a conditioning variable. In their cross-sectional test conditioning with CAY

                                                   12
substantially improves the performance of the models. We also include CAY as a conditioning
variable for the quarterly models.
   Loughran (1997) and Daniel and Titman (1997) argue that the B/M eﬀect in stock returns
is largely driven by a January eﬀect, that is, the B/M eﬀect is not present at other times of the
year. The basic assets we use are the Fama and French twenty-five portfolios which are constructed
precisely to incorporate the B/M and size eﬀects. We use a January dummy variable (JAN) to
allow prices of risks to diﬀer between January and other months of the year.
   Another important issue is the stability of the model’s parameters. Conditional models are
attractive because unconditional models may not adequately capture time-varying risk premiums.
But, this approach is not costless. If the conditional version is correctly specified and captures
the dynamics in risk premiums, it will outperform the unconditional models. However, if the
model’s implied time-varying risk premiums are inherently misspecified because we choose the
wrong conditioning variable, this false model may still appear to work well in small samples since
it uses additional degrees of freedom. Ghysels (1998) finds that conditional models are fragile and
may have bigger pricing errors than unconditional models.
   If the model is correctly specified, parameter stability is not a problem. We use the supLM test
of Andrews (1993) to see whether there are structural shifts in the parameters. The null hypothesis
is there are no structural shifts. Andrews (1993) argues that the supLM test is powerful against
the alternative of a single structural break at an unknown time. He also argues that even if this is
not the most interesting alternative hypothesis, it provides a reasonable test of parameter stability.
The LM statistics are evaluated at 5% increments between 20% and 80% of the sample, and the
largest is the supLM statistics. The distribution for the supLM statistic is presented in Table 1 of
Andrews (1993).
   To keep the estimation tractable, we use the twenty-six portfolios as the basic assets to be
priced. We also investigate whether the model is robust to a diﬀerent set of assets by adopting
Cochrane’s approach of scaling returns. Cochrane (1996) notes that conditioning information can
be used to scale returns as implied by equation (1). These scaled returns can be interpreted as
the returns to managed portfolios. The portfolio manager changes the weight of each portfolio
according to the signal he observes from the conditioning variable. To illustrate, we multiply both
sides of equation (1) by any variable xt ∈ Φt to get

                          Et (mt+1 Rj,t+1 )xt = xt pj , ∀ j, t > 0, ∀ xt ∈ Φt .                  (35)

                                                   13
By the law of iterated expectation, we have

                         E(mt+1 Rj,t+1 xt ) = E(xt pj ), ∀ j, t > 0, ∀ xt ∈ Φt .                (36)

Equation (40) provides the orthogonality conditions for scaled returns. If the model is robust to
changes in the underlying assets, it should be able to price the new assets correctly. That is, if
the model can price non-scaled returns R, under the null hypothesis that the parameters are not
asset-sensitive, the model should be able to price scaled returns Rx as well.
    We first calculate parameter estimates from optimal GMM using the twenty-six returns as

                                    b
                                    b = arg min gT (R)0 W ∗ gT (R).                             (37)

Then, under the null that bb is the true parameter, the set of scaled returns Rx should be correctly
priced with bb. We calculate the new J statistics as

                             J = gT (Rx, bb)0 var[gT (Rx, bb)]−1 gT (Rx, bb),                   (38)

where
                                            1 TX
                                               −1           ³        ´
                            gT (Rx, bb) =         (Rt+1 xt ) bb0 Ft+1 − pxt ,                   (39)
                                            T t=1

The J-statistic is distributed as a χ2 (n) under the null. The degrees of freedom are n because we
have n orthogonality conditions, and we do not estimate any additional parameters. The same
argument applies to HJ-distance. With the new orthogonality conditions for scaled returns, we
need to calculate the new δ and the distribution of T δ2 . Since the first stage estimates by optimal
GMM are not very diﬀerent from those obtained from HJ-distance estimation, we choose to use
the estimates from optimal GMM to calculate new HJ-distance for the new scaled assets.



3    Data

Unless otherwise indicated, all data are from CRSP. For the monthly models, the sample period is
1952:01 to 1997:12, for 552 total observations. For the quarterly models, the sample is from 1953:01
to 1997:04, for 180 total observations. We begin in 1953:01 because CAY is only available after
1953:01.




                                                    14
3.1      The Portfolio Returns

Our basic assets are the twenty-five excess returns on the portfolios sorted by size and book-to-
market ratio that are calculated as in Fama and French (1993).4 Excess returns are constructed
by subtracting the T-bill rate, and our twenty-sixth asset is the gross return on the T-bill. The
previous literature finds that the twenty-five B/M and size portfolios are very hard to price correctly
because they incorporate both size premiums and value premiums. We require the models to price
these excess equity returns and the riskfree rate, as well.
      Portfolios are numbered 11 to 55, where the first number refers to the size quintile and the
second number refers to the B/M quintile. For example, 11 is the portfolio of the smallest firms
with the lowest B/M, while 55 is the portfolio with the largest firms and highest B/M. Table 1
provides summary statistics for the twenty-five portfolios for the sample period 1952:01 to 1997:12.
It is similar to Table 2 of Fama and French (1993), which involves a shorter sample period from
1963:01 to 1991:12. For our longer sample, most average returns are larger, except for the low B/M
firms. Since the standard errors are smaller, the t-statistics are larger except for the low B/M firms.
      As demonstrated in section 2, the weighting matrix for the calculation of HJ-distance depends
only on the assets and is the same for diﬀerent models. The weighting matrix is not the same
when we use conditioning information to scale returns. Hence, we have four weighting matrices:
monthly non-scaled returns, monthly scaled returns, quarterly non-scaled returns, and quarterly
scaled returns. Because our main results are derived from monthly and quarterly non-scaled returns,
we focus primarily on these two cases. Since

                                                  W = E(R0 R)−1 ,

we first want to demonstrate that E(R0 R) is non-singular. The condition numbers of the two matri-
ces of sample second moments are 13548 and 7851 for monthly and quarterly returns, respectively5 .
This indicates that inversion of the matrices should be well behaved.
      Cochrane (1996) argues that one can transform the weighting matrix using eigenvalue decom-
position such that W = ΓQΓ0 where Γ is an orthonormal matrix with the eigenvectors of W on its
columns, and Q is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues. Then, the HJ-distance problem in equation
(15) can be rewritten as
  4
      We thank Ken French for providing the data.
  5
      For monthly scaled returns, the condition number is 10264; for quarterly scaled returns, the condition number is
5238.


                                                          15
                                   £                               ¤1/2
                               δ = E(yR − pn )0 ΓQΓ0 E(yR − pn )          .

The elements of the jth column in Γ can be interpreted as weights that are assigned to individual
portfolios for the jth eigenvalue in Q. If there are a few large eigenvalues of W with eigenvectors
that place large weights on only a few portfolios, the GMM problem may be choosing parameters
that are associated only with a few portfolios. Because W does not change across models, it is not
unfair to ask the competing models to price the same portfolios. But, we do want the structure of
the weighting matrix to be reasonable. Figure 1 demonstrates which particular portfolios receive
the largest weights for the largest two eigenvalues of the weighting matrices. The weights are
standardized to sum to one. Figure 1 demonstrates that no particular portfolio receives an unusually
large weight.


3.2     Conditioning Variables

3.2.1    Conditioning Variables to Scale Factors

We use five variables to capture movements in the prices of risks over the business cycle. For the
monthly models, the cyclical part of the natural logarithm of the industrial production index is one
conditioning variable. The industrial production index is from the Citibase monthly dataset. The
series is available from January 1947 to April 1999 . We use the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter on
the first five years to initialize the cyclical series. The smoothing parameter is set to be 6400. Thus
the first element of our cycle is 1951:12. We then use the procedure recursively on all available data
to find the subsequent elements for the cyclical series. This method guarantees that each element
is in the time t information set. Panel A of Figure 2 gives the log industrial production index and
the cyclical element IP we use.
   As mentioned above, in monthly models we also scale the factors with a January dummy, JAN,
that takes the value 1 for each January and is 0 otherwise. For quarterly models, JAN takes the
value 1 for the first quarter and is 0 otherwise.
   For the quarterly models, we also scale the factors with the cyclical component of real GNP .
The data are also from the Citibase quarterly dataset (beginning in 1946:01). We use the recursive
Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter with the smoothing parameter equal to 1600. Because GNP is not
announced until the following quarter, we lag GNP twice to make sure it is in the time t information

                                                    16
set. Alternatively, Lettau and Ludvigson (1999) develop another conditioning variable, the change
in the consumption-wealth ratio, CAY .6 The CAY series is lagged one period to be a legitimate
instrumental variable. Panels B and C of Figure 2 present the dynamics of GNP and CAY .
The cyclical components of the GNP and CAY series are not particularly highly correlated. The
contemporaneous correlation is -0.0441, and the cross correlations indicate that CAY leads GNP
by 3 to 4 quarters, as theory predicts consumption should lead income.
       Table 2 provides some information on the predictive power of the three conditioning variables
except JAN. We use the conditioning variables to estimate the next period return on the value-
weighted market return. All of the three conditioning variables have significant predictive power.
The explained part of returns is small, as anticipated. With monthly data the R2 for IP is 1%,
and with quarterly data it is 3% for GNP , and 11% for CAY .


3.2.2      Conditioning Variable to Scale Returns

We only use one series as the conditioning variable for scaled returns. It is the term premium,
calculated as the diﬀerence between the 30-year government bond yield and the 1-year government
bond yield. The data are from CRSP, which provides a monthly index. We construct the quarterly
series by using the end-of-quarter observations.


3.3       The Asset Pricing Models

We evaluate eight asset-pricing models. The simplest model incorporates only a constant in the
SDF, and it is called the Null model. The Null model is used as a benchmark. With only a constant
                                           e is δ = minm∈M std(m). Thus, we can interpret the
factor present, the distance between y and m
HJ-distance as the standard deviation for the least volatile element in M. In the conditional case,
the Null model has two factors, the constant and the conditional cycle. Thus, the conditional Null
model determines whether the movement in the cycle is an important pricing factor.
   6
       The data are obtained from Ludvigson’s website: http://www.ny.frb.org/rmaghome/economist/ludvigson.html.
CAY is calculated as CAYt = ct − wat − (1 − w)yt , where ct is consumption, at is asset wealth, yt is labor income,
and w is the weight of asset wealth in total wealth. w is estimated by OLS using all observations. Because of the
                                                                         b for w is said to be superconsistent. Lettau
cointegration relationship between ct , at and yt , the sample estimate (w)
                                                                                                d t , as a function
                                b can therefore be treated as if it is the true parameter. Thus CAY
and Ludvigson (1999) argue that w
   b can be treated as if it is in time t information even though w
of w,                                                             b is estimated using all observations, and when
      d t in estimation there is no need to adjust the standard errors for the sampling variability in w.
using CAY                                                                                              b



                                                         17
       The second model is the CAPM. The model SDF has two factors, a constant, and the excess
return on the market portfolio. We use the excess return on the value-weighted CRSP index over
the one month risk free rate RV W , as a proxy for the market excess return. For the quarterly
model, we compound the monthly market returns to produce quarterly returns and subtract the
three month interest rate. In the conditional model of the SDF, there are 4 factors: the constant,
the cycle, RV W and RV W · cycle.
       The third model is a linearized CCAPM. The original CCAPM is non-linear and requires a
particular form for the utility function. Rather than develop nonlinear models of marginal utility,
we simply use consumption growth, ∆c, as the factor. We use the growth rate in real nondurables
consumption from Citibase. The unconditional model of the SDF has two factors, the constant and
∆c. The conditional model has four factors: the constant, the cycle, ∆c, and ∆c · cycle.
       The fourth model is the conditional CAPM developed by Jagannathan and Wang (1996)(here-
after the JW model). This model is derived from the assumption that the CAPM holds as a
conditional model and that the return on the market is predictable with the default premium,
RP REM , which is the diﬀerence between the yield on baa and aaa corporate bonds from the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve. The JW model’s unconditional form involves two betas. One
is the original market-beta. The other beta incorporates variation in the market beta, which Ja-
gannathan and Wang (1996) call beta-premium sensitivity. Beta premium sensitivity is captured
by variation in the default premium. RP REM measures the instability of the market beta over
the business cycle. Jagannathan and Wang (1996) also argue that the value-weighted index is an
inadequate proxy for the market return. They include labor income growth, RLBR , as an additional
factor reflecting a return to human capital.7 There are four factors in the JW model, a constant,
RV W , RLBR and RP REM . We construct the data as described in Jagannathan and Wang (1996) for
monthly models. For the quarterly model, RLBR is calculated as the quarterly growth rate in labor
income, and RP REM is constructed by selecting the third observation in each quarter. Although
the JW model is already an unconditional version of a conditional model, we also estimate our
conditional version which implies a total of eight factors in the model SDF.
       The fifth model is a linear version of Campbell’s (1996) log-linear asset pricing model. Camp-
   7                                                                         Lt−1 +Lt−2
       Jagannathan and Wang (1996) measure labor income growth as RLBR,t =   Lt−2 +Lt−3 ,   where L is labor income per
capita calculated as the diﬀerence between personal income and dividend income per capita. The data are obtained
from Citibase. Jagannathan and Wang(1996) use a two-month average to “minimize the influence of measurement
errors”.


                                                       18
bell (1996) develops an intertemporal asset pricing model that allows for changes in investment
opportunities. Factors are determined by their ability to predict the return on the market. As
in Jagannathan and Wang (1996), Campbell (1996) argues that labor income is an important
additional factor to fully reflect investor’s wealth. However, the labor income factor, LBR, is con-
structed as the monthly growth rate in real labor income (from Citibase). The other three factors
are the following: the dividend yield on RV W , DIV ; the relative bill rate, RT B, calculated as
the diﬀerence between the 1-month T-bill rate and its 1-year backward moving average; and the
yield spread between long and short-term government bonds T RM, which we constructed as the
diﬀerence in yields between 30-year government bond and 1-year government bond. In total, there
are six factors in the SDF for this model: the constant, RV W , LBR, DIV, RT B and T RM. In
Campbell (1996), the pricing proxy is actually defined as y = exp(−F 0 b) and there are constraints
across the parameters. Here we simply put the six factors into a linear SDF model, y = F 0 b. For
the conditional models, we have twelve factors in total.
   The sixth model is a linearized version of Cochrane’s (1996) production based asset pricing
model. Cochrane (1996) argues that returns should be well priced by the investment return, which
is a complicated function of the investment-capital ratio and several parameters. But, Cochrane
(1996) finds that the investment growth rate performs equally well, and we adopt the investment
growth rate model instead of the investment return model. The factors are the growth rate on
real non-residential investment, GNR, and the growth rate on real residential investment, GR.
Both original series are from Citibase. The model has three factors in the unconditional model,
a constant, GNR, and GR. The conditional Cochrane model has six factors. The data are from
Citibase. Since we only have quarterly data for real investment, we do not compute a monthly
model in this case.
   The above six models are all based on explicit economic theories. We also consider two empirical
asset pricing models. They are called “empirical” because their key pricing factors are derived from
the data. The seventh model is the Fama-French (1993) three factor model (hereafter the FF3
model). The first factor is the excess return on the market portfolio, RV W , as calculated above.
To mimic the risk factors in returns related to size and B/M ratio, Fama and French (1993) first
sort all stocks into two size portfolios, small and big, they also sort all stocks into three B/M
portfolios, high, medium and low. Factor SMB (small minus big) is constructed as the diﬀerence
in returns on small and big, thus it captures risk related to size. Factor HML (high minus low)


                                                19
is constructed as the diﬀerence in returns on high and low, thus it captures risk related to B/M
ratio. The unconditional model of the SDF has four factors: constant, RV W , SMB, and HML.
We construct quarterly factors by compounding the monthly factors. There are eight factors in the
conditional model.
    The eighth model is the Fama-French (1993) five-factor model in which they add a term-
structure factor and a default-premium factor to their three factor model (hereafter the FF5 model).
Fama and French (1993) use the diﬀerence between the yield on a thirty-year bond and the yield on
the one-month bill as a term structure factor, that is, T ERM. Default risk, RP REM , is proxied by
the diﬀerence between the yields on baa and aaa corporate bonds (as in JW). We construct quar-
terly data by compounding the monthly RV W , SMB and HML, and we use the third observation
of each quarter for T ERM and RP REM . The conditional model has twelve factors.



4     Empirical Results

4.1   Basic Model Diagnostics

The basic model diagnostics are presented in the seven panels of Table 3. The first row of each panel
reports the HJ-distance (δ) estimates. The second row provides the p-values of the test δ = 0 as in
equation (28). The third row contains the standard errors for the HJ-distance estimates calculated
under the null hypothesis that the true distance is not equal to zero as in equation (45) of Hansen
and Jagannathan (1997). These allow an assessment of the precision with which δ is estimated.
The fourth row reports the p-values of the Wald tests that the pricing errors are all zero as in
equation (30). The fifth row reports the p-values of the J-statistics from optimal GMM estimates
of the models. The sixth row presents the values of the supLM test, and the seventh row provides
the p-values for these tests from Table 1 of Andrews (1993). The eighth row reports the number of
parameters.
    Recall that the HJ-distance has two interpretations. It is the distance between the true SDF
and the model’s implied SDF, and it is the maximum pricing error for any portfolio formed from
the basic assets with norm of the payoﬀ on the portfolio equal to one. Since the second moment of
the payoﬀ equals one, and because the mean of the payoﬀ must be less than the second moment,
the true price of the payoﬀ must be less than one if the expected return is to be greater than one.
Thus, the maximum pricing error understates what the percentage pricing error would be.


                                                 20
   Interpretation of the HJ-distance estimates in finite samples is hampered by the fact that zero
is on the boundary of the parameter space. Even if the null hypothesis is true, we expect in finite
samples that the estimated HJ-distance will be positive. Of course, if the p-values of the test
statistics are well behaved, false rejections of the null hypothesis only occur the correct percentage
of the time.
   The Monte Carlo experiments conducted by Ahn and Gadarowski (1999) indicate that the
expected value of the HJ-distance for a three factor model can be quite large and depends on
the number of assets and the number of time periods. From Table 1 of Ahn and Gadarowski
(1999) with 25 returns, we find average HJ-distances of 0.393 for 160 observations, 0.260 for 330
observations and 0.174 for 700 observations. Hence, by extrapolating to our monthly sample of 552
observations, we should not be surprised to see an HJ-distance equal to 0.21, even though a model
is true. Similarly, for a quarterly sample of 180 observations, we should not be surprised to see an
HJ-distance equal to 0.38, even though the model is true.
   Ahn and Gadarowski (1999) also investigate the empirical size of the test that HJ-distance
equals zero. For 25 assets they find that 5.5% of their experiments exceed the 1% critical value
with 160 observations, 2.5% are greater with 330 observations, and 1.5% are greater with 700
observations. Thus, for our sample sizes, the monthly model appears to be close to having the
correct size of the test if a three-factor model is true, while the rejection rates for the quarterly
model appear to be too high.
   Monthly Models. The first two rows of Panel A in Table 3 indicate that the Null model,
the CAPM, the CCAPM, the JW model, and the FF3 model all have HJ-distances that are larger
than 0.32. The p-values for the tests that these distances are zero are all less than 0.0001. The
standard errors of the HJ-distances, calculated under the hypothesis that a model is false, are
all about 0.05. The fourth and fifth rows report the Wald tests of whether the pricing errors on
the twenty-six original portfolios are jointly zero when evaluated at either the parameters that
minimize the HJ-distance or the parameters from optimal GMM, respectively. Generally, we find
little disagreement between these tests, and in panel A of Table 3 we find five out of the six models
are all rejected at the 0.001 level of significance or smaller. Campbell’s model achieves the smallest
HJ-distance, and the p-value of the test δ = 0 indicates we cannot reject correct pricing. Thus
the model captures the size and B/M eﬀects and also prices the riskfree rate. It is noticeable that
the same model also passes the J-test of optimal GMM. Unfortunately, Campbell’s model does not


                                                 21
have stable parameters. It fails the supLM test severely.
   The HJ-distance of the FF5 model is smaller than that of the FF3 model. As one might suspect,
this diﬀerence comes from the fact that the T-bill rate is hard for the FF3 model to price because
the FF3 model only includes equity pricing factors. To evaluate this conjecture, we did a test which
only used the twenty-five size and B/M portfolios. There were only small diﬀerences between the
FF3 model and the FF5 model in that test. Even for the FF5 model, the point estimate of HJ-
distance is still around 0.30. If we subtract the bias in the statistic of 0.21, we can conclude that
the maximum pricing error is around 0.11.
   Panel B of Table 3 reports the results when the factors are scaled by cycle(IP ). We find
the magnitudes of HJ-distances all shrink significantly by approximately 10% except for the Null
model. The p-value’s for the test of HJ-distance equal zero are now near 5%. We test whether the
conditioning information is statistically significant with a Wald test on the joint hypothesis that the
parameters for all scaled factors equal zero. For the CAPM, the CCAPM and the JW model, the
p-value’s are smaller than 0.02, which means the scaling variable IP significantly captures time-
varying behavior of risks. Using cycle(IP ) reduces HJ-distance for all models, and Campbell’s
model achieves the smallest distance. Scaled factors also improve the supLM statistics, though
none of the models pass both the test of HJ-distance equal zero and the supLM test. It is notable
that the CAPM with scaled factors marginally passes both the test of HJ-distance equal zero and
the optimal GMM test. Again, all results from minimizing HJ-distance are similar to what we find
from the optimal GMM approach.
   The fact that scaled factor models have smaller HJ-distances than non-scaled factors models
comes from two sources. First, the conditioning information reduces the pricing errors by allowing
the prices of risks to vary with the business cycle. Second, by doubling the number of parameters,
a scaled factor model uses additional degrees of freedom in the minimization problem and is better
able to fit the data. This better fit may be spurious, though, as small-sample biases may worsen.
In the next section, we will examine the details of individual models.
   According to Loughran (1997), the January eﬀect explains a substantial part of the B/M eﬀect.
When we allow only for a January dummy variable in addition to the constant term of the SDF’s,
there are very few changes compared to the results in Panel A of Table 3. These results are
not reported to save space. Panel C of Table 3 reports results with all factors scaled by JAN.
This eﬀectively separates the January observations from the non-January observations by allowing


                                                  22
diﬀerent factor prices in January. For the Null model, the Wald statistic for the test that the
conditional parameter equals zero in the Null model is 0.0001, which demonstrates the importance
of a January eﬀect. Allowing for a January conditioning variable improves the point estimates of
HJ-distance for all the models. Nevertheless, p-values of the J statistics indicated that the CAPM,
the CCAPM, and the FF3 models are still rejected at the 0.05 level of significance. The most
dramatic improvement is in the JW model which now passes all of the tests except the stability
test. The Wald test on the importance of the scaled factors indicates their joint significance.
There is a slight improvement in the performance of the FF3 model although the joint test of the
significance of the scaled factors has a p-value of 0.15. The FF5 model and Campbell’s model
already do reasonably well with non-scaled factors. Scaling all the factors in these models with a
January dummy does not appear to add any important factors since the p-values of the Wald tests
are both quite large.
      Quarterly Models. The previous literature typically reports either monthly or quarterly
models. Some models, such as Cochrane’s (1996) model, can only be applied to quarterly data
because of data constraints. In this section we investigate the performance of the models with
quarterly data. Several issues arise. First, time aggregation may worsen the fit between the
factors and the models by smoothing the factors8 . Second, market imperfections that cause short-
term deviations from the models may be lessened because the returns are cumulated. Third, as
noted above, the small-sample performance of any model deteriorates with a smaller number of
observations. The first and third eﬀects suggest the performance of the models with quarterly data
deteriorates, while the second factor allows for improvement.
      Panel D provides the summary results for the eight quarterly models, the seven previously
investigated plus Cochrane’s (1996) model. Although the point estimates of the HJ-distances are
much larger for the quarterly models than the monthly models, recall from our discussion of Ahn
and Gadarowski (1999) that values like 0.38 are to be expected in these sample sizes even if the
model is true. Nevertheless, the quarterly HJ-distances generally exceed the average of the Ahn and
Gadarowski (1999) figures by more than the monthly estimates exceed the corresponding average
from the Monte Carlo experiments. For example, the monthly FF3 model has an HJ-distance of
  8
      This logic leads Cochrane (1996) to time average monthly returns in constructing quarterly returns. While we
construct the quarterly returns from the compound monthly returns as Rt+1 + Rt+2 + Rt+3 , Cochrane (1996) uses
1
  R
3 t+1
        + 23 Rt+2 + Rt+3 + 23 Rt+4 + 13 Rt+5 .




                                                        23
0.323 and the Monte Carlo average is approximately 0.21 for a diﬀerence of 0.113. At the quarterly
sampling interval we find a diﬀerence of 0.537-0.38=0.157.
   While the p-values of the tests that HJ-distance equals zero are all less that 0.0370, recall also
that in this sample size the asymptotic p-values probably understate the probability of a type I
error as Ahn and Gadarowski (1999) find that 15.7% of their empirical experiments exceed the 0.05
asymptotic critical value in samples of 160 observations. Hence, it seems reasonable to conclude
that the evidence against the JW model, the FF5 model, and Campbell’s model is not particularly
strong. Unfortunately these three models all fail the parameter stability test.
   In Panel E, we scale all factors by the lagged cyclical component of GNP . Including the
conditioning information reduces the magnitude of HJ-distance by 5-10%. Two models, the FF3
model and Cochrane’s, now pass the test of HJ-distance equal zero and the supLM test. Once again
the HJ-distance tests are consistent with the results from optimal GMM. The test that all bb’s for
scaled factors equal zero indicates scaling with GNP does not significantly improve the performance
of the models. One should keep in mind, though, this is a joint test which may overshadow the
significance of individual parameters.
   An alternative quarterly scaling variable is CAY from Lettau and Ludvigson (1999). They
find that scaling with CAY greatly improves the performance of the CCAPM in pricing the excess
returns on the twenty-five FF portfolios over a sample period 1963 to 1997. However, for our sample
of 1953 to 1998, CAY does not produce a noticeable improvement for the CCAPM. The scaled
model fails both the test of HJ-distance equal zero and the optimal GMM test. None of the models
scaled by CAY passes both the test of HJ-distance equal zero and the supLM test.
   Panel G provides results when all the factors are scaled by JAN. For the quarterly models,
JAN takes the value 1 for the first quarter of each year, and 0 otherwise. The first thing to note
is scaling all factors with JAN reduces the magnitude of the HJ-distance for all models. The JW
model, the FF5 model and Campbell’s model all have p-values for the test of HJ-distance equal
zero above 80%. Surprisingly, the FF3 model does not pass the HJ-distance test and the J test.
This is because the scaled factor model is still unable to price the small growth firms. Cochrane’s
model passes both the test of HJ-distance equal zero and the supLM test. More details for this
model are provided in the section on successful models.
   Correlations of Adjustment to Pricing Proxies. If the adjustments to two models as
calculated in equation (13) are highly correlated, we know the pricing element lacking in one model


                                                24
is also left out of the other model.
   Panel A of Table 4 reports the correlations of the adjustments between the monthly models.
The Null model is the benchmark in the first grid. Those models that have a high correlation
with it would be less likely to pass the HJ-distance test and the optimal GMM test. The CAPM,
CCAPM and the JW model all have high correlation (over 0.90) with the Null model, and from
Table 3, we know they all fail the two tests. The FF3 model, the FF5 model and Campbell’s model
have relatively low correlations with the Null model, and as we already know, the last one passes
both tests. Still there are diﬀerences between the three models. Since the FF3 model is nested in
the FF5 model, they have a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.91. The diﬀerence comes from the macro
variables in the FF5 model. Both the FF5 model and Campbell’s model include the term premium,
and they have a correlation of 0.82.
   By adding conditioning information, the correlations between the necessary adjustments to the
models to make them equal the true SDF are reduced. From the first column of Table 3, we find the
adjustments to the CAPM, CCAPM, and the JW model are now correlated with the Null model at
0.75-0.85 level, and the adjustments to the FF3 model, the FF5 model and Campbell’s model are
correlated with the Null model at 0.6-0.7 level. Thus, conditioning information aids in explaining
time-varying risks and changes the pattern of the adjustments.
   Panel B of Table 4 reports the information for quarterly models, which is similar to what we
have for monthly models. One should notice that although the correlations between models are
diﬀerent, the numbers are big(above 0.50). This means either those models share the same problem
or the statistics suﬀer from small sample biases. Once again, since HJ-distance will be positive in
any model in a finite sample, correlations of pricing errors will be positive and possibly quite large
even if a model is true.


4.2   Model Errors and Pricing Errors for Non-scaled Factor Models

Additional information on the performance of the models is available by examining the model
errors and the Lagrange multipliers which are the components of δ. To check whether conditioning
information improves the performance of a model, we first need to understand the performance
of the original non-scaled factor model. The average model errors with their standard errors are
presented in Figure 3. Since monthly unconditional model errors share very similar patterns with
the quarterly model errors, we only present monthly model errors gT as defined in equation (20).


                                                 25
For Cochrane’s model, we report quarterly model errors.
    The model errors for the Null model range from 1.15% per month for portfolio 25 to -0.01%
for the T-bill rate. The B/M eﬀect is very evident in the Figure as in each quintile, higher B/M
portfolios have larger pricing errors. There is less dispersion in the pricing errors across the five
B/M portfolios as size increases. The model under-estimates the returns on all portfolios except
the T-bill rate.
    From Panel B, the CAPM correctly prices the largest size portfolios, but it tends to under-
estimate returns on high B/M portfolios and to over-estimate returns on low B/M portfolios. The
model error is between -0.50% per month and 0.45% per month.
    The CCAPM is presented in Panel C. It has a pattern very similar to the Null model, which is
                                                                          0
                                                                    e R of the Null model and
                                                                 e =λ
consistent with the high correlation between the adjustments y − m
CCAPM.
    The JW model is presented in Panel D of Figure 3. It has a very similar pattern to the CAPM
except the over-estimation for low B/M portfolios is slightly smaller.
    Panel E reports the pattern for Campbell’s pricing errors. The model considerably attenuates
the B/M eﬀect. The average errors range from -0.28% to 0.30%. Part of the ability of the model
to pass the test of HJ-distance equal zero arises from its increased standard errors relative to the
CAPM. Although δ can be compared across models, the p-values of the tests are not comparable
because they are based on the eigenvalues of A in equation (27) which depends on the pricing
factors, the variance of pricing errors and the number of parameters.
    Panel F presents the pricing errors in Cochrane’s model which share the same magnitude and
pattern as the quarterly CAPM. There is a distinct B/M eﬀect as in the monthly CAPM.
    The FF3 model is presented in Panel G. The additional two factors SMB and HML dampen
the size eﬀect and the B/M eﬀect. Now there is no particular pattern for the model errors. They
are scattered around the zero axis. The FF3 model over-predicts the average returns for both the
smallest firms and the largest firms, but especially the small growth stocks (low B/M ratio).
    The FF5 model has a similar pattern to the FF3 model, except it reduces the pricing errors
slightly.
    All models share one common characteristic, they do not misprice the T-bill rate. Model errors
for the T-bill rate are always around zero.




                                                 26
4.3   Interesting Models

Since we have 21 monthly models and 32 quarterly models, we are unable to display parameter esti-
mates for all of them, but we report results for “interesting models”. Our definition of “interesting”
is the model at least marginally passes the test of HJ-distance equal zero at the 1% marginal level
of significance and the scaling parameters for scaled factor models are jointly significant at the 5%
level. As we observed in the previous section, the test of HJ-distance equal zero always produces
similar results to those of the J test from optimal GMM. Hence, that is implicitly a criterion. In
total we have 12 models satisfying both conditions. In addition we provide information on the
monthly FF3 model with non-scaled factors for comparison. This section first discusses monthly
models, then quarterly models.
   Table 5 reports parameter estimates from minimizing the HJ-distance measure for all interesting
models. Each panel has two parts. The first part presents estimates for b as in equation (3). If
b1 for one factor is significantly diﬀerent from zero, then the factor is an important determinant of
the pricing kernel. The second part of each panel presents estimates for Λ as in equation (7). It
provides information on whether the factors significantly influence the expected returns.
   Monthly Models. The first model is the monthly CAPM with factors scaled by IP . The
model marginally passes the test of HJ-distance equal zero with a p-value of 0.0255. Both RV W
and IP are important for the correct pricing kernel. Thus the business cycle incorporated in IP
cannot be omitted from the pricing kernel. The same two factors are significantly priced for the
basic twenty-six portfolios with the positive signs. Thus IP helps to explain the size eﬀect and the
B/M eﬀect. In the framework of Jagannathan and Wang (1996), IP could be a proxy for beta-
sensitivity. Panel A of Figure 4 reports the model’s pricing errors, with its non-scaled counterpart.
With two more factors, IP and RV W · IP , most of the improvements are for low B/M portfolios,
and the biggest one happens for the smallest growth firms. With size increasing, the improvement
becomes smaller. However, the scaled factors model cannot eliminate either the size eﬀect or B/M
eﬀect. The monthly CAPM with factors scaled by IP also does not pass the supLM test at the 5%
level, so the estimates may be unstable.
   The second monthly model is the CCAPM with factors scaled by IP . Parameter estimates
are reported in Panel B of Table 5. The test of HJ-distance equal zero is passed with a p-value
of 0.0408. From the estimates for b, we find ∆c, IP and ∆c · IP are all significantly priced for
the SDF. The estimates for Λ indicate that both ∆c and IP are priced for the underlying twenty-

                                                 27
six portfolios with the correct signs. As in the monthly CAPM with factors scaled by IP , the
business cycle element IP is important for both the pricing kernel and the pricing of individual
portfolios. The monthly CCAPM with factors scaled by JAN also satisfies both conditions for
being “interesting”. For comparison, its parameter estimates are provided in Panel C of Table 5.
Now only the interaction between ∆c and JAN is significant for both the pricing kernel and prices
of risk. While this result literally implies that the consumption growth rate is important only in
January, an alternative interpretation is that the return characteristics of the underlying twenty-six
portfolios are most evident in January. The pricing errors for the two scaled factor versions of the
CCAPM together with the non-scaled factor benchmark are given in Panel B of Figure 4. One
finds that when the factors are scaled by IP, the improvements mostly happen for the high B/M
portfolios by 0.1% to 0.2% per month, thus the pricing errors when factors are scaled by IP are
flatter than the original non-scaled CCAPM. When the factors are scaled by JAN, both the size
eﬀect and the B/M eﬀect are much smaller. As a result, the line connecting the pricing errors is
somewhat flatter.
   Panel D of Table 5 reports the parameter estimates for the monthly JW model with factors
scaled by IP . The p-value for the test of HJ-distance equal zero is 0.0574. First, both RV W
and RP REM · IP are important factors for the correct pricing kernel. The same two factors with
RLBR · IP significantly aﬀect risk premiums. Panel E of Table 5 presents the parameter estimates
for the monthly JW model with factors scaled by JAN. From the estimation of b, both RP REM
and RP REM · JAN are significant determinants of the model’s pricing kernel. It is interesting to
find the default premium is priced diﬀerently in January(-0.28+0.13=-0.15) and outside January(-
0.28). Jagannathan and Wang (1996) find a positive price of risk for RP REM which appears to be
driven primarily by a January eﬀect. The pricing errors of the above two models together with
their non-scaled factors benchmark are presented in Panel C of Figure 4. When the factors are
scaled by IP , the pricing errors are smaller for both the small firms and high B/M firms. Thus IP
helps dampen both the size eﬀect and the B/M eﬀect. When the factors are scaled by JAN, the
pricing errors are even smaller, as in the CCAPM above. The p-value of the test of HJ-distance
equal zero is 0.6497. However, neither of the models passes the supLM test.
   Campbell’s model with non-scaled factors is reported in Panel F of Table 5. The model passes
the test of HJ-distance equal zero with a p-value 0.3471. Both DIV and T RM are important for
the correct pricing kernel from the estimates of b. In the lower part of the panel, we present the


                                                 28
estimate for the prices of risks Λ. RV W , DIV and T RM are all significantly priced. Neither labor
income nor the relative bill rate is important. Panel D of Figure 4 reports the model’s pricing
errors along with the errors from the FF3 model as the benchmark. No size eﬀect is apparent and
Campbell’s model prices the small growth firms better than FF3. While a B/M eﬀect is present, its
magnitude is not large. Overall, the pricing errors for Campbell’s model are not bigger than those
of FF3’s, while the latter model is constructed to price the size eﬀect and B/M eﬀect. However,
Campbell’s model fails the supLM test. Thus the parameter estimates are not stable and should
be used cautiously.
   The last monthly models we report are FF3 with non-scaled factors and FF3 with factors
scaled by JAN. FF3 is reported because we want to examine whether it can price the size and
B/M eﬀects which it is constructed to do. It does not pass the test of HJ-distance equal zero.
Parameter estimates for FF3 are presented in Panel G of Table 5. It is somewhat surprising to
find that only RV W and HML are important for the pricing kernel, and they are also significantly
priced risk factors. Panel E of Figure 4 provides the pricing errors for FF3. The problem portfolios
are the lowest B/M with smallest and second smallest sizes, which are overpriced by the model.
Thus, the factor SMB cannot adequately capture the size eﬀect in the portfolios, and SMB is not
significantly priced in the unconditional version when risk prices are held constant.
   The monthly FF3 with factors scaled by JAN is reported in Panel H of Table 5. It passes the
test of HJ-distance equal zero with a p-value of 0.1012. From the estimates of b, RV W , SM B and
SMB · JAN are important factors for the pricing kernel. For the prices of risks, RV W , HML and
SMB · JAN are significant. This is consistent with the view that the size eﬀect is primarily a
January eﬀect.
   As mentioned in the previous section, if the B/M eﬀect mainly occurs in January, and HML
explains the B/M eﬀect, HML will not be priced outside January. Thus, the results tell us either
there is still a significant B/M eﬀect outside of January or there are some other risks which can
be priced by HML. We also examine the pricing errors to see whether scaling by JAN really
improves on the performance of the FF3 model in an interesting way. In the Panel E of Figure 4,
we find that adding JAN actually reduces the pricing errors by 0.2% for the smallest growth stocks.
Since the FF3 model already captures the B/M eﬀect reasonably well, JAN does not improve this
dimension. Both models pass the supLM test.
   Quarterly Models. The first quarterly model is the JW model. It marginally passes the test


                                                 29
of HJ-distance equal zero with a p-value 0.0370. The parameter estimates are presented in Panel I
of Table 5. Only RP REM is important in the pricing kernel. For the prices of risks, RP REM is also
significant, but with a negative sign in contrast to Jagannathan and Wang (1996). In addition, the
price of market risk is marginally significant. The pricing errors of the JW model are reported in
Panel F of Figure 4 together with the quarterly FF3 with non-scaled factors as benchmark. Both
the size eﬀect and the B/M eﬀect are evident in the Figure, and most of the errors range from
0.5% per quarter to 2% per quarter. These pricing errors are quite large compared to those of
FF3. Thus the quarterly JW model passes the HJ-distance test not because it has small pricing
errors but because it has larger standard errors. Hence, the JW model with non-scaled factors is
not an economically interesting model. It also fails the supLM test indicating that the parameter
estimates are not stable.
   The second quarterly model is Campbell’s model with non-scaled factors. The test of HJ-
distance equal zero has a p-value 0.0159. Panel J of Table 5 provides the parameter estimates. As
in the monthly models, the term premium is important in the pricing kernel. Both market risk
and term premium risk are priced factors for the risk premiums. The pricing errors are reported
in Panel G of Figure 4 together with the benchmark FF3. The pattern of the errors is very similar
to the monthly models we provide in Panel D. Campbell’s model improves on the smallest growth
portfolio, but it has an evident B/M eﬀect. It also fails the supLM test.
   The third quarterly model is Cochrane’s model with factors scaled by the cyclical element in
lag GNP . The parameter estimates are given in Panel K of Table 5. For the pricing kernel, both
RINV and RINV ·GNP are important. This is consistent with Cochrane (1996) who demonstrates
the importance of residential investment. For the twenty-six portfolios we are considering, only
the latter factor is significantly priced with a correct sign. The HJ-distance measure drops from
0.6255 for Cochrane’s non-scaled factors model to 0.5585 for its scaled factors model. In all of
the above models, scaled-factor models perform better than non-scaled models, and we confirm the
scaling factors are economically interesting by looking at the pricing errors and parameter estimates.
However, for Cochrane’s model, the improvement in HJ-distance does not actually come from the
improvements on pricing errors. This can be seen in Panel H of Figure 4. The pricing errors of the
non-scaled model show a distinct pattern of size and B/M eﬀects. The scaled factors model shifts
most of the pricing error upward by 0.5-1%. There is improvement only for the first portfolio. The
smaller HJ-distance for the scaled factor model arises because the additional free parameters make


                                                 30
it easier for Cochrane’s model to solve the minimization problem with the particular weighting
matrix. This is significant statistically, but it is not interesting economically. Panel L of Table 5
reports the quarterly Cochrane model with factors scaled by JAN. Both JAN and NRINV · JAN
are important for the pricing kernel. Thus the January eﬀect itself as a constant is important for
the pricing kernel. The same two factors are also priced significantly for the size eﬀect, the B/M
eﬀect and the riskfree rate. By looking at Panel H of Figure 4, we find after controlling for the
January eﬀect, the pricing errors are shifted downward by 1-1.5%, which is a big improvement for
value firms. The B/M eﬀect is mitigated but still present. Thus we conclude that the improvement
on HJ-distance measure is from the improvement of pricing errors. Both Cochrane’s scaled factors
models are stable, and they both pass the supLM test.
   The quarterly FF5 model with non-scaled factors is provided in Panel M of Table 5. It passes
the test of HJ-distance equal zero with p-value 0.0180. From the estimates of b, we find that
RV W and HML are priced, as in FF3, and the two macro factors, T ERM and RP REM are both
important for the correct pricing kernel. However, the latter two factors are not significantly priced
risk factors for the twenty-six portfolios. The pricing errors from FF5 in Panel H of Figure 4 are
almost the same as those in FF3. There are only small improvements on the smallest growth
portfolios. Unfortunately, the two additional macro factors bring instability into the model as it
fails the supLM test.
   There is one last issue to note. All of the models do well in pricing the gross return of the T-bill.
This implies that although the minimization problem does not put a particularly large weight on
the T-bill return, it does not ignore it either. Others, such as Lettau and Ludvigson (1999) and
Jagannathan and Wang (1996), only include stock portfolios and have big estimates for the zero-
beta rate. We estimate the zero-beta rate for each model. For monthly models, the rate is around
0.4% per month; for quarterly models, it is around 1.8% per quarter. We believe these estimates
are more reasonable.


4.4   Robustness

In the above results, we obtain parameter estimates and conduct tests using non-scaled returns.
To examine whether these models are robust, we change the underlying assets from non-scaled
returns to scaled returns, and we investigate whether the parameter estimates obtained from non-
scaled return models (the first stage estimates) can price the scaled returns. We scale returns with


                                                  31
the term premium, the diﬀerence in yields between a thirty-year government bond and a one-year
government bond. If a model is able to price the basic assets (non scaled-returns), and it is specified
correctly, it should be able to price the managed portfolios (scaled-returns).
    Table 6 provides the information on these experiments. We use the estimates obtained from
the first stage by optimal GMM, to calculate test of the HJ-distance equal zero and the J-statistic
for optimal GMM for the new orthogonality conditions, as in equations (41), (42) and (43). These
p-values are denoted p1 and p2 . We also use the first-stage estimates of HJ-distance to calcu-
late second-stage HJ-distance tests, and the p-value is denoted p3. None of the monthly models
successfully prices the new assets.



5    Conclusion

The purpose of this paper is to evaluate a number of asset pricing models that have been advanced
in light of the anomalies that have been uncovered in testing the CAPM. The models are compared
on a common set of returns: twenty-five size and book-to-market portfolios constructed as proposed
in Fama and French (1993) for a sample period from 1952 to 1997. Average excess returns across
these portfolios are as low as 0.36 percent per month and as high as 1.13 percent per month. Within
a size quintile, higher book-to-market portfolios have higher average returns. Within all but the
lowest book-to-market quintiles, average returns are generally decreasing in size. The unconditional
CAPM cannot explain these returns.
    We consider only linearized versions of the models, and we evaluate the models with both non-
scaled factors and scaled factors, where the scaling reflects either business-cycle movements or a
January dummy. The models are compared using the methodology of Hansen and Jagannathan
(1997) who recognize that the estimated distance between a model’s pricing kernel and the true
pricing kernel also is an estimate of the maximal mis-pricing of a portfolio of the assets with norm
of the portfolio return equal to one. We also evaluate the models using the optimal GMM test of
Hansen (1982). In general, we find little disagreement between the two tests. Finally, we evaluate
the temporal stability of the parameters using the supLM test of Andrews (1993).
    For monthly models with non-scaled factors, Campbell’s (1996) model is the only model that
passes the test of HJ-distance equals zero, and its estimated HJ-distance is also smaller than that
of the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model. Only three of the five factors in the model appear



                                                  32
to be important: the return on the market portfolio, the dividend yield, and the term premium.
Unfortunately, the Campbell model fails to pass the stability test. While the simulation study of
Ahn and Gadarowski (1999) provides some support that the small-sample distributions of the HJ-
distance test are reliable for our sample size, no comparable study of the small-sample distributions
of the stability test has been conducted. Thus, additional study of the Campbell model appears to
be desirable. In particular, we evaluate only the linearized version of the model.
   Scaling the risk factors of the models with the cyclical element in industrial production as
measured by the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter improves the performance of several of the models.
The CAPM, CCAPM, and Jagannathan and Wang (1996) models all have significant coeﬃcients
on the scaled factors. There is also evidence that pricing in January is significantly diﬀerent than
pricing outside of January. For example, when the three factors of the Fama-French (1993) model
are entered without scaling, only the market return and the HML portfolio are significant risk
factors. When the factors are also scaled with a January dummy, the market return and the HML
portfolio retain their significance and the SMB portfolio is significant in January. This latter model
also passes the stability test.
   With quarterly data, none of the models with non-scaled factors passes the test of HJ-distance
equal to zero. Nevertheless, the simulation results of Ahn and Gadarowski (1999) suggest that these
results should be interpreted with care as the sizes of the tests appear to deteriorate in this sample
size. Neither scaling with the cyclical component of GNP as measured by the Hodrick-Prescott
(1997) filter nor scaling with the consumption-wealth series of Lettau and Ludvigson (1999) has
much of an influence on the results.
   Additionally, none of the models, either monthly or quarterly appears to be robust in the
following sense. When we estimate the parameters of the models using the basic returns and ask
the models to price the set of assets constructed by scaling returns with the term premium, all of
the models fail.
   There are several directions in which this study could be extended. First, we construct our
estimates as if there are no transactions costs in asset markets. Hanna and Ready (1999) find
that transaction costs reduce but do not eliminate the CAPM anomalies.. Luttmer (1996) notes
that a small transaction costs can have large implications for the variability of implied stochastic
discount factors. Future research should be directed to determine how transaction costs aﬀect the
estimates of HJ-distance. Liquidity and market impact of trading individual assets may also be


                                                 33
important. The study by Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998) suggests that average
returns on individual equities are aﬀected by trading volume, which is consistent with diﬀerences
in liquidity premiums across assets. Understanding how liquidity is priced and the role it plays in
portfolio returns is an open issue. The presence of these market frictions implies that it may be
diﬃcult if not impossible to realize the returns that certain trading strategies imply. It is only truly
available returns that require adjustment for risk.




                                                  34
   Reference
   Ahn, Seung C., and Christopher Gadarowski, 1999, “Small Sample Properties of the Model
Specification Test Based on the Hansen-Jagannathan Distance”, unpublished working paper.
   Andrews, Donald W. K., 1993, “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with
Unknown Change Point”, Econometrica, volume 61, 821-856.
   Brennan, Michael J., Tarun Chordia and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, “Alternative Factor
Specifications, Security Characteristics, and the Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns”, Journal
of Financial Economics, 49, 345-373.
   Campbell, John Y., 1993, “Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption Data”, American
Economic Review, 83, 487-512.
   Campbell, John Y., 1996, “Understanding Risk and Return”, Journal of Political Economy,
104, 298-345.
   Cochrane, John H., 1996, “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Based Asset Pricing Model”,
Journal of Political Economy, 104, 572-621.
   Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, “Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross Sectional
Variation in Stock Returns”, Journal of Finance, 52, 1-33.
   Daniel, Kent, and Walter Torous, 1995, “Common Stock Returns and the Business Cycle”,
unpublished working paper.
   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, “The Cross-section of Expected Stock Re-
turns”, Journal of Finance, 47, 427-465.
   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.
   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1995, “Size and Book-to-Market Factors in Earnings
and Returns”, Journal of Finance, 50, 131-155.
   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, “Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing
Anomalies”, Journal of Finance, 51, 55-84.
   Ferson, Wayne E., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1999, “Conditioning Variables and the Cross
Section of Stock Returns”, Journal of Finance, 54, 1325-1360.
   Ghysels, Eric, 1998, “On Stable Factor Structure in the Pricing of Risk: Do Time-Varying Betas
Help or Hurt?”, Journal of Finance, 53, 549-573.
   Glasserman, Paul, and Yan Jin, 1998, “Comparing Stochastic Discount Factors through Their


                                                 35
Implied Measures”, unpublished working paper.
   Hanna, J. Douglas, ad Mark J. Ready, 1999, “Profitable Predictability in the Cross-section of
Stock Returns”, unpublished working paper.
   Hamilton, James P., 1994, Time Series Analysis.
   Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982, “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Esti-
mators”, Econometrica, 50, 1029-1054.
   Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth Singleton, 1982, “Generalized Instrumental Variable Estima-
tion of Nonlinear Rational Expectation Models”, Econometrica, 50, 1269-1286.
   Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1997, “Assessing Specification Errors in Stochastic
Discount Factor Models”, Journal of Finance, 52, 557-590.
   Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott, 1997, “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empir-
ical Investigation”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29, 1-16.
   Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section
of Expected Returns”, Journal of Finance, 51, 3-53.
   Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 1999a, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected
Stock Returns”, New York Federal Reserve working paper.
   Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 1999b, “A Cross-Sectional Test of Linear Factor Models
with Time-Varying Risk Premia”, New York Federal Reserve working paper.
   Lintner, John, 1965, “ The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in
Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13-37.
   Loughran, Tim, 1997, “Book-to-Market across Firm Size, Exchange, and Seasonality: Is there
an eﬀect”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 32, 249-268.
   Luttmer, Erzo G. J., 1996, “Asset Pricing in Economies with Frictions”, Econometrica, 64,
1439-1467.
   Merton, Robert C., 1973, “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model”, Econometrica, 41,
867-887.
   Roll, Richard, 1977, “A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory’s Test: Part I: On Past and
Potential Testability of the Theory”, Journal of Financial Economics, 4, 129-176.
   Sharpe, William F., 1964, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Con-
ditions of Risk”, Journal of Finance, 19, 425-442.




                                                36
Table 1: summary statistics for Fama-French 25 portfolios

Panel A: means

 portfolios      BM1        BM2         BM3          BM4         BM5
  SIZE1          0.36       0.77        0.83         1.03        1.13
  SIZE2          0.49       0.78        0.96         1.00        1.15
  SIZE3          0.59       0.76        0.80         0.97        1.04
  SIZE4          0.60       0.60        0.82         0.87        1.02
  SIZE5          0.57       0.63        0.68         0.67        0.85

Panel B: standard errors

 portfolios      BM1        BM2         BM3          BM4         BM5
  SIZE1          7.17       6.25        5.56         5.26        5.53
  SIZE2          6.49       5.62        5.11         4.85        5.39
  SIZE3          5.94       5.04        4.66         4.50        5.14
  SIZE4          5.32       4.80        4.61         4.52        5.22
  SIZE5          4.54       4.39        4.09         4.24        4.91

Panel C: t-statistics

 portfolios      BM1        BM2         BM3          BM4         BM5
  SIZE1          1.18       2.91        3.52         4.58        4.82
  SIZE2          1.76       3.25        4.41         4.85        5.03
  SIZE3          2.33       3.55        4.05         5.04        4.76
  SIZE4          2.64       2.93        4.17         4.50        4.60
  SIZE5          2.97       3.36        3.89         3.74        4.07




The data are monthly returns on Fama-French 25 portfolios from 1952:01 to 1997:12 in excess of 1-month T-bill rate.
Increasing portfolio numbers indicate increases in either size or book-to-market ratio.
Table 2: Predictive power of conditioning variables used to scale factors

Panel A: monthly cycle = IP

              constant        cycle       R2
     b          0.01          -0.13      0.01
  s.e.(b)       0.00          0.06

Panel B: quarterly cycle = GNP

              constant        cycle       R2
     b          0.01          -0.77      0.03
  s.e.(b)       0.01          0.34

Panel C: quarterly cycle = CAY

              constant        cycle       R2
     b          0.00          2.52       0.11
  s.e.(b)       0.01          0.56




The estimated OLS regression is Rvw(t) = b0*constant + b1*cycle(t-1)+ε(t). Rvw is the value-weighted return from
CRSP. For the monthly regression, the sample period is 1952:01 to 1997:12. For the quarterly regression, the sample
period is 1953:01 to 1997:04. The series IP and GNP are the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filtered industrial production and
real income respectively. The series CAY is the consumption-wealth ratio calculated by Lettau and Ludivigson (1999).
Table 3: summary of models using excess returns with T-bill (26 portfolios)
Panel A: monthly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

  MODEL          NULL       CAPM       CCAPM         JW          CAMP      FF(3)      FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)     0.4198     0.3900      0.4293    0.3861         0.2961    0.3230     0.3164
   p(δ=0)        0.0000     0.0000      0.0000    0.0000         0.3471    0.0000     0.0007
    se(δ)        0.0510     0.0503      0.0633    0.0519         0.0648    0.0524     0.0547
 p-Wald(err)     0.0000     0.0000      0.0000     0.0000        0.3059    0.0010     0.0053
     p(J)        0.0000     0.0000      0.0000    0.0000         0.1944    0.0011     0.0045
 supLM stat     216.5006    3.5479      4.2343    38.2902       193.9762   9.9709    58.8892
 supLM test       Fail       pass        pass        fail          fail     pass        fail
 No. of para        1          2           2          4             6         4          6

Panel B: monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by cycle(IP)

   MODEL          NULL      CAPM       CCAPM          JW         CAMP       FF(3)     FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)     0.4101     0.3515      0.3890     0.3138         0.2556    0.3021    0.2728
    p(δ=0)       0.0000     0.0255      0.0408     0.0574         0.5804    0.0096    0.1431
     se(δ)       0.0543     0.0639      0.0838     0.0502         0.0789    0.0616    0.0620
 p-Wald(err)      0.0000     0.0640     0.0072      0.0491        0.6149    0.0239    0.2039
  p-Wald(b)      0.0639     0.0123      0.0233     0.0136        0.6157    0.3502    0.3717
      p(J)       0.0004     0.2694      0.0015     0.0624        0.5336     0.0265    0.2180
 p-Wald(b*)      0.0063     0.0028      0.0205      0.0156        0.4859    0.3287    0.3981
 supLM stat      10.0277    15.9634     9.8311     28.2542       73.9089   16.6455   40.2039
 supLM test        Pass        fail      pass         fail          fail     pass       fail
 No. of para         2          4          4           8            12         8        12

Panel C: monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by JAN

   MODEL        NULL        CAPM      CCAPM          JW        CAMP         FF(3)     FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)    0.3963      0.3657     0.3665     0.2738       0.2842       0.2866    0.2682
    p(δ=0)      0.0000      0.0000     0.0574     0.6497       0.1260       0.1012    0.3351
     se(δ)      0.0598      0.0668     0.0892     0.0863       0.0640       0.0493    0.0667
 p-Wald(err)    0.0000      0.0003     0.0427      0.7780      0.1023       0.0167    0.2576
  p-Wald(b)     0.0001      0.0419     0.0479     0.0213       0.9521      0.1535    0.5431
      p(J)      0.0000      0.0002     0.0223     0.8086       0.0652       0.0253    0.0976
 p-Wald(b*)     0.0000      0.1651     0.0257      0.0180      0.9616       0.2378    0.5935
 supLM stat     5.6920      6.2444    10.3446     52.6631     180.9788     13.4695   39.2249
 supLM test      pass        pass       pass         fail        fail        pass       fail
 No. of para       2           4          4           8          12            8        12

Panel D: quarterly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

  MODEL          NULL       CAPM      CCAPM          JW         CAMP        COCH     FF(3)      FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)    0.6490      0.6206     0.6186     0.5784         0.5501     0.6255   0.5368     0.5156
   p(δ=0)       0.0000      0.0000     0.0007     0.0370         0.0159     0.0000   0.0010     0.0180
    se(δ)       0.1034      0.0973     0.1076     0.1246         0.1074     0.1126   0.1157     0.1046
 p-Wald(err)     0.0005     0.0005     0.0026      0.0545        0.0187     0.0003   0.0087     0.0684
     p(J)       0.0005      0.0005     0.0048     0.0832         0.0499     0.0002   0.0102     0.1250
 SupLM stat     55.0231     3.6710    10.0706     31.0784       55.9571    10.0257   8.7462    52.1701
 SupLM test        fail      pass       pass         fail          fail      pass     pass        fail
 No. of para        1          2          2           4             6          3        4          6
Panel E: quarterly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by cycle(lag GNP)

   MODEL          NULL       CAPM       CCAPM           JW       CAMP        COCH         FF(3)       FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)     0.6418      0.6004      0.6129      0.5432       0.5038     0.5585       0.4522      0.4291
    p(δ=0)       0.0000      0.0013      0.0000      0.0878       0.1473     0.1080       0.4881      0.3624
     se(δ)       0.0990      0.0820      0.1061      0.1106       0.1039     0.1285       0.1078      0.0990
 p-Wald(err)      0.0002      0.0043     0.0004       0.1414      0.1162     0.1084       0.2346      0.1949
  p-Wald(b)      0.1501      0.2030      0.5238      0.4105      0.7939      0.1426      0.2384       0.3347
      p(J)       0.0002      0.0105      0.0014      0.0558       0.1007     0.0859       0.4233      0.2537
 p-Wald(b*)      0.2194      0.0507      0.7989       0.0129      0.5747     0.0084       0.1108      0.2422
 SupLM stat      10.8365     11.0756    11.5782      37.0059     44.6401     9.8478      11.2852     34.0714
 SupLM test        pass        pass       pass          fail        fail      pass         Pass         fail
 No. of para         2           4          4            8          12          6            8          12

Panel F: quarterly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by CAY

   MODEL          NULL       CAPM       CCAPM           JW       CAMP         COCH        FF(3)       FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)     0.6342      0.6134      0.6080      0.5443       0.5152      0.6234      0.5278      0.4975
    p(δ=0)       0.0000      0.0000      0.0001      0.2691       0.0985      0.0000      0.0010      0.0105
     se(δ)       0.0993      0.1102      0.1049      0.1543       0.1246      0.1143      0.1054      0.0895
 p-Wald(err)      0.0007      0.0003     0.0015       0.0778      0.0198      0.0001      0.0046      0.0383
  p-Wald(b)      0.0767      0.4116      0.3338      0.8286      0.7796      0.9450      0.8092       0.8587
      p(J)       0.0011      0.0002      0.0010      0.4282       0.0967      0.0005      0.0030      0.0324
 p-Wald(b*)      0.0122      0.5416      0.2529       0.4044      0.8340      0.6092      0.9312      0.9304
 SupLM stat      14.0275     14.3103     7.1698      39.1712     40.3727     16.7572     20.1487     30.9369
 SupLM test         fail       pass       pass          fail        fail       pass        pass         fail
 No. of para         2           4          4            8           12          6           8          12

Panel G: quarterly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by JAN

   MODEL         NULL        CAPM       CCAPM           JW       CAMP         COCH        FF(3)       FF(5)
  HJ-dist(δ)     0.5903      0.5638      0.5818      0.3908      0.3791       0.5099      0.5085      0.3941
    p(δ=0)       0.0006      0.0014      0.0003      0.9970      0.9745       0.4290      0.0053      0.8703
     se(δ)       0.1349      0.1274      0.1312      0.2389      0.1952       0.1329      0.1294      0.1488
 p-Wald(err)     0.0091      0.0038      0.0078       0.9939      0.9708      0.4013      0.0038      0.3941
  p-Wald(b)      0.0000      0.0001      0.0101      0.1530      0.4625      0.0175      0.3532      0.4322
      p(J)       0.0106      0.0032      0.0096      0.9973      0.9844       0.5999      0.0037      0.9097
 p-Wald(b*)      0.0000      0.0001      0.0055      0.2059       0.4346      0.0011      0.6764      0.4995
 SupLM stat      8.5860      9.1810      9.1330      32.2225     28.3110     11.7944     20.1440     52.1233
 SupLM test       pass        pass        pass          fail       pass        pass        pass         fail
 No. of para        2           4           4            8          12           6           8          12

The data are returns on Fama-French 25 portfolios in excess of the T-bill rate and the return on T-bill. Monthly data are
from 1952:01 to 1997:12; quarterly data are from 1953:01 to 1997:04. Cycle (IP) is the cyclical element in industrial
production index; cycle (GNP) is the cyclical element in real GNP; CAY is from Lettau and Ludvigson (1999). All
conditioning variables are lagged at least one period; JAN is a dummy variable which has value 1 for January (monthly
models) or first quarter (quarterly models).
HJ-dist(δ) is Hansen-Jagannathan distance. p(δ =0) is the p-value for the test δ =0 under the null δ =0. se(δ ) is standard
error for HJ-distance under the hypothesis that δ ≠0. p-Wald(err) is a Wald test for all model errors=0 using estimates
of b from minimizing HJ-distance. p-wald(b) is a Wald test on that all conditional elements of b are 0. The p-value of
the optimal GMM test is p(J). p-Wald(b*) is a Wald test on that all conditional elements of b* are 0. supLM stat is the
value for the supLM test statistics. The supLM test is based on a 5% significance level. No. of para is the number of
parameters.
Table 4: correlation of adjustments y − m
                                        ~ = λ~ ' R in pricing proxies

Panel A: monthly models

             NULL    CAPM   CCAPM JW      LCM    FF3     FF5    NULL     CAPM     CCAPM JW          LCM      FF3      FF5      NULL  CAPM CCAPM JW     LCM FF3     FF5
                                                                (IP)     (IP)     (IP)     (IP)     (IP)     (IP)     (IP)     (JAN) (JAN) (JAN) (JAN) (JAN) (JAN) (JAN)
NULL           1     0.93   0.93   0.92   0.71    0.77   0.75     0.98     0.84     0.82     0.75     0.61     0.72     0.65    0.94  0.87  0.77  0.65  0.68  0.68  0.64

CAPM          0.93   1.00   0.92   0.99   0.76    0.83   0.81    0.87     0.90     0.78     0.80     0.66     0.77     0.70     0.88   0.94   0.75   0.70   0.73   0.73   0.69

CCAPM         0.93   0.92   1.00   0.90   0.73    0.81   0.78    0.90     0.84     0.91     0.73     0.62     0.79     0.68     0.92   0.90   0.86   0.68   0.72   0.71   0.63

JW            0.92   0.99   0.90   1.00   0.76    0.79   0.77    0.86     0.90     0.75     0.81     0.66     0.74     0.68     0.85   0.91   0.71   0.71   0.74   0.72   0.67

LCM           0.71   0.76   0.73   0.76   1.00    0.76   0.72    0.69     0.78     0.57     0.68     0.86     0.77     0.69     0.72   0.76   0.56   0.69   0.96   0.72   0.57

FF3           0.77   0.83   0.81   0.79   0.76    1.00   0.98    0.72     0.78     0.69     0.75     0.73     0.93     0.84     0.84   0.90   0.82   0.66   0.76   0.89   0.83

FF5           0.75   0.81   0.78   0.77   0.72    0.98   1.00    0.72     0.79     0.67     0.73     0.66     0.93     0.86     0.83   0.88   0.80   0.65   0.72   0.86   0.85

NULL(IP)      0.98   0.87   0.90   0.86   0.69    0.72   0.72    1.00     0.86     0.82     0.77     0.62     0.74     0.67     0.91   0.80   0.77   0.65   0.66   0.66   0.60

CAPM(IP)      0.84   0.90   0.84   0.90   0.78    0.78   0.79    0.86     1.00     0.76     0.89     0.73     0.86     0.78     0.78   0.82   0.76   0.74   0.74   0.75   0.66

CCAPM(IP)     0.82   0.78   0.91   0.75   0.57    0.69   0.67    0.82     0.76     1.00     0.62     0.43     0.73     0.66     0.82   0.75   0.84   0.52   0.58   0.65   0.57

JW (IP)       0.75   0.80   0.73   0.81   0.68    0.75   0.73    0.77     0.89     0.62     1.00     0.67     0.79     0.79     0.65   0.72   0.67   0.63   0.64   0.75   0.67

LCM(IP)       0.61   0.66   0.62   0.66   0.86    0.73   0.66    0.62     0.73     0.43     0.67     1.00     0.76     0.59     0.61   0.65   0.51   0.57   0.82   0.65   0.45

FF3(IP)       0.72   0.77   0.79   0.74   0.77    0.93   0.93    0.74     0.86     0.73     0.79     0.76     1.00     0.90     0.79   0.82   0.80   0.70   0.77   0.86   0.77

FF5(IP)       0.65   0.70   0.68   0.68   0.69    0.84   0.86    0.67     0.78     0.66     0.79     0.59     0.90     1.00     0.67   0.68   0.66   0.56   0.68   0.80   0.76

NULL(JAN)     0.94   0.88   0.92   0.85   0.72    0.84   0.83    0.91     0.78     0.82     0.65     0.61     0.79     0.67     1.00   0.92   0.83   0.69   0.72   0.72   0.68

CAPM(JAN)     0.87   0.94   0.90   0.91   0.76    0.90   0.88    0.80     0.82     0.75     0.72     0.65     0.82     0.68     0.92   1.00   0.82   0.75   0.78   0.78   0.73

CCAPM(JAN)    0.77   0.75   0.86   0.71   0.56    0.82   0.80    0.77     0.76     0.84     0.67     0.51     0.80     0.66     0.83   0.82   1.00   0.53   0.58   0.80   0.72

JW (JAN)      0.65   0.70   0.68   0.71   0.69    0.66   0.65    0.65     0.74     0.52     0.63     0.57     0.70     0.56     0.69   0.75   0.53   1.00   0.73   0.56   0.50

LCM(JAN)      0.68   0.73   0.72   0.74   0.96    0.76   0.72    0.66     0.74     0.58     0.64     0.82     0.77     0.68     0.72   0.78   0.58   0.73   1.00   0.70   0.56

FF3(JAN)      0.68   0.73   0.71   0.72   0.72    0.89   0.86    0.66     0.75     0.65     0.75     0.65     0.86     0.80     0.72   0.78   0.80   0.56   0.70   1.00   0.94

FF5(JAN)      0.64   0.69   0.63   0.67   0.57    0.83   0.85    0.60     0.66     0.57     0.67     0.45     0.77     0.76     0.68   0.73   0.72   0.50   0.56   0.94   1.00



The HJ-distance is calculated as min || y - m || , and y − m
                                                           ~ = λ~ ' R is the adjustment for y to make it a true pricing kernel. LCM stands for linear version of Campbell's (1996) asset pricing model. The data are returns on
Fama-French 25 portfolios in excess of T-bill rate and the return on T-bill rate. Monthly data are from 1952:01 to 1997:12, 552 observations.
Panel B: quarterly models

             NULL    CAPM   CCAPM JW      LCM    COCH FF3      FF5    NULL(   CAPM( CCAPM JW (GN LCM(     COCH FF3(G FF5(G NULL(      CAPM( CCAPM JW (CA LCM(     COCH FF3(C FF6(C NULL(J CAPM( CCAPM JW (JA LCM(J COCO FF3(J FF5(J
                                                                      GNP)    GNP)   (GNP) P)      GNP)   (GNP) NP)  NP)   CAY)       CAY)   (CAY) Y)      CAY)   (CAY) AY)  AY)   AN)    JAN) (JAN) N)      AN)   (JAN) AN)  AN)
NULL          1.00   0.96   0.95   0.89   0.85   0.96   0.83   0.79    0.99   0.93   0.94   0.84   0.78   0.96   0.70   0.66   0.98   0.95   0.94   0.84   0.79   0.96   0.81   0.77   0.91   0.87   0.90   0.60   0.58   0.96   0.78   0.61

CAPM          0.96   1.00   0.94   0.93   0.89   0.97   0.87   0.83    0.97   0.97   0.93   0.88   0.81   0.97   0.73   0.69   0.98   0.99   0.94   0.88   0.83   0.97   0.85   0.80   0.86   0.91   0.87   0.63   0.62   0.97   0.82   0.64

CCAPM         0.95   0.94   1.00   0.81   0.84   0.94   0.88   0.87    0.96   0.87   0.99   0.76   0.76   0.94   0.71   0.68   0.95   0.93   0.98   0.77   0.78   0.94   0.86   0.84   0.91   0.91   0.94   0.62   0.59   0.94   0.83   0.64

JW            0.89   0.93   0.81   1.00   0.85   0.87   0.75   0.70    0.89   0.92   0.79   0.94   0.77   0.87   0.64   0.59   0.90   0.92   0.81   0.94   0.78   0.87   0.72   0.65   0.72   0.75   0.70   0.68   0.56   0.87   0.69   0.49

LCM           0.85   0.89   0.84   0.85   1.00   0.87   0.87   0.84    0.85   0.89   0.84   0.79   0.92   0.87   0.85   0.80   0.87   0.87   0.85   0.78   0.94   0.87   0.84   0.80   0.79   0.82   0.77   0.66   0.69   0.87   0.83   0.71

COCH          0.96   0.97   0.94   0.87   0.87   1.00   0.88   0.86    0.97   0.94   0.94   0.83   0.83   1.00   0.72   0.69   0.98   0.97   0.96   0.84   0.84   1.00   0.86   0.82   0.91   0.91   0.90   0.61   0.62   1.00   0.82   0.69

FF3           0.83   0.87   0.88   0.75   0.87   0.88   1.00   0.96    0.86   0.80   0.90   0.72   0.79   0.88   0.84   0.80   0.85   0.88   0.89   0.69   0.87   0.88   0.98   0.93   0.84   0.88   0.86   0.68   0.69   0.88   0.95   0.73

FF5           0.79   0.83   0.87   0.70   0.84   0.86   0.96   1.00    0.82   0.78   0.87   0.70   0.77   0.86   0.83   0.83   0.81   0.83   0.87   0.63   0.83   0.86   0.95   0.96   0.80   0.85   0.83   0.63   0.58   0.86   0.87   0.76

NULL(GNP)     0.99   0.97   0.96   0.89   0.85   0.97   0.86   0.82    1.00   0.94   0.95   0.85   0.78   0.97   0.70   0.67   0.98   0.96   0.95   0.84   0.80   0.97   0.84   0.79   0.91   0.90   0.91   0.61   0.59   0.97   0.81   0.65

CAPM(GNP)     0.93   0.97   0.87   0.92   0.89   0.94   0.80   0.78    0.94   1.00   0.86   0.90   0.83   0.94   0.75   0.71   0.94   0.95   0.88   0.83   0.83   0.94   0.80   0.76   0.81   0.84   0.80   0.57   0.59   0.94   0.74   0.62

CCAPM(GNP)    0.94   0.93   0.99   0.79   0.84   0.94   0.90   0.87    0.95   0.86   1.00   0.75   0.78   0.94   0.73   0.70   0.95   0.94   0.99   0.78   0.79   0.94   0.87   0.85   0.92   0.92   0.94   0.62   0.61   0.94   0.86   0.66

JW (GNP)      0.84   0.88   0.76   0.94   0.79   0.83   0.72   0.70    0.85   0.90   0.75   1.00   0.73   0.83   0.64   0.63   0.84   0.86   0.77   0.87   0.75   0.83   0.71   0.67   0.63   0.67   0.63   0.57   0.52   0.83   0.64   0.48

LCM(GNP)      0.78   0.81   0.76   0.77   0.92   0.83   0.79   0.77    0.78   0.83   0.78   0.73   1.00   0.83   0.81   0.75   0.81   0.80   0.79   0.74   0.85   0.83   0.74   0.71   0.73   0.76   0.72   0.64   0.68   0.83   0.75   0.73

COCH(GNP)     0.96   0.97   0.94   0.87   0.87   1.00   0.88   0.86    0.97   0.94   0.94   0.83   0.83   1.00   0.72   0.69   0.98   0.97   0.96   0.84   0.84   1.00   0.86   0.82   0.91   0.91   0.90   0.61   0.62   1.00   0.82   0.69

FF3(GNP)      0.70   0.73   0.71   0.64   0.85   0.72   0.84   0.83    0.70   0.75   0.73   0.64   0.81   0.72   1.00   0.95   0.69   0.71   0.70   0.51   0.81   0.72   0.85   0.82   0.69   0.72   0.69   0.58   0.61   0.72   0.80   0.68

FF5(GNP)      0.66   0.69   0.68   0.59   0.80   0.69   0.80   0.83    0.67   0.71   0.70   0.63   0.75   0.69   0.95   1.00   0.67   0.66   0.67   0.44   0.76   0.69   0.82   0.81   0.63   0.67   0.65   0.49   0.56   0.69   0.72   0.67

NULL(CAY)     0.98   0.98   0.95   0.90   0.87   0.98   0.85   0.81    0.98   0.94   0.95   0.84   0.81   0.98   0.69   0.67   1.00   0.97   0.96   0.86   0.81   0.98   0.83   0.78   0.89   0.89   0.88   0.60   0.63   0.98   0.80   0.64

CAPM(CAY)     0.95   0.99   0.93   0.92   0.87   0.97   0.88   0.83    0.96   0.95   0.94   0.86   0.80   0.97   0.71   0.66   0.97   1.00   0.95   0.89   0.85   0.97   0.86   0.81   0.87   0.92   0.87   0.64   0.64   0.97   0.85   0.64

CCAPM(CAY)    0.94   0.94   0.98   0.81   0.85   0.96   0.89   0.87    0.95   0.88   0.99   0.77   0.79   0.96   0.70   0.67   0.96   0.95   1.00   0.81   0.79   0.96   0.87   0.85   0.89   0.91   0.92   0.60   0.61   0.96   0.84   0.65

JW (CAY)      0.84   0.88   0.77   0.94   0.78   0.84   0.69   0.63    0.84   0.83   0.78   0.87   0.74   0.84   0.51   0.44   0.86   0.89   0.81   1.00   0.73   0.84   0.64   0.60   0.70   0.74   0.68   0.68   0.54   0.84   0.66   0.42

LCM(CAY)      0.79   0.83   0.78   0.78   0.94   0.84   0.87   0.83    0.80   0.83   0.79   0.75   0.85   0.84   0.81   0.76   0.81   0.85   0.79   0.73   1.00   0.84   0.85   0.80   0.75   0.79   0.73   0.61   0.74   0.84   0.83   0.77

COCH(CAY)     0.96   0.97   0.94   0.87   0.87   1.00   0.88   0.86    0.97   0.94   0.94   0.83   0.83   1.00   0.72   0.69   0.98   0.97   0.96   0.84   0.84   1.00   0.86   0.82   0.91   0.91   0.90   0.61   0.62   1.00   0.82   0.69

FF3(CAY)      0.81   0.85   0.86   0.72   0.84   0.86   0.98   0.95    0.84   0.80   0.87   0.71   0.74   0.86   0.85   0.82   0.83   0.86   0.87   0.64   0.85   0.86   1.00   0.94   0.82   0.87   0.84   0.62   0.69   0.86   0.94   0.73

FF5(CAY)      0.77   0.80   0.84   0.65   0.80   0.82   0.93   0.96    0.79   0.76   0.85   0.67   0.71   0.82   0.82   0.81   0.78   0.81   0.85   0.60   0.80   0.82   0.94   1.00   0.79   0.83   0.81   0.57   0.54   0.82   0.85   0.72

NULL(JAN)     0.91   0.86   0.91   0.72   0.79   0.91   0.84   0.80    0.91   0.81   0.92   0.63   0.73   0.91   0.69   0.63   0.89   0.87   0.89   0.70   0.75   0.91   0.82   0.79   1.00   0.96   0.99   0.66   0.64   0.91   0.86   0.67

CAPM(JAN)     0.87   0.91   0.91   0.75   0.82   0.91   0.88   0.85    0.90   0.84   0.92   0.67   0.76   0.91   0.72   0.67   0.89   0.92   0.91   0.74   0.79   0.91   0.87   0.83   0.96   1.00   0.96   0.70   0.68   0.91   0.90   0.70

CCAPM(JAN)    0.90   0.87   0.94   0.70   0.77   0.90   0.86   0.83    0.91   0.80   0.94   0.63   0.72   0.90   0.69   0.65   0.88   0.87   0.92   0.68   0.73   0.90   0.84   0.81   0.99   0.96   1.00   0.67   0.63   0.90   0.87   0.66

JW (JAN)      0.60   0.63   0.62   0.68   0.66   0.61   0.68   0.63    0.61   0.57   0.62   0.57   0.64   0.61   0.58   0.49   0.60   0.64   0.60   0.68   0.61   0.61   0.62   0.57   0.66   0.70   0.67   1.00   0.61   0.61   0.68   0.44

LCM(JAN)      0.58   0.62   0.59   0.56   0.69   0.62   0.69   0.58    0.59   0.59   0.61   0.52   0.68   0.62   0.61   0.56   0.63   0.64   0.61   0.54   0.74   0.62   0.69   0.54   0.64   0.68   0.63   0.61   1.00   0.62   0.76   0.67

COCH(JAN)     0.96   0.97   0.94   0.87   0.87   1.00   0.88   0.86    0.97   0.94   0.94   0.83   0.83   1.00   0.72   0.69   0.98   0.97   0.96   0.84   0.84   1.00   0.86   0.82   0.91   0.91   0.90   0.61   0.62   1.00   0.82   0.69

FF3(JAN)      0.78   0.82   0.83   0.69   0.83   0.82   0.95   0.87    0.81   0.74   0.86   0.64   0.75   0.82   0.80   0.72   0.80   0.85   0.84   0.66   0.83   0.82   0.94   0.85   0.86   0.90   0.87   0.68   0.76   0.82   1.00   0.78

FF5(JAN)      0.61   0.64   0.64   0.49   0.71   0.69   0.73   0.76    0.65   0.62   0.66   0.48   0.73   0.69   0.68   0.67   0.64   0.64   0.65   0.42   0.77   0.69   0.73   0.72   0.67   0.70   0.66   0.44   0.67   0.69   0.78   1.00



The HJ-distance is calculated as min || y - m || , and y − m
                                                           ~ = λ~ ' R is the adjustment for y to make it a true pricing kernel. LCM stands for linear version of Campbell's (1996) asset pricing model. COCH is a modified
model for Cochrane(1996) model, with the factors as investment growth rates. . The data are returns on Fama-French 25 portfolios in excess of T-bill rate and the return on T-bill rate. Quarterly data are from 1953:01 to
1997:04, 180 observations.
Table 5: Parameters estimates of interesting models from HJ-distance
Panel A: CAPM monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by IP

                            Constant              RVW                   IP                RVW*IP
Parameters of the pricing kernel
          b̂                  1.03                -0.04                -0.34               0.02
         s.e.                 0.05                 0.02                 0.12               0.03
Factor risk prices
          Λ                                       0.66                 2.16                0.58
         s.e.                                     0.27                 0.74                2.75

Panel B: CCAPM monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by IP

                            Constant               ∆c                   IP                ∆c *IP
Parameters of the pricing kernel
          b̂                  1.14                -0.75                -0.28               0.22
         s.e.                 0.10                 0.36                 0.11               0.12
Factor risk prices
          Λ                                       0.43                 1.38                -0.49
         s.e.                                     0.21                 0.65                 0.55

Panel C: CCAPM monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by JAN

                            Constant               ∆c                  JAN                ∆c *JAN
Parameters of the pricing kernel
          b̂                  1.05                -0.12                0.58                -3.93
         s.e.                 0.06                 0.37                0.90                 1.62
Factor risk prices
          Λ                                       0.26                 0.02                0.20
         s.e.                                     0.22                 0.06                0.08

Panel D: JW monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by IP

              Constant       RVW       RLBR      RPREM         IP       RVW*IP   RLBR*IP     RPREM*IP
Parameters of the pricing kernel
     b̂          1.38       -0.04      -0.66      0.68        0.38       0.00     -0.40           -0.40
    s.e.         0.68        0.02       0.64      0.71        0.38       0.03      0.31            0.22
Factor risk prices
     Λ                       0.65      0.05       -0.05       1.01       0.80     1.72             1.09
    s.e.                     0.28      0.12        0.13       0.98       2.68     1.02             0.41

Panel E: JW monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by JAN
              Constant      RVW      RLBR        RPREM        JAN     RVW*JAN RLBR*JAN RPREM*JAN
Parameters of the pricing kernel
     b̂         -0.68       0.02      0.53         2.54       4.33      -0.45     0.35            -8.36
    s.e.         0.90       0.05      0.78         1.13       3.34       0.40     3.65             3.26
Factor risk prices
     Λ                      0.59     -0.14        -0.28       0.07       0.70     0.07             0.13
    s.e.                    0.34      0.15         0.18       0.05       0.62     0.07             0.06
Panel F: Campbell monthly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

                   constant         RVW            LBR             DIV               RTB               TRM
Parameters of the pricing kernel
       b̂            -1.07          0.01           0.10            0.67              0.90               -0.72
     s.e.            1.30           0.03           0.41            0.34              4.33               0.28
Factor risk prices
      Λ                             0.66           0.02            -0.69             -0.05              1.11
     s.e.                           0.31           0.27             0.33             0.04               0.35

Panel G: FF3 monthly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

                            Constant               RVW                     SMB                       HML
Parameters of the pricing kernel
          b̂                  1.07                 -0.05                   -0.01                     -0.10
         s.e.                 0.02                  0.01                    0.02                      0.02
Factor risk prices
          Λ                                        0.65                    0.14                      0.39
         s.e.                                      0.21                    0.12                      0.10

Panel H: FF3 monthly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by JAN

              Constant       RVW       SMB         HML         JAN         RVW*JAN SMB*JAN HML*JAN
Parameters of the pricing kernel
     b̂          1.07       -0.08      0.12        -0.06       1.38          0.21            -0.98           0.15
    s.e.         0.05        0.03      0.06         0.05       1.22          0.26             0.43           0.42
Factor risk prices
     Λ                       0.63      0.16        0.39        0.01          -0.07           0.74            0.19
    s.e.                     0.27      0.21        0.16        0.06           0.47           0.32            0.23

Panel I: JW quarterly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

                            Constant               RVW                     RLBR                      RPREM
Parameters of the pricing kernel
          b̂                  -0.35                0.00                    -0.20                     1.01
         s.e.                  0.85                0.02                     0.64                     0.48
Factor risk prices
          Λ                                        1.29                    -0.02                     -0.74
         s.e.                                      0.84                     0.12                      0.33

Panel J: Campbell quarterly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

                   constant         RVW            LBR             DIV               RTB               TRM
Parameters of the pricing kernel
       b̂            0.22           0.00           0.10            0.28              -0.20              -0.56
     s.e.            1.00           0.02           0.16            0.27              2.64               0.22
Factor risk prices
      Λ                             1.52           -0.13           -0.28             -0.03              0.85
     s.e.                           0.79            0.37           0.24              0.02               0.34
Panel K: Cochrane quarterly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by lag GNP

                   constant        NRINV          RINV              GNP      NRINV*GNP        RINV*GNP
Parameters of the pricing kernel
       b̂            0.92          -0.01           -0.16            0.12          -0.04          -0.09
     s.e.            0.27           0.16           0.07             0.22          0.07           0.04
Factor risk prices
      Λ                             0.33           1.76             0.03          0.86            5.33
     s.e.                           0.85           1.31             0.58          1.21            3.24

Panel L: Cochrane quarterly non-scaled returns with scaled factors by JAN

                   constant        NRINV          RINV              JAN       NRINV*JAN       RINV*JAN
Parameters of the pricing kernel
       b̂            1.41          -0.24           0.09             -1.44         0.90           -0.19
     s.e.            0.21           0.17           0.07             0.53          0.37           0.15
Factor risk prices
      Λ                            -0.63           -1.38            0.15          -1.25          -0.03
     s.e.                          0.75            1.44             0.08          0.59           0.61

Panel M: FF5 quarterly non-scaled returns with non-scaled factors

                   constant         RVW            SMB              HML          TERM            RPREM
Parameters of the pricing kernel
       b̂            1.23          -0.05           0.00             -0.06         -0.21           1.25
     s.e.            0.52           0.02           0.02             0.02          0.11            0.78
Factor risk prices
      Λ                             1.51           0.58             1.12          0.23           -0.06
     s.e.                           0.79           0.42             0.41          0.51           0.10

All parameters are calculated by both optimal GMM and minimizing HJ-dist. The risk prices for factors, Λ,
are defined in equation (7). The data are returns on Fama-French 25 portfolios in
excess of T-bill rate and the return on T-bill rate. Monthly data are
from 1952:01 to 1997:12; quarterly data are from 1953:01 to 1997:04.
Table 6: Robustness test for non-scaled returns models
Panel A: monthly scaled returns by TERM with non-scaled factors
              NULL         CAPM       CCAPM          JW      CAMPBELL            FF3          FF5
    p1           0            0           0           0         0                  0            0
    p2           0            0        0.0001      0.0001       0               0.0005       0.0033
    p3           0            0           0           0         0                  0            0

Panel B: monthly scaled returns by TERM with scaled factors by IP
              NULL         CAPM       CCAPM          JW       CAMPBELL           FF3          FF5
    p1           0            0           0        0.0022         0                0            0
    p2           0         0.0035         0        0.0044         0             0.0173       0.0004
    p3           0            0        0.0001         0           0             0.0001          0

Panel C: monthly scaled returns by TERM with scaled factors by JAN
              NULL         CAPM       CCAPM          JW       CAMPBELL           FF3          FF5
    p1           0         0.0001      0.0013         0            0               0            0
    p2           0         0.0006      0.0361      0.0023          0            0.0074       0.0855
    p3           0            0        0.0751      0.0038          0            0.0006       0.0008

Panel D: quarterly scaled returns by TERM with non-scaled factors
              NULL          CAPM       CCAPM         JW       CAMPBELL          COCH          FF3           FF5
    p1        0.0001        0.0001      0.0135      0.002         0                0         0.0015        0.0028
    p2        0.0028        0.0054      0.0122     0.0063         0             0.0003       0.0403        0.0494
    p3           0          0.0001      0.0064     0.0005         0                0         0.0012        0.0017

Panel E: quarterly scaled returns by TERM with scaled factors by lag GNP
               NULL         CAPM       CCAPM          JW       CAMPBELL         COCH          FF3           FF5
    p1           0          0.0021      0.0096       0.001            0            0         0.0387        0.0176
    p2        0.0011        0.0173      0.0149      0.0077         0.0004       0.0005       0.3613        0.4949
    p3           0          0.0016      0.0035         0              0            0         0.0690        0.0156

Panel F: quarterly scaled returns by TERM with scaled factors by CAY
               NULL         CAPM       CCAPM          JW       CAMPBELL         COCH          FF3           FF5
    p1           0          0.0014      0.0001      0.0052          0              0         0.0005        0.0012
    p2        0.0005        0.0058      0.0022       0.012          0           0.0009       0.0528        0.1095
    p3           0          0.0002      0.0004      0.0025          0              0         0.0022        0.0061

Panel G: quarterly scaled returns by TERM with scaled factors by JAN
              NULL          CAPM       CCAPM          JW       CAMPBELL         COCH          FF3           FF5
    p1        0.0003        0.0022      0.0009      0.0204           0          0.0641       0.0004        0.0060
    p2        0.0154        0.0199      0.0111       0.103        0.0166        0.2361       0.0315        0.2157
    p3        0.0007        0.0017      0.0003      0.0159           0          0.0385       0.0007        0.0035

The p-values are:
p1: test of HJ-distance =0 using parameter estimates from optimal GMM for corresponding non-scaled
return models; p2: test of optimal GMM over-identification using parameter estimates from optimal GMM
for corresponding non-scaled return models; p3: test of HJ-distance =0 using parameter estimates from
minimizing HJ-distance for corresponding non-scaled return models.
The tests are based on returns on the FF25 portfolios in excess of T-bill rate and the return of T-bill,
conditioned on the term premium, the difference in yields between a thirty-year government bond and a
one-year bond. Monthly data are from 1952:01 to 1997:12; quarterly data are from 1953:01 to 1997:04.
Figure 1. Diagnostic of Weighting matrix = E[R’R]-1 . Standardized eigenvector
corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue of E[R’R]
Panel A: monthly non-scaled returns, condition number=13548, 1st va(E[R’R]) = 0.00007, 2nd
va(E[R’R])=0.00009.


                             monthly non-scaled returns

     40
     30
     20
     10
      0
    -10
    -20
    -30
    -40
          11    13    15    22     24    31     33    35      42   44    51    53    55

                                              va(1)   va(2)

Panel B: quarterly non-scaled returns, condition number=7851, 1st va(E[R’R]) = 0.00013, 2nd
va(E[R’R])=0.00018.

                            quarterly non-scaled returns

     40
     30
     20
     10
      0
    -10
    -20
    -30
    -40
          11    13    15    22     24    31     33    35      42   44    51    53    55

                                              va(1)   va(2)




The data are monthly and quarterly returns of Fama-French 25 portfolios in excess of T-bill rate and the
return on the T-bill. Monthly data start at 1952:01, end at 1997:12, 552 observations. Quarterly data start at
1953:01, end at 1997:04, 180 observations. The smallest eigenvalue of E[R’R] is the biggest eigenvalue for
the weighting matrix = inv E[R’R], thus the corresponding eigenvector is the most important weight on the
model errors.
Figure 2. Time series of three conditioning variables

Panel A: monthly conditioning variable cycle(IP)

                                           IP

   0.12

   0.08

   0.04

       0

   -0.04

   -0.08

   -0.12
       5201    5701     6201    6701    7201       7701   8201   8701   9201   9701



Panel B: quarterly conditioning variable cycle (GNP)


                                          GNP

   0.06

   0.04

   0.02

       0

   -0.02

   -0.04

   -0.06
        5201    5701    6201    6701    7201       7701   8201   8701   9201   9701
Panel C: quarterly conditioning variable cycle(CAY)

                                         cay

    0.04
    0.03
    0.02
    0.01
       0
   -0.01
   -0.02
   -0.03
   -0.04
        5301 5701 6101 6501 6901 7301 7701 8101 8501 8901 9301 9701




Cycle (IP) is the cyclical element in industrial production. Monthly data begin at 1952:01 and end at
1997:12. Cycle (GNP) is the cycle element of GNP. Cycle (CAY) is constructed as the change in aggregate
consumption-wealth ratio, derived in Lettau and Ludvigson (1999a). Cycle (GNP) starts at 1952:01, and
ends at 1997:04. Cycle (CAY) starts at 1953:01 and ends at 1997:04.
Figure 3: model errors for monthly models with non-scaled factors
Panel A: Null
                                  NULLM

   1.4
   1.2
   1.2
     1
     1
   0.8
   0.8
   0.6
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
   0.4
     0
   0.2
  -0.2
     0
  -0.4
  -0.2
  -0.6
         11
          1   13
               3   15
                    5   22
                         7   24
                              9   31
                                  11   33
                                       13   35
                                            15   42
                                                 17   44
                                                      19   51
                                                           21   53
                                                                23   55
                                                                     25

                                   MODERR        SE

Panel B: CAPM
                                  CAPMM

   1.4
   1.2
     1
   0.8
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
     0
  -0.2
  -0.4
  -0.6
         11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                   MODERR        SE

Panel C: CCAPM
                                  CCAPMM

   1.4
   1.2
     1
   0.8
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
     0
  -0.2
  -0.4
  -0.6
         11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                   MODERR        SE
Panel D: JW
                                  JWM

  1.4
  1.2
    1
  0.8
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
    0
 -0.2
 -0.4
 -0.6
        11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                  MODERR        SE

Panel E: CAMPBELL
                             CAMPBELLM

  1.4
  1.2
    1
  0.8
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
    0
 -0.2
 -0.4
 -0.6
        11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                  MODERR        SE

Panel F: COCHRANE
                                 COCHQ

   2
  1.5
   1
  0.5
   0
 -0.5
   -1
 -1.5
        11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                 MODERR         SE
Panel G: FF3
                                   FF3M

   1.4
   1.2
     1
   0.8
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
     0
  -0.2
  -0.4
  -0.6
         11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                   MODERR        SE

Panel H: FF5
                                   FF5M

   1.4
   1.2
     1
   0.8
   0.6
   0.4
   0.2
     0
  -0.2
  -0.4
  -0.6
         11   13   15   22   24   31   33   35   42   44   51   53   55

                                   MODERR        SE

The data are monthly and quarterly returns of Fama-French 25 portfolios in excess of T-bill rate and the
return on the T-bill. Monthly data start at 1952:01, end at 1997:12, 552 observations. Quarterly data start at
1953:01, end at 1997:04, 180 observations. Model errors are defined in equation (20).
Figure 4. Pricing Errors for Interesting Models

Panel A: monthly CAPM with scaled factors by IP
                              monthly CAPM(IP)

  0.6

  0.4

  0.2

    0

  -0.2

  -0.4

  -0.6
         11   13   15    22   24   31    33   35     42    44   51   53   55

                                   CAPM            CAPM(IP)

Panel B: monthly CCAPM with scaled factors by IP and JAN

                   monthly CCAPM(IP) and CCAPM(JAN)

    1
  0.8
  0.6
  0.4
  0.2
    0
  -0.2
  -0.4
         11   13   15    22   24   31    33   35     42    44   51   53   55

                        CCAPM           CCAPM(IP)          CCAPM(JAN)

Panel C: monthly JW with scaled factors by IP and JAN
                        monthly JW(IP) and JW(JAN)

  0.6

  0.4

  0.2

    0

  -0.2

  -0.4

  -0.6
         11   13   15    22   24   31    33   35     42    44   51   53   55

                              JW         JW(IP)           JW(JAN)
Panel D: monthly Campbell’s model with non-scaled factors (with benchmark FF3)

                        monthly non-scaled factors

  0.4

  0.2

    0

  -0.2

  -0.4

  -0.6
         11   13   15   22    24    31     33   35     42   44      51   53   55

                                     Campbell            FF3

Panel E: monthly FF3 with scaled factors by JAN
                              monthly FF3(JAN)
   0.2
   0.1
     0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
  -0.4
  -0.5
  -0.6
         11   13   15   22    24    31     33   35     42   44      51   53   55

                                    FF3              FF3(JAN)

Panel F: quarterly JW with non-scaled factors (with benchmark FF3)
                                   quarterly JW

  2.5
    2
  1.5
    1
  0.5
    0
  -0.5
    -1
  -1.5
         11   13   15   22   24     31     33   35     42   44      51   53   55

                                          FF3          JW

Panel G: quarterly Campbell’s model with non-scaled factors (with benchmark FF3)

                             quarterly Campbell

  1.5

    1

  0.5

    0

  -0.5

    -1

  -1.5
         11   13   15   22    24     31    33   35     42      44   51   53   55

                                     FF3             Campbell
Panel H: quarterly Cochrane’s model with scaled factors by GNP and JAN
               Quarterly Cochrane(GNP) and Cochrane(JAN)

   2.5
     2
   1.5
     1
   0.5
     0
  -0.5
    -1
  -1.5
    -2
  -2.5
          11   13    15   22     24    31     33   35   42    44   51   53   55

                          COCH              COCH(GNP)          COCH(JAN)

Panel I: quarterly FF5 with non-scaled factors (with benchmark FF3)

                                      quarterly FF5

    0.4
    0.2
      0
   -0.2
   -0.4
   -0.6
   -0.8
     -1
   -1.2
   -1.4
          11    13   15    22    24     31    33   35   42    44   51   53   55

                                             FF3        FF5

The data are monthly and quarterly returns of Fama-French 25 portfolios in excess of T-bill rate and the
return on the T-bill. Monthly data start at 1952:01, end at 1997:12, 552 observations. Quarterly data start at
1953:01, end at 1997:04, 180 observations. Pricing errors are defined in equation (33).
