                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FEDERAL
                                TAXES AS AUTOMATIC STABILIZERS


                                               Alan J. Auerbach
                                               Daniel Feenberg


                                             Working Paper 7662
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w7662

                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         April 2000




We are grateful to Brad DeLong, Nada Eissa, Jonathan Gruber, Alan Krueger, Christina Romer, David
Romer, Tim Taylor, Jim Ziliak, and participants in the NBER Public Economics program meeting for helpful
discussions and comments on an earlier draft, and to Nancy Nicosia for research assistance. Auerbach
received financial support for this research through the Burch Center for Tax Policy and Public Finance at
Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Alan J. Auerbach and Daniel Feenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Significance of Federal Taxes as Automatic Stabilizers
Alan J. Auerbach and Daniel Feenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 7662
April 2000
JEL No. E62




                                               ABSTRACT



        Using the TAXSIM model for the period 1962-95, we consider the federal tax system’s impact
as an automatic stabilizer. Despite the many changes in the tax system, there has been relatively little
change in its role as an automatic stabilizer. We estimate that individual federal taxes offset perhaps as
much as 8 percent of initial shocks to GDP. We also suggest that the progressive income tax may help to
stabilize output via its effect on the supply of labor, an additional effect that may even be of similar
magnitude to the more traditional path of stabilization through aggregate demand.




Alan J. Auerbach                                             Daniel Feenberg
Department of Economics                                      National Bureau of Economic Research
University of California                                     1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
(510) 643-0711                                               (617) 588-0343
and NBER                                                     feenberg@nber.org
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu
       Automatic stabilizers are those elements of fiscal policy that tend to mitigate output

fluctuations without any explicit government action. From the traditional Keynesian perspective,

automatic stabilizers could include any components of the government budget that act to offset

fluctuations in effective demand by reducing taxes and increasing government spending in

recession, and doing the opposite in expansion. Perhaps the most commonly discussed automatic

stabilizer is the federal income tax, which reduces the multiplier effects of demand shocks through

the marginal taxation of income fluctuations. A progressive income tax with high marginal tax rates

could substantially reduce fluctuations in after-tax income and, so the argument goes, private

spending, without the need for any explicit policy changes. Moreover, automatic stabilizers avoid

the slow implementation that can cause discretionary policy to lag so far behind events.

       Since the period following World War II when automatic stabilizers were first discussed

seriously, the U.S. tax system has experienced significant changes. The maximum marginal tax rate

has declined substantially since the early 1960s. Over the same period, the payroll tax has grown

steadily as a share of federal revenue, this growth offsetting relative declines in corporate and excise

tax collections. Also changing over this period has been the distribution of income, with a marked

increase in the share of income received by high-income taxpayers. In light of these and other

changes, it is useful to consider what has happened to the tax system’s potential to stabilize income

fluctuations. While most of our analysis relates to the individual income and payroll taxes, we do

offer some additional comments on other fiscal instruments at the end of the paper.

       Our analysis reveals a number of interesting findings. We estimate that automatic stabilizer

effects through the income and payroll tax together would currently offset about 8 percent of any

initial shock to GDP. This impact is much the same as its was during the early 1960s (although it

did increase temporarily during the late 1970s and early 1980s). Moreover, we believe that the
effects of changes in marginal tax rates on labor supply, although they are not often considered as

automatic stabilizers, may be as important in this regard as the aggregate demand impacts normally

considered.


What Makes Automatic Stabilizers Effective?

        Automatic stabilizers must be precipitated by a shock that causes aggregate economic

activity to fall or rise. How can fiscal policy act automatically to offset this shock? If fiscal policy is

to stimulate aggregate demand without doing so directly through government purchases, it must

provide inducements to increased private purchases. The inducement normally considered is an

increase in disposable income, although there might be other changes to encourage current spending

via incentive effects.

        But the effectiveness of an automatic stabilizer depends not only on how much of an

increase in disposable income it produces, but also how large a private response in consumption this

increase in disposable income generates. This response, in turn, will depend on how the increase in

disposable income is distributed, for households with different income levels will differ in the extent

to which they spend increases in current disposable income.

        In our analysis below, we follow this logic and address the measurement of automatic

stabilizers in two steps, using individual tax return information from 1962 to 1995. The first step is

to estimate how the sensitivity of after-tax income to before-tax income has changed over time.

Presumably, reducing this sensitivity provides greater stabilization, since either increases or declines

in before-tax income would have a lesser effect on after-tax income. Our approach decomposes

measured historical variation into what is attributable, respectively, to changes in the tax system and

to changes in the distribution of income. We also consider separately the role of the payroll tax and

the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), a major redistributive component of the federal income tax

                                                                                                     2
not present during the early years of the sample. Finally, we account for the additional changes in

real tax liabilities induced by fluctuations in the inflation rate that are associated with real income

shocks.

          The second step of our analysis is to translate these reductions in income fluctuations into

reductions in aggregate demand. Here, a crucial consideration is the extent to which consumption

reacts to current disposable income. Since upper-income households are less to consume a smaller

share of temporary additions to income, their change in consumption as a share of the change

disposable income will be less than for middle-income and lower-income households. However,

even though poor households might respond significantly to changes in tax payments, they pay a

very small share of the income tax to begin with, and hence tax fluctuations will have little effect on

their consumption. But the EITC and, especially, the payroll tax, are significant among lower

income households, and hence may have a greater stabilizing impact. Thus, from the perspective of

automatic stabilization, the growth in these two programs may have been an important change.


Data and Methodology

          In the past, researchers have used a variety of techniques to estimate the responsiveness of

the tax system to fluctuations in income.1 One approach focuses on estimating an aggregate

relationship between total taxes and total income. This approach does pick up the effects of changes

in the composition of income that occur as aggregate income fluctuates, but its usefulness depends

on the ability to hold other factors constant, and cannot deal effectively with changes in the tax law

over time.

          The approach we use is an extension of that developed by Pechman (1973, 1987), using a

simulation model based on a file of actual tax returns to consider the impact of hypothetical changes

in income and its components on individual tax payments.2

                                                                                                 3
        Our basic data are the individual tax returns covered by the NBER TAXSIM Model, which

includes a “tax calculator” that allows us to estimate the impact on tax liability of changes in tax-

return components of income and deductions.3 The TAXSIM Model now includes 1962, 1964,

1966, and each tax year thereafter through 1995. Because the definition of Adjusted Gross Income

(AGI) changed periodically during this era, we measure before-tax income using a standardized

AGI measure, which is actual AGI plus the excluded portion of capital gains, IRA, and Keogh

deductions, plus the dividend exclusion and the adjustment for alimony.

        The period 1962-95 incorporates a number of important legislative changes in the individual

income tax. These include: the Revenue Act of 1964, which reduced the top marginal income rate

from 91 percent to 70 percent; the Tax Reform Act of 1969, which introduced a ceiling of 50

percent on the marginal tax rate on “earned” income;4 the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981,

which reduced the top marginal rate on other income from 70 percent to 50 percent; the Tax Reform

Act of 1986, which reduced the marginal rate on the highest incomes to 28 percent and the top

marginal rate to 33 percent; and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA93), which

raised the marginal tax rate on high-income individuals to at least 39.6 percent, with other

provisions placing most such individuals into higher effective brackets. The EITC, introduced as a

small program in 1975, was expanded by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and the Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Acts of 1990 and 1993.

        Over this same period, the payroll tax rose in importance, as its rate and income ceiling both

grew. Most of the returns in our sample do not include a direct measure of payroll taxes. For the

returns of single individuals, it is relatively easy to estimate such taxes based on the reported levels

of wage and salary and self-employment income. However, for joint returns, the actual payroll tax

will depend on the breakdown of earnings between husband and wife, which we typically do not



                                                                                                  4
observe, unless total earnings are below the income ceiling for one person and hence fully taxable.

Thus, we must estimate payroll taxes by imputing the income of each spouse. We do have data on

the breakdown of earnings between husband and wife for 1974. Thus, for the years 1960-1979, we

look at each level of AGI and say that the division earnings between husbands and wives at that

income level has the same distribution as in the 1974 data. For later years, we use the distributions

from the nearest year of the Survey of Consumer Finances (available for 1983, 1989, 1992 and

1995).


Initial Results

         In the public finance literature, perhaps the most familiar measure of the sensitivity of taxes

to income changes is the elasticity of aggregate income taxes with respect to changes in aggregate

income. A proportional income tax has an elasticity of 1.0, while progressive tax systems whose

tax-income ratios increase with income have an elasticity greater than 1.0. This elasticity, then,

serves as an indicator of the tax system’s overall progressivity. It is also true that, for a given level

of taxes, the higher the elasticity, the smaller will be the change in after-tax income that results from

a given change in before-tax income.

         However, for purposes of measuring the tax system’s role as an automatic stabilizer, the

income elasticity of taxes has a severe shortcoming: it is invariant with respect to whether the share

of income taken as taxes is high or low. If taxes take a large share of the economy, they will be

more able to act as an automatic stabilizer than if they take a smaller share. But if one knows that

the elasticity of taxes with respect to income is, say, 1.5, this is no help at all in knowing whether

the percentage change in taxes is being calculated on a large or a small tax base. Thus, a more

direct measure of the potential stabilization effect of the tax system is the ratio of the change in taxes

with respect to a change in before-tax income; that is, the ratio of the changes not expressed, as in

                                                                                                    5
the case of the elasticity, in percentage terms.   Pechman (1973) refers to this measure as the tax

system’s “built-in flexibility” and we refer to it as the normalized tax change.

        Figure 1 presents four versions of the normalized tax change for each year in our sample

period. To calculate each value, we carried out a hypothetical experiment in which we increase all

income and income-related deduction items on each tax return by 1 percent, meant to simulate a 1-

percent change in aggregate income spread neutrally across the population. Then, we add together

all the individual tax changes and divide by the sum of assumed income changes for that year. The

result is the ratio of the aggregate change in taxes to the aggregate change in income.

        The first series of Figure 1 presents estimates of this ratio for the income tax, excluding the

EITC. The basic income tax without the EITC has served to cushion between 18 and 28 percent of

the fluctuations in before-tax income over the sample period. We might expect this ratio to have

fallen during the 1960s and 1970s, with the general decline (at least until the 1990s) of top marginal

tax rates. However, the two years in which the ratio is highest are 1980 and 1981. The explanation

lies in the high inflation of the 1970s and early 1980s. For a tax system based on nominal income

and deductions, i.e., not indexed to the price level, inflation raises the real value of taxes paid for

any given level of real income, because the system is progressive with respect to nominal income;

an individual with a given real income will appear “wealthier” and face a higher average tax burden.

The U.S. tax system was effectively indexed only in 1985 when provisions that indexed rate

brackets, personal exemptions and the standard deduction took effect.5 On the other hand, a trend

does appear beginning with the 1981 tax cut, as the ratio declines gradually into the early-1990s.

        Of course, not all of the year-to-year changes in this first series are purely attributable to

changes in the tax schedule (either directly or through price-level changes). The responsiveness of

tax collections to real income will vary both with respect to the level of income and also with



                                                                                                 6
respect to the distribution of income, which will affect what proportion of the population faces

various marginal tax rates. Some of these fluctuations in the distribution of income may be

associated with business cycle fluctuations; some of the change in distribution in recent decades will

reflect a secular trend.

        The second series in Figure 1 repeats the exercise of the first series, but holds the

distribution of income constant at that of the 1980 tax year. We implement this hypothetical

experiment by applying the tax law for each respective year to the 1980 sample, with incomes and

income-related deductions adjusted to reflect the ratio of that year’s aggregate adjusted gross

income to the adjusted gross income for 1980. In the 1960s, the normalized tax change would have

been lower had the 1980 income distribution prevailed, which indicates a greater share of income

among those in higher brackets – a more unequal distribution – during these very early years of the

sample. This pattern reverses by the mid-1970s, with the gap between the two series reaching

relative peaks in 1978 and 1986, relatively early in the well-documented period of increasing

income inequality that ensued. However, the trend in more recent years is weak, surprising perhaps

in light of the underlying movement in the income distribution.

        The third series in the figure is a reprise of the first, with varying income distribution, but

now the EITC and payroll tax are added. Adding the EITC alone (not shown) has no effect until its

1975 enactment, and a very small effect for the remainder of the period, never adding more than 1

percentage point to the overall response for the aggregate taxpaying population considered in this

figure. For the payroll tax, we consider only the employee portion, in keeping with our focus on the

change in individual tax payments. 6 In principle, the change in the employer portion should also act

as a cushion, but the impact would be more indirect, akin to that of other business tax payments,

which we consider further below. The effect of the payroll tax over time incorporates two factors,



                                                                                                 7
both of which increase its magnitude. First, the payroll tax has risen over time. Second, the rapidly

rising payroll tax ceiling has made more taxpayers subject to the payroll tax on marginal income

changes. Overall, the payroll tax increases the normalized tax change substantially, particularly in

later years. By 1995, roughly one-sixth of the overall tax response is attributable to the payroll tax.

        The final series shown in Figure 1 takes into account the indirect effects of inflation on tax

payments. The existence of a short-run Phillips curve implies that a decline in the rate of economic

activity, as represented by a rise in the unemployment rate, will be associated with a fall in the

inflation rate. As discussed above, inflation raised the real value of taxes paid before 1985, so a

reduction in the rate of inflation would have decreased this effect, adding to the stabilizing impact of

the tax system. To incorporate this effect in our calculation, we assume that the same uniform 1-

percent shock to real income induces a 0.5-percent shock to the price level, for a total increase in

each individual’s nominal income of 1.5 percent. 7 We calculate the change in deflated taxes for each

taxpayer and then proceed as before in constructing the ratio of the aggregate tax change to the

aggregate real income change. 8 The impact of this additional effect is, as expected, to raise the

normalized tax response in the years prior to 1985.

        Regardless of which of the figure’s series one considers, 1981 stands as the year in which

the individual tax system absorbed the highest share of marginal income changes. The payroll tax

imparts an upward trend from the early 1980s on, while the lack of indexing raises values for the

period prior to 1985. The overall picture is one of very little net change over the full period, as the

effects of particular changes have tended to cancel each other out. The normalized tax change in

1995, .26, is the same as that of 1966 and between the values of 1962 and 1964.9

        Table 1 provides further detail on these normalized tax changes, breaking them down by

income quintile for selected years during the sample period. The table presents three panels to



                                                                                                   8
illustrate the effects of different components of income and payroll taxes. In the lowest quintile, the

income tax has played an insignificant cushioning role except around 1981, when bracket creep had

had its strongest impact; by 1995, the payroll tax is more important for this group. Note that the

EITC reduces the impact of taxation for this lowest quintile, but raises it for the second quintile and,

in more recent years, the third quintile, where taxpayers in the phase-out range dominate those

receiving additional subsidy. At the other end of the income distribution, the payroll tax plays

virtually no role, for individuals in the top quintile are nearly all above the payroll tax ceiling.

        The normalized tax change for the top quintile has dropped over time. The impact of the top

marginal rate reductions of 1964, 1981 and 1986 are evident in comparisons between 1962 and

1967, and 1981 and 1988, respectively, outweighing the impact of bracket creep through 1981 and

the marginal tax rate increases of 1993. On the other hand, because of the rising payroll tax and, in

the second and third quintiles, the EITC, the normalized tax response has risen for the rest of the

income distribution.


The Stabilizing Effect of the Tax System on Aggregate Demand

        For output to be stabilized, it is necessary that the cushioning effect of taxes on changes in

before-tax income translate into lower volatility of household expenditures on goods and services.

The traditional analysis of automatic stabilizers presumes that such a change occurs. However, a

high reaction of consumption to an increase in current disposable income is not consistent with

rational, forward-looking behavior unless: a) the increase is expected to be long-lived; or b) the

household faces a liquidity constraint that depresses current consumption below its desired level.

As we are focusing on income shocks that are cyclical in nature, and hence of relatively short

duration, we must rely primarily on liquidity constraints – or myopia – to translate the income

shocks, and their mitigation, into consumption responses.10

                                                                                                       9
       Several papers have estimated the extent to which households respond to changes in fiscal

variables. Wilcox (1990) finds that aggregate consumption does respond to the timing of tax

payments. At the micro level, Shapiro and Slemrod (1995) find similar sensitivity in response to

changes in income tax withholding rules introduced by President Bush in 1992. These rules should

have had little impact on rational households not facing liquidity constraints, for they amounted to a

very slight change in the timing of tax payments. However, using survey evidence, Shapiro and

Slemrod find that 43 percent of households would spend most of the extra take-home pay. More

recently, Parker (1999) and Souleles (1999) find similar responses to predictable changes in social

security taxes and tax refunds, respectively. One cannot apply these results directly to the current

question, though, because the distributions of social security taxes and even tax refunds (which are

less common among those with higher income) are more concentrated among lower- and middle-

income individuals than are tax payments on incremental income. There might be a much lower

response among the high-income taxpayers who account for such a large share of incremental tax

payments.

       Whether the responsiveness of consumption to current disposable income is due to liquidity

constraints or to other factors, there is little doubt that a substantial share of the population does

respond to longer-range measures of wealth and income. Thus, the consumption response to the tax

changes measured in Table 1 may be significantly lower than the tax changes themselves. To assess

how important this factor might be, we consider a variety of alternative adjustments.

       To begin, we model the impact under the liquidity-constraint hypothesis, following the basic

approach of Zeldes (1989), who divided his sample into two groups of households, according to

whether they had with at least two months of income in non-housing wealth, and found that




                                                                                               10
households with a reasonable level of liquid wealth do smooth consumption shocks in something

approaching an optimal fashion. 11

       Our approach places a similar fraction of households in the low-wealth category to Zeldes’s

68 percent, with our share ranging among the different years in our sample from a low of 61 percent

to a high of 78 percent. We then assume, for simplicity, that households that are low wealth are also

liquidity-constrained, and consume all reductions in tax payments concurrently, while the remaining

households consume none of these tax reductions. The fraction of income of households in our low

wealth-income category is lower than the fraction of households in this category, since higher-

income households are less likely to be classified as liquidity-constrained. Still, this share of

standardized AGI varies between 48 percent and 65 percent during our sample period, a range that

lies somewhat above the share implied by the estimates by Campbell and Mankiw (1989). Thus,

this approach to the identification of liquidity-constrained households probably produces an upper

bound for the consumption response to tax changes.

       Just as the share of income going to liquidity-constrained households is smaller than the

population share of such households, we should expect their share of the aggregate income tax

response to be smaller still, because of the progressivity of marginal tax rates. As the first series

in Figure 2 shows, this is indeed the case. This series shows how the tax automatic stabilizer

increases consumption. These numbers should be compared to those of the first series in Figure

1, which includes the change in the income tax, excluding the EITC, for all individuals. In the

earlier figure, for example, the tax response to a change in income was .21 in 1995. Here in

Figure 2, the consumption out of that tax response is estimated as .10, indicating that just over

half (that is, (.21-.10)/.21) occurs among those not liquidity-constrained – a group comprising 32

percent of households and 44 percent of standardized AGI. Over the entire period, the estimated



                                                                                              11
consumption response associated with the income tax automatic stabilizer ranges between 9

percent and 15 percent, again peaking in 1981.

       The second series in Figure 2, which includes payroll taxes and the EITC, shows that these

two factors (mostly the former) contribute even a larger share of the consumption response than of

the tax response in Figure 1. Because payroll taxes are concentrated almost entirely among the

group we deem to be liquidity-constrained, almost all of the tax change resulting from a shock to

income translates into a change in consumption. Thus, by 1995, about one-fourth of the estimated

cushioning impact of the tax system on consumption derives from changes in the payroll tax, rather

than the income tax. With the rise in the payroll tax over time, this means that the estimated impact

of this combined stabilizer in 1995 is at a level as high as it was in the early 1980s. Adding the

correction for inflation, before 1985, has the expected impact but leaves 1981 as the peak year.

       Thus far, our calculations have assumed that the shock to income is spread uniformly in

proportion to initial income, with no impact on the income distribution. Yet, several authors have

estimated that the income of lower-income individuals is more cyclically sensitive to

macroeconomic conditions, as measured by fluctuations in aggregate income or the unemployment

rate (for example, Blank, 1989; Cutler and Katz, 1991; Blank and Card, 1993; Hoynes, 1999). As

lower-income individuals are more likely to be in the category we classified as being liquidity-

constrained, attributing a greater share of the income shock to them might increase the estimated

aggregate consumption response. We highlight the word “might” because such individuals also

have a smaller share of their income shock initially cushioned by taxes, so the estimated

consumption effect would increase only if their higher consumption response to reduced taxes offset

their lower tax response to reduced income.




                                                                                               12
       To get a sense of the importance of income distribution shifts, we use the results of Blank

and Card (1993, Table 6), who estimate that a 1-percent increase in aggregate income would be

associated with percent income increases by income quintile of 0.72, 1.41, 1.33, 1.05 and 0.89,

respectively, from the lowest to the highest quintile. We apply these percentages to our sample and

calculate the change in taxes divided by the change in aggregate income. The results of this

adjustment on the estimated consumption response, for the income and payroll tax combined, are

illustrated in Figure 2 by comparing the series just discussed with that labeled “Variable Income

Response.” The impact of the adjustment is to increase the estimated consumption response, but

only slightly. That is, the fact that more of the income shock is being attributed to constrained

households outweighs the fact that these households have a lower change in taxes to begin with.

       The numbers in this last series are, in a sense, our best estimate of the impact of income-

induced tax changes on consumption. They indicate that, contrary to what one might have expected

from the decline in marginal tax rates over time, there has been no downward trend in the role of the

tax system in stabilizing aggregate demand through household tax changes. We estimate that about

one-seventh of the initial shock to household income would be offset by changes in household

consumption. Given that the 1995 ratio of adjusted gross income to GDP was roughly 57 percent,

this suggests that about 8 percent of an initial shock to GDP would be offset by changes in private

consumption. We should add, though, that even this figure may overestimate the response, as it

classifies as liquidity-constrained many high-income households. For comparison, the last series in

Figure 2 presents consumption responses based on a much simpler assumption, that every

household in the bottom three quintiles is liquidity-constrained and none in the top two quintiles are

constrained. The very low values of this series – ranging between 4 and 6 percent of the assumed

income shock – illustrate the point made earlier, that as most of the taxes are concentrated among



                                                                                               13
higher-income individuals, these individuals must account for a share of any large automatic

consumption response.


Stabilization on the Supply Side

       In the past, references to the automatic stabilization of output have almost always referred to

the stabilization of aggregate demand. This is consistent with the assumption that the level of

employment is demand-determined, and not on the labor supply curve. In this framework, only

changes in the demand for labor will affect the quantity of labor hired in the market.

       However, to the extent that employment levels are also determined by labor supply

conditions, a tax system with rates rising with respect to income might also serve to stabilize output.

When output fell, the lower marginal tax rates could encourage greater labor supply; conversely,

when output rose, the higher marginal tax rates could discourage labor supply. The impact would

work through incentive effects of marginal tax rates, rather than through changes in tax payments.

Moreover, the temporary nature of the change in income, which works against the effectiveness of

demand-side stabilization, reinforces the supply-side impact. If leisure is a normal good, permanent

increases in the after-tax wage have an income effect that discourages labor supply and works

against the substitution effect of the wage change. But this offsetting income effect is largely absent

from temporary wage changes.

       Figure 3 illustrates this mechanism, in the context of labor market equilibrium. Imagine an

initial equilibrium at point A at the intersection of labor demand curve D and labor supply curve S,

with the resulting employment level L0 and before-tax wage rate w0. Some exogenous shock, say to

productivity, lowers the labor demand schedule to D’. If we ignore the impact of marginal tax rates

on labor supply, this shock results in a decline in employment and the before-tax wage to L1 and w1,

respectively, as shown at point B. But, as L and w fall, so does labor income, wL, and hence the

                                                                                                14
marginal tax rate workers face, thereby mitigating the decline in the after-tax wage rate and

stimulating labor supply. The effect of this decline in the marginal tax rate is to make the labor

supply curve steeper, offsetting the decline in labor supply as the before-tax wage falls (and,

conversely, offsetting the increase in labor supply should the before-tax wage rise). Employment

falls to L2, as shown at point C, rather than to L1, and of the initial income shock, (w0L0-w1L1), an

amount w 1(L2-L1) is offset.

        The general point that marginal tax rate variations can influence output fluctuations is

certainly not new. However, we have found little discussion in the literature of these variations

serving as an automatic stabilizer. Perhaps the closest point to ours is in Agell and Dillén (1994),

who study the optimal design of a progressive income tax to stabilize output fluctuations in a model

that stresses Keynesian price rigidities but also incorporates variable labor supply.

        How large an effect might such marginal tax rate changes have? If we focus only on first-

round effects (i.e., ignoring subsequent effects of the induced increase in labor supply on the before-

tax wage and marginal tax rate), there are two steps here. First, it is necessary to calculate how

much the initial change in output – the shift from point A to point B in Figure 3 – will affect the

after-tax wage rate though the mechanism of changing the marginal tax rate. Then, the question is

what change in labor income will result from the labor supply response to the change in the after-tax

wage rate – the shift from point B to point C in the figure. The net stabilization offset will equal the

product of these two terms: the change in the after-tax wage with respect to the change in income

times the change in labor income with respect to the change in the after-tax wage. This product, in

turn, is roughly equal to the product of the labor supply elasticity and the change in the marginal tax

rate with respect to a unit proportional change in income.12 (For a 1-percent change in income, we

would multiply the resulting change in the marginal tax rate by 100.)



                                                                                                 15
        Estimates of the elasticity of labor supply with respect to changes in wages vary, of course.

We must remember that because the change in the after-tax wage is assumed to arise from cyclical

variation, it should be short-lived, making the income effect small from a lifetime perspective.

Thus, the appropriate elasticity is one that primarily reflects the substitution of current leisure for

current and future consumption and future leisure. Based on the recent life-cycle labor supply

literature,13 a range of between 0.3 and 1.0 should be viewed a reasonable for the elasticity of labor

supply with respect to changes in wages.

        Given these estimates, the upper bound for the proportional income offset to a 1-percent

change in income is the associated change in the marginal tax rate itself, multiplied by 100. For

example, if a 1-percent fall in income reduced the marginal tax rate by 0.1 percentage points, or

0.001, then, for a labor supply elasticity of 1.0, the resulting outward shift in the aggregate supply

curve would be 0.1, or 10 percent, of the initial decline in output.

        Figure 4 presents estimates of the impact of income changes on marginal tax rates, averaged

over the population in proportion to labor income.14 The three series in the figure correspond to the

first three in Figure 2, incorporating different components of the tax system. As one would expect,

the patterns in this figure are similar to those in Figures 1 and 2, with the sensitivity of marginal tax

rates peaking around 1981, when tax progressivity peaked and, like tax progressivity, falling after

the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The EITC effect (not shown separately) is small, slightly reducing the

marginal tax rate (due to individuals passing out of the phase-out range with rising income). The

impact of the payroll tax is more significant and counter to its impact on the demand side. Here, it

reduces the tax system’s impact, affecting those just below the payroll tax ceiling who experience a

decline in their marginal tax rates in moving above the ceiling. However, this effect may be

somewhat overstated, because it does not take into account the fact that earnings above the ceiling



                                                                                                  16
also do not count in subsequent benefit calculations.15 As in earlier calculations, incorporating the

added change in nominal income due to inflation magnifies the measured effect before 1985.

       Overall, the potential stabilizing impact through marginal tax rate changes has fallen

considerably over time. Even in 1995, though, the marginal tax rate response to a 1-percent

increase in income was 0.08 percentage points, a reduction that might induce a supply shift in the

range of 0.02—0.08 percent of GDP — that is, an offset of between 2 percent and 8 percent of the

initial shock. The upper end of this range is the same as the consumption response just estimated,

suggesting that supply-side response may be an important part of the picture, to the extent that

observed employment reflects supply as well as demand shifts.


Other Channels

       It is generally agreed that taxes account for essentially all of the automatic response to real

economic fluctuations, at least at the federal level. For example, in its evaluation of the effect of

slower economic growth on the federal budget, CBO (2000) attributes a negligible amount to

changes in outlays. The logic is straightforward: discretionary spending is, after all, discretionary,

not automatic, and interest payments and the most important mandatory spending programs, Social

Security and Medicare, are based on longer-term factors.

       On the federal tax side, we have already considered the impact of personal income and

payroll taxes which, together, account for the vast majority of federal revenues – fully 82 percent in

1999 (CBO, 2000). However, there are other potentially important channels through which fiscal

policy might effectuate automatic stabilization, through other federal taxes and through taxes and

spending at the state and local level. Here, we consider two potentially important channels, the

corporate income tax and unemployment compensation.            This examination is not exhaustive,



                                                                                               17
though, as it leaves out many other expenditure programs that might also have some automatic

stabilization effects, such as Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) and food stamps.


Corporate Taxes

       Corporate income taxes account for a much smaller share of revenue and GDP than do

individual income taxes or payroll taxes; in 1999, just 10 percent of federal revenues and 2 percent

of GDP (CBO, 2000). Moreover, unlike individual income taxes, corporate income taxes are not

progressive – a given change in income will produce a proportional change in taxes, with that

proportion equal to the tax rate. Thus, for a given income fluctuation, corporate taxes would change

by a smaller percentage amount than would taxes on individual income.

       However, corporate profits are more volatile than GDP, and so corporate income taxes

account for a greater share of tax fluctuations than this small share of receipts and low tax elasticity

would suggest. For example, between 1989 and 1992, as the growth of real GDP slowed, individual

income taxes fell by 0.5 percent of GDP (from 8.2 to 7.7 percent), while the ratio of corporate taxes

to GDP fell by 0.3 percent (from 1.9 to 1.6 percent). Thus, based simply on the relative size of its

fluctuations, the corporate income tax is a potentially important source of automatic stabilization.

       As emphasized above, though, any changes in tax payments must translate into changes in

aggregate demand for automatic stabilizers to succeed. For corporate income taxes, the effect on

consumption is tenuous, because the household ownership of corporate stock is highly concentrated

among individuals who are very unlikely to face liquidity constraints (Auerbach and Hassett 1991).

Thus, any sizeable impact must occur through corporate investment. With flexible and forward-

looking capital markets, however, temporary changes in corporate tax payments should have little

impact on the long-term incentive to invest.        The effect, then, as in the case of household

consumption, must rely primarily on the presence of liquidity constraints, in this case the existence


                                                                                                 18
of firms whose investment policies depend on current liquidity, holding investment opportunities

constant.

        The importance of liquidity constraints for corporate investment remains the subject of

dispute in the literature. Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1987) identify the presence of such effects,

but their findings have been challenged by Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and Cummins, Hassett and

Oliner (1997) and supported by Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998). It is beyond the scope of this

paper to resolve this dispute.

        To the extent that the literature has identified the presence of liquidity constraints on firm

investment, it has been among smaller firms with arguably greater problems of asymmetric

information and weaker access to capital markets. The relevant question for our exercise, which the

literature thus far has failed to address, is how large are the corporate tax fluctuations over the

business cycle among these firms.        Even though the corporate income tax is essentially a

proportional one, it applies asymmetrically to income and losses; that is, it does not provide a refund

for tax losses. Thus, firms with losses experience no change in their current tax liability if these

losses increase or decrease slightly. As having tax losses may be strongly related to facing liquidity

constraints, the relevant tax fluctuations might be small, even if the size of the liquidity-constrained

sector were not. This offers an intriguing subject for future research.


Unemployment Compensation

        Unemployment insurance benefits, paid through state-operated programs, fluctuate in

response to the rise and fall in unemployment that are one characteristic of aggregate economic

fluctuations.   The relationship between output fluctuations and changes in the level of

unemployment benefits is complicated, depending on the relationship between output and

unemployment, the extent of unemployment covered by unemployment insurance, the rate of take-


                                                                                                 19
up of benefits by those eligible, and the formulas that determine the fraction of lost wages replaced

by unemployment insurance.

       For our purposes, though, it is not necessary to estimate separately the impact of each of

these factors. Instead, to get a rough idea of the magnitude involved, one can simply look at the

year-to-year fluctuations in unemployment benefits over the business cycle. For example, around

the 1990-91 recession, annual unemployment insurance benefits went from of $14.9 billion in 1989

to a high of $26.7 in 1991, a rise of $11.8 billion, or about 0.20 percent of GDP (Economic Report

of the President, 2000). Over this same period, real GDP grew by 1.7 percent in 1990 and -0.2

percent in 1991, which, relative to a potential growth rate of, say, 3.0 percent year, represents a

cumulative GDP gap of 4.6 percentage points. Thus, the growth in benefits was about 0.20/4.6 or

about 4 percent of the associated GDP gap. Estimates by Gruber (1997) suggest that the about half

of an increase in received unemployment benefits is consumed, indicating an offset of roughly 2

percent of the initial GDP shock – about one-fourth of the demand effect associated with the income

and payroll taxes. This comparison may understate the relative importance of unemployment

insurance somewhat. The earlier estimates were that that more than one-half of the reductions in

income and payroll taxes are consumed, and it seems unlikely that a smaller share of the rise in

unemployment benefits would be consumed than of the reduction in tax payments. Still, the role of

taxes as an automatic stabilizer appears to be several times larger than that of unemployment

insurance benefits.

       Indeed, the simple calculation here may overstate the automatic stabilizer role of

unemployment insurance in several ways. Unemployment tends to lag the business cycle, so that

the fluctuations in output and benefits are not contemporaneous. This lag would also undercut

the effectiveness of unemployment insurance as an automatic stabilizer of output shocks.



                                                                                              20
Further, not all fluctuations in unemployment benefits are “automatic,” because benefit rules

regarding maximum weeks of coverage are typically relaxed by act of Congress or state

legislatures during periods of elevated unemployment. Thus, not all of the increase in benefits

that occurs after the onset of a recession can necessarily be attributed to the action of automatic

stabilizers.


Conclusion

        Despite the many changes in the U.S. economy and its tax system since the early 1960s,

there has been relatively little net change in the role of the tax system as an automatic stabilizer.

Taking changes in the income tax, the payroll tax, the income distribution, and indexing provisions

into account, and factoring in heterogeneity with respect to consumption responses and income

volatility, we estimate that the tax system’s effectiveness at stabilizing aggregate demand was

somewhat lower in 1995 than at its estimated peak in 1981, and roughly the same as in the early

1960s, when those in the top marginal income tax bracket faced a tax rate of 91 percent. The most

important single source of automatic stabilization of aggregate demand probably occurs through

tax-induced consumption responses, which offset perhaps as much as 8 percent initial shocks to

GDP, but possibly less, depending on how one estimates the consumption response. While the size

of this offset may seem modest, it is broadly consistent with results based on simulations of current

large-scale macro models, such as the FRB/US model used by the Federal Reserve Board (Cohen

and Follette 2000).

        We also suggest that other sources of automatic stabilization may matter, too; in particular,

the progressive income tax may help to stabilize output via its effect on the supply of labor, and this

effect may even be of similar magnitude to the more traditional path of stabilization through

aggregate demand.

                                                                                                21
References

       Agell, Jonas, and Mats Dillén, 1994, “Macroeconomic Externalities: Are Pigouvian Taxes

the Answer?” Journal of Public Economics, January, 111-26.

       Auerbach, Alan J. and Kevin Hassett, 1991, “Corporate Savings and Shareholder

Consumption,” in D. Bernheim and J. Shoven, eds., National Saving and Economic Performance,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 75-98.

       Blank, Rebecca M, 1989, “Disaggregating the Effect of the Business Cycle on the

Distribution of Income,” Economica, May, 141-63.

       Blank, Rebecca M., and David Card, 1993, “Poverty, Income and Growth: Are They Still

Connected?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 285-325.

       Blundell, Richard, Costas Meghir, and Pedro Neves, 1993, “Labour Supply and

Intertemporal Substitution,” Journal of Econometrics, September, 137-60.

       Browning, Martin, Lars Peter Hansen, and James J. Heckman, 1998, “Micro Data and

General Equilibrium Models,” unpublished manuscript, September.

       Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1989, “Consumption, Income and Interest

Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence,” in O. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds., NBER

Macroeconomics Annual, 185-216.

       Cohen, Darrel, and Glenn Follette, 2000, “The Automatic Fiscal Stabilizers: Quietly Doing

Their Thing,” in Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, April, 35-68.

       Cummins, Jason, Kevin A. Hassett, and Stephen D. Oliner, 1997, “Investment Behavior,

Observable Expectations, and Internal Funds,” New York University Working Paper.

       Cutler, David, and Lawrence Katz, 1991, “Macroeconomic Performance and the

Disadvantaged,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1-74.


                                                                                           22
       Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, “Financing Constraints

and Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 141-95.

       Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts, 1993, “An Introduction to the TAXSIM model,”

Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Winter.

       Gilchrist, Simon and Charles Himmelberg, 1998, “Investment: Fundamentals and Finance,”

NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 223-62.

       Goode, Richard, 1976, The Individual Income Tax, revised edition, Washington: Brookings.

       Gruber, Jonathan, 1997, “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment

Insurance,” American Economic Review, March, 192-205.

       Hoynes, Hilary, 1999, “The Employment, Earnings and Income of Less Skilled Workers

Over the Business Cycle,” in R. Blank and D. Card, eds., Labor Markets and Less Skilled Workers,

Russell Sage Foundation, forthcoming.

       Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities

Provide Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February,

169-215.

       Lindsey, Lawrence B., 1981, “Is the Maximum Tax on Earned Income Effective,” National

Tax Journal, June, 249-55.

       Mulligan, Casey B., 1998, “Substitution Over Time: Another Look at Life-Cycle Labor

Supply,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 75-134.

       Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable

Changes in Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, September, 959-73.

       Pechman, Joseph A., 1973, “Responsiveness of the Federal Income Tax to Changes in

Income,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 385-421.



                                                                                         23
       Pechman, Joseph A., 1987, Federal Tax Policy, 5th ed., Washington: Brookings.

       Romer, Christina D. and David Romer, 1994, “What Ends Recessions?” in S. Fischer and J.

Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 13-57.

       Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod, 1995, “Consumer Response to the Timing of

Income: Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding,” American Economic Review, March, 274-

83.

       Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax

Refunds ,” American Economic Review, September, 947-58

       U.S. Congressional Budget Office, 2000, The Economic and Budget Outlook: Fiscal Years

2001-2010, January.

       Wilcox, David W., 1990, “Income Tax Refunds and the Timing of Consumption

Expenditure,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, April.

       Ziliak, James P. and Thomas J. Kniesner, 1999, “Estimating Life Cycle Labor Supply

Effects,” Journal of Political Economy, April, 326-59.




                                                                                        24
                                       Figure 1. The Change in Taxes with Respect to Before-Tax Income

                  0.40




                  0.35
Change in Taxes




                  0.30




                  0.25




                  0.20




                  0.15
                      1962   1966   1968   1970   1972   1974   1976   1978    1980   1982   1984   1986    1988   1990     1992   1994
                                                                              Year

                                      Income Taxes, without EITC                      Income Taxes for Fixed Distribution
                                      Income Taxes with EITC and Payroll Taxes        All Taxes, with Inflation Effect
                                                    Figure 2. The Consumption Response via Induced Tax Changes

                           0.25



                           0.20
Marginal Tax Rate Change




                           0.15



                           0.10



                           0.05



                           0.00
                               1962   1966   1968    1970   1972   1974    1976   1978    1980    1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994
                                                                                         Year

                                               Income Taxes, without EITC                        Income Taxes with EITC and Payroll Taxes
                                               All Taxes, with Inflation Effect                  Variable Income Response
                                               Bottom 3/5
     Figure 3. Stabilizing Effects on the Supply Side



w



                                                            S’




                                                        S



                              A
w0                                                           D

         B
w1                                                           D’
                          C




           L1        L2           L0                              L
                                               Figure 4. The Response of Marginal Tax Rates to Before-Tax Income

                           0.25




                           0.20
Marginal Tax Rate Change




                           0.15




                           0.10




                           0.05
                               1962   1966   1968   1970   1972    1974   1976   1978    1980   1982   1984   1986   1988    1990    1992    1994
                                                                                        Year

                                      Income Taxes, without EITC      Income Taxes with EITC and Payroll Taxes       All Taxes, with Inflation Effect
Table 1. The Change in Taxes with Respect to Before-Tax Income, by Quintile

                                        QUINTILE
YEAR             1st              2nd          3rd              4th     5th

                            Income Taxes, without EITC
1962             .03             .13              .15           .19     .33
1967             .05             .13              .15           .15     .23
1974             .05             .13              .15           .18     .28
1981             .15             .18              .22           .25     .34
1988             .07             .12              .15           .17     .24
1995             .06             .11              .14           .18     .26

                              Income Taxes, with EITC
1962             .03              .13             .15           .19     .33
1967             .05              .13             .15           .15     .23
1974             .05              .13             .15           .18     .28
1981             .14              .20             .22           .25     .34
1988             .06              .14             .16           .17     .24
1995             .02              .16             .18           .18     .26

                       Income Taxes with EITC + Payroll Taxes
1962             .06              .15            .17            .19     .33
1967             .08              .16            .18            .15     .23
1974             .10              .18            .20            .20     .28
1981             .20              .25            .28            .31     .35
1988             .12              .20            .22            .24     .25
1995             .08              .22            .24            .25     .28
Endnotes

1. Some of these studies and their results are discussed by Goode (1976), Appendix E. There have
been relatively few contributions to this literature in more recent years.

2. Our extensions from Pechman include the consideration of more recent years, the decomposition
of changes over time, the inclusion of payroll taxes, which have grown in importance since the
period Pechman studied, and the tracing through of estimated consumption responses. Although our
methodology differs from Pechman’s in a number of ways, our results are generally consistent with
his for the period of overlap.

3. The TAXSIM model is described more fully in Feenberg and Coutts (1993).

4. The impact of this ceiling was actually more complicated, as discussed by Lindsey (1981).

5. These provisions were enacted in 1981 as part of the Economic Recovery Tax Act, but delayed in
their implementation.

6. Our approach here is consistent with the assumption that as before-tax income falls, the incidence
of the payroll tax remains the same.

7. The change in inflation per unit change in output, dπ/dY, should equal the ratio of the short-run
Phillips curve slope relating inflation to unemployment, dπ/du, and the Okun’s Law relationship
relating output to the unemployment rate, dY/du. Recent estimates of Okun’s Law put the latter
term at around 2; the slope of the short-run Phillips curve has been more volatile, but a value of 1
seems reasonable; hence the value of dπ/dY = ½ = 0.5 used in the calculation.

8. We set this effect to zero from 1985 on, even though some less important elements of the tax
code were not indexed for inflation.

9. While our data and calculations run only through 1995, it is likely that the values for more recent
years are not much different from those of 1995. The only significant tax legislation of the period,
the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, was quite modest in its effects on marginal tax rates.

10. The term “liquidity constraint” doesn’t necessarily imply an absolute inability to borrow. Even
a mild version, reflected by a substantial difference between borrowing and lending rates, could lead
households to time their purchases of durable goods to coincide with the arrival of temporary cash
infusions. The cost of distorting the timing of durables purchases would be offset by the benefit of
avoiding the spread between borrowing and lending costs.

11. In this calculation, wealth is measured as the capitalized value of interest income (at the
Treasury 3-month bill rate) and property income (at the Standard and Poor’s 500 Stock Index
dividend yield). Property income includes dividends, estate and trust income, rents and royalties.
12. For a fixed before-tax wage, the change in the after-tax wage with respect to income is
 − w dt dY ; the change in labor income with respect to the change in the after-tax wage is
 w dL d [ w(1 − t )] . The product of these two terms may be written − (α (1 − t ))η dt d ln Y , whereη
is the elasticity of labor supply with respect to the after-tax wage, w(1-t), and α is labor’s income
share, wL/Y. As the terms α and (1-t) are about the same size (around .75), the stabilization term is
roughly equal to the response of the marginal tax rate to a unit proportional income change,
 dt d ln Y , multiplied by the labor supply elasticity, η.

13. See, for example, Blundell, Meghir and Neves (1993), Browning, Hansen and Heckman (1998),
Mulligan (1998), and Ziliak and Kniesner (1999). As life-cycle labor supply estimates typically do
not take liquidity constraints into account, it is not clear how to adjust these estimates for
households that are liquidity-constrained.

14. Because we are estimating labor supply responses, it is appropriate to weight by labor income,
rather than AGI. Our measure of labor income includes wages and salaries plus self-employment
income reported on Schedule C.

15. Note, though, that this offset would be far from complete for households near the payroll tax
ceiling, given the progressivity of the benefit formula.
