                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE TRANSITION ECONOMIES AFTER TEN YEARS


                                             Stanley Fischer
                                              Ratna Sahay


                                          Working Paper 7664
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7664

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




Stanley Fischer is the First Deputy Managing Director and Ratna Sahay is an Advisor in the Research
Department of the International Monetary Fund. This paper was presented at the AEA meetings in Boston,
January 2000 and at a conference on “Ten Years After: Transition and Growth in Post-Communist
Countries,” organized by the Center for Social and Economic Research Foundation and held in Warsaw,
Poland, October 15-16, 1999. The paper benefitted from comments by Marek Belka, Andy Berg, Lajos
Bokros, Mark De Broeck, David Lipton, Prakash Loungani, Johannes Mueller, Miguel Savastano, Jerry
Schiff, Carlos Végh and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. We thank Haiyan Shi and Manzoor Gill for excellent research
assistance and Cynthia Galang for administrative assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of
the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the International Monetary Fund or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Stanley Fischer and Ratna Sahay. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Transition Economies After Ten Years
Stanley Fischer and Ratna Sahay
NBER Working Paper No. 7664
April 2000
JEL No. P2, P3



                                            ABSTRACT


       While output declined in virtually all transition economies in the initial years, the speed and

extent of the recovery that followed has varied widely across these countries. The contrast between

the more and less successful transitions, the latter largely in the former Soviet Union, raises many

questions about the relative roles played by adverse initial conditions, external factors, and reform

strategies. This paper summarizes the macroeconomic performance of the transition economies. We

first review the initial conditions confronting these economies, the reform strategy that was

proposed, and the associated controversies that arose a decade ago. We then account for the widely

different outcomes, highlighting the role of exogenous factors and the macroeconomic and structural

policies adopted by the countries. We find that both stabilization policies and structural reforms,

particularly privatization, contributed to the growth recovery. We also conclude that the faster is the

speed of reforms, the quicker is the recovery and the higher is growth.



Stanley Fischer                                                Ratna Sahay
First Deputy Managing Director                                 Advisor, Research Department
International Monetary Fund                                    International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.                                          700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington D.C. 20431                                          Washington D.C. 20431
and NBER                                                       rsahay@imf.org
sfischer@imf.org
                                                                   -2-




                                                           Contents                                                                  Page



I. Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 3

II. Macroeconomic Performance ................................................................................................... 4
        A. Inflation and Stabilization ............................................................................................ 6

III. Accounting for Output Performance ....................................................................................... 10
        A. Initial Conditions..................................................................................................... 10
        B. Transition Strategies ................................................................................................. 11
        C. Aid and Capital Flows............................................................................................... 12
        D. Implementation of Reforms........................................................................................ 13
        E. Explaining Growth Performance .................................................................................. 14

IV. Taking Stock .................................................................................................................... 17
        A. Uzbekistan and Belarus ............................................................................................. 18
        B. Privatization ........................................................................................................... 19
        C. Governance ............................................................................................................ 20
        D. The role of External Assistance ................................................................................... 20
        E. Russia ................................................................................................................... 21
        F. What Determines the Extent of Reform? ........................................................................ 21

Charts
1.         GDP Index in Transition Time………………………………………………………...23-25
2.         Output Profile in Transition Economies……………………..…………………………..….26
3.         Private Consumption and Investment in Transition Economies…………………………….….27
4.         Inflation and Fiscal Profile in Transition Economies……………………………………...….28
5.         Fiscal Revenue and Selected Expenditure in Transition Economies…………………….….…..29
6.         Phasing of Reform……………..………………………………………………………...30
7.         Capital Flows in Transition Economies……………..………………………………….…..31
8.         Composition of Capital Flows………………………………………………………….…32
9.         Structural Reforms Profile in Transition Economies……………….………………………...33



Tables
1.         Transition Economies: Output Performance, 1989-1998………………………………………34
2.         Transition Economies: Stabilization Programs and Inflation Performance, 1989-1998….………....35
3.         Countries in Transition: Initial Conditions, 1989-1991……………………………………………..36
4.         Structural Indicators in Transition Economies………….………………………………...37-38



References………………………………………………………………………………...39-43
                                              -3-




                                      I. INTRODUCTION

        Economic performance among the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union has differed widely in the ten years since the start of the Polish
economic reform program. The countries that have done best are those who have pursued
their reform agendas most consistently; they are also those who seemed from the start most
committed to reform.2 By and large, they are also the countries closest to Western Europe,
and those who had spent the least time under communist rule.

        Figure 1 presents charts of output levels in transition time for the 25 transition
economies studied in this paper.3 Output declined in all countries in the initial years of
transition. However, the more successful have been growing since mid-1990s, and several are
well on their way towards joining the European Union. Although they still confront many
reform tasks, they have graduated from the ranks of the transition economies. Output in the
least successful countries continued to decline virtually every year, and most of them still face
many of the challenges of transition.

        In this paper we first summarize the macroeconomic performance of the transition
economies. We then try to account for the widely differing outcomes in the 25 countries. We
start by reviewing the initial conditions confronting these economies, and the reform strategy
that was proposed a decade ago, as well as some of the associated controversies. We then
provide an analysis of the determinants of economic growth, which is consistent with the
conventional view that both macroeconomic stabilization and structural reforms are necessary
for growth.

        However, the contrast between the more and less successful transitions, the latter
largely in the former Soviet Union, raises many questions about both the details of the
transition strategy and the political factors that determine the choice of economic policies. In
the concluding sections we take up some of those questions, and touch on the broader political
economy issues that dominate the prospects for the transition economies.



   2
     In mitigating the output decline, Uzbekistan is an exception, a country that has done
   relatively little reforming. Belarus is another country where the pattern of output is not
   very different from that of more successful reformers, but reform has been, at best, slow.
   These cases will be discussed below.
   3
    Transition time is defined as starting in year T, the year in which the communist regime
   collapsed, a rough measure of the date at which the country began to move towards a
   market economy. See Figure 1 for country-specific years in which transition began. Note
   that the GDP index is normalized to 100 in the year T-2 for all countries in Figure 1.
                                              -4-




                            II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

        A decade ago it was generally expected that output would fall at the start of the reform
process, as a result of both macroeconomic stabilization and the reallocation of resources from
unproductive sectors to sectors that would be profitable at world prices. As stabilization took
hold, and the new sectors began to grow while the old sectors declined, aggregate output
would start growing; output was then expected to grow more rapidly than in the advanced
economies, and some closing of income gaps or even eventual convergence would take place.

       As Figure 1 shows, output did fall in all 25 countries at the start of the transition
process, although the extent to which output collapsed far exceeded expectations. By the time
output had bottomed out, it had fallen by more than 40 percent on average. By 1998, output
had begun to grow in over 20 of the 25 economies, though growth was glacial in some of
them.

        The quality of output data, especially in the early stages of transition, is an important
issue. Output as well as rates of growth for transition economies were likely to be understated
in the official data -- on account of both the emergence of the non-state sector, which in the
early days of transition was typically not fully included in the statistical net, and also because
of the development of the untaxed economy. Despite these concerns regarding the data, we
believe that the statistical evidence sheds some light on the initial transition years. Attempts
have been made in recent years to estimate the non recorded sector. In comparing our data
with the most comprehensive but still incomplete data set such as Johnson et al.=s (1999), we
find that while the relative magnitudes of decline could differ across countries, the qualitative
conclusions regarding broad groupings of countries, as described here, remain unchanged. 4

      It is useful to group the 25 economies into three categories: the Central and Eastern
European countries (CEE); the Baltics; and the other countries of the Former Soviet Union
(OFSU).5 The Baltics and OFSU are together referred to as FSU countries. Sometimes a

   4
     Research on this question suggests much larger underestimation in the former Soviet
   Union (FSU) countries than in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE)
   (Johnson, Kaufmann, and Shleifer,1997, DeBroeck and Koen, 1999, and others). But
   even under the most optimistic scenario, output fell by significantly more in the FSU than
   in the CEE. Attempts are being made to adjust the official data, including retrospectively,
   to reduce these biases in transition economies. Official statistics in Russia, Kazakhstan,
   and Lithuania already include these revisions.
   5
    The ten CEE discussed in this paper are: Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic,
   Hungary, FYR Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. The Baltics,
   are, of course, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. The OFSU are: Armenia, Azerbaijan,
   Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhastan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan,
   Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.
                                              -5-




distinction is made between the Aearly reformers@ in the CEE, countries which implemented
comprehensive stabilization and structural reform packages early in the transition period, and
those which started late, the Alate reformers.@ Late reformers in CEE are Albania, Bulgaria,
FYR Macedonia, and Romania, while the rest of the CEE are early reformers.

        Figure 2 shows output patterns for the three categories in both calendar and transition
time.6 The average output declines in CEE at 28 percent were much smaller than those in the
Baltics (43 percent) and the OFSU (54 percent). The country level data are shown in Table 1.
However, the Baltics seemed to have suffered similar output losses as those in the late
reformers of the CEE. Typically, output had bottomed out by 1992 in CEE, by 1994 in the
Baltics, and by 1995 in OFSU.

         The pick up in growth rates since the output troughs has been impressive in many
countries (Table 1). Cumulatively, the recoveries in Albania, Poland, Slovak Republic,
Croatia, Georgia and Armenia, in that order, have been the highest, ranging from 43 percent to
nearly 30 percent, as of 1998. Average growth rates in FSU countries have been higher than in
CEE. This result is consistent with catchup, given that per capita incomes are lower and the
fall in output had been greater in the OFSU countries, but of course not all OFSU countries
have yet returned to growth or seem to be catching up.

        Despite the beginnings of growth in most countries, the data show very few countries
as having surpassed their pre-transition year output levels. Relative to 1989 or the pre-
transition year, only Poland, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia had higher measured output
levels in 1998. However, if the benchmark test date is six years after transition began (to take
account of the later start in the FSU), Poland was the only country that had a higher level of
output compared to its pre-transition year. On average, by either measure, by 1998 or after six
years after transition began, the CEE countries had recovered at least 90 percent of their
measured output relative to the pre-transition year, while the corresponding figures for the
Baltics and OFSU were 70 and 60 percent, respectively.7

       Although measured GDP is the single most useful summary statistic of economic
performance, its weaknesses need to be borne in mind. In the first instance, the data are likely

   6
    The output measure shown in Figure 2 for each group is a simple (i.e. unweighted)
   average of the output levels in each country, with 100 as the base year level.
   7
     The choice of the transition year is also not free from controversy. As Lajos Bokros and
   Vaclav Klaus have pointed out, by defining it as the year in which the communist regimes
   fell, one does not take into account that countries may have been at different stages of
   their business cycle. This is a valid point. In the case of Hungary, the problem of defining
   the transition year is somewhat different as slow reforms were introduced over a long
   period of time. We chose 1990 as the starting date because reforms accelerated during that
   year.
                                              -6-




to be inaccurate as discussed earlier. But even if the data were accurate, they would suffer
from well-known problems as a welfare indicator: analytically, the calculation of real output
is likely to depend heavily on the base prices when relative prices change significantly as they
have in the transition process; the quality of the same consumption basket is likely to have
improved after liberalization; income distribution has changed radically in many of the
transition economies; and the share of consumption in output has generally increased.

        Bearing in mind the unreliability of consumption and investment data in the transition
economies, Figure 3 suggests that private consumption rose sharply and fixed investment
declined as shares of GDP, around the time transition began.8 The higher consumption levels
relative to GDP suggest that welfare levels declined on average less than implied by the
behavior of output.9

                               A. Inflation and Stabilization

        Most countries entered the transition process with a monetary overhang and the need
for price liberalization. Inflation was either already present or a major threat. Starting with
Poland in 1990, stabilization packages had been put in place by 1995 in all 25 countries but
Turkmenistan. Depending on the extent of the monetary overhang and the delay in starting a
stabilization program, the 12-month pre-stabilization inflation rates varied widely: from the
hyperinflationary 57,000 percent per annum in Georgia to 26 percent in Hungary (Table 2).

        By 1998, inflation rates had been brought down to single digits in most countries (see
last column of Table 2), with deflation occurring in at least three countries. The CEE
countries have lower inflation rates than the FSU, on average. This average, however, distorts
the clear successes of most FSU countries because of the high rates of inflation in Russia and
Belarus in 1998.10 The early reformers in CEE (listed in Table 2) have been more successful
than the late reformers. The countries with a currency board -- Bulgaria, Estonia, and
Lithuania -- have had the most impressive inflation performance.



   8
    Private consumption and gross fixed capital formation are measured in nominal terms as
   a share of GDP because investment and GDP deflators are either non existent or highly
   unreliable.
   9
     The big changes in consumption demand seen in Figure 3 can be explained by the
   adjustment of consumption towards equilibrium levels following the end of central
   planning. See Calvo, Sahay, and Végh (1996) and Denizer and Wolf (1998) for
   discussions of suppressed consumption and forced saving during the transition.
   10
    Excluding Russia and Belarus, the average annual inflaton for OFSU in 1998 was only
   10.9 percent.
                                                -7-




        Inflation stabilization is one of the major successes of the transition process.
At the time that prices were freed, reigning in inflation had been a leading concern. Price
jumps could easily have led to an inflationary spiral, triggered ever rising wage demands, and
resulted in the dollarization of the economies.11 Keeping these concerns in mind, several
checks were introduced in the stabilization programs to contain inflation: tight monetary and
credit policies, wage control policies, monetary reforms, and non-inflationary sources of
financing the budget deficits.12 Figure 4 shows how inflation was brought under control very
soon after stabilization programs were implemented. Unlike in Latin America, wage
indexation did not set in and highly dollarized countries became de-dollarized as inflation fell
(a good example is Poland).13

        The choice of exchange rate regime was an important part of the initial stabilization
strategy. Countries in the CEE and the Baltics chose a mix of fixed (Croatia, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia) and flexible (Albania, Bulgaria, FYR Macedonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, Romania and Slovenia) regime while all OFSU countries are on record as
having chosen a flexible regime at the start of their programs (Table 2). There were several
reasons for adopting a flexible regime in OFSU: the concern that real shocks would occur
during the transition period, the view that the peg could not be maintained for long as the
starting credibility of OFSU countries was low, the lack of foreign exchange reserves to back
a peg, and simply the inability to assess the rate at which the local currency should be
pegged.14

         Although many FSU countries announced their regimes as flexible, the exchange rate
was generally de-facto pegged to the dollar or the deutsche mark soon after starting the
stabilization programs (see footnote 4 in Table 2). Several countries undertook monetary
reforms and introduced new currencies. Lithuania in April 1994 and Bulgaria in July 1997
instituted currency boards. Latvia pegged to the SDR in February 1994. Russia and Ukraine
announced narrow exchange rate corridors in 1995. With most exchange rates either
explicitly or implicitly fixed, inflation rates began to decline rapidly, steadily reaching
relatively low levels by 1998.15

   11
    Dollarization would have limited the monetary authorities= ability to conduct monetary
   policy and reduced the base for inflation tax.
   12
        In fact, treasury bills were introduced in many countries very early in the reform process.
   13
        See Sahay and Végh (1996a) for evidence on dollarization in transition economies.
   14
        See Zettelmeyer and Citrin (1995).
   15
     Fischer, Sahay, and Végh (1996a, 1997) show that stabilization tended to be more
   successful in countries with fixed exchange rate regimes, a result that was consistent with
   experience in other developing countries. Loungani and Sheets (1997) present evidence on
   the relationship between the degree of independence of central banks and inflation
                                                                                 (continued…)
                                               -8-




        Today, all but four countries have formally adopted a flexible regime. There are
several reasons why many countries moved from pegs to more flexible regimes. Some
allowed more flexibility when the peg came under pressure, sometimes to appreciate. Poland
took a preemptive decision to exit gradually from the dollar peg by adopting a basket peg in
May 91, followed by a crawling peg in October 1991, and finally introducing a flexible
regime (very wide band) in May 1995. Even from an international perspective, the Polish
case is viewed today as one of the few successful exits from a peg. The koruna was floated
following the Czech exchange market crisis in 1997. Following the Czech crisis, the Slovak
Republic exited successfully from a peg in October 1998. De-facto pegging by several
countries in the FSU that have flexible regimes today could also be considered a success since
it helped bring inflation down rapidly but did not require a formal exit from the peg when
more flexibility was needed. The dangers of not exiting into a more flexible arrangement in
time in the context of unsustainable fiscal policies and high capital mobility are exemplified
by the Russian case.

        At the time of transition, fiscal balances had also deteriorated sharply.16 As Figure 4
shows, in OFSU the average fiscal deficit worsened to more than 15 percent of GDP in 1992,
in CEE it worsened to 4-5 percent, while in the Baltics the fiscal balance went from a surplus
of more than five percent to near zero. As stabilization programs were implemented, the
fiscal balance improved sharply in the OFSU, worsened moderately in the CEE, and slightly
in the Baltics. However, throughout the post-1992 period, the average deficits for both the
Baltics and CEE remained lower by 2-4 percentage points than in the OFSU countries. By
1997, the Baltics had registered surpluses once again, while the average deficits for the CEE
and OFSU were about 4 and 5 percent, respectively.

       For the transition economies, fiscal deficits in the initial years were almost inevitable.
While it was clear that hard budget constraints would need to be imposed on state enterprises
(Kornai, 1986), the scope for raising revenues in the short-run was limited. Traditional tax
systems and the institutional setup for collecting revenues had collapsed. Consequently,

   outcomes in transition economies. For a discussion of the relative merits of a fixed
   exchange rate system over a flexible regime at the start of the transition process, see Sachs
   (1996b), and Sahay and Végh (1996b).
   16
      Given the high inflation it is natural to assume that the high deficits at the start are
   mainly nominal rather than operational: however, given the generally low levels of
   domestic government debt at the time, nominal and operational deficits were similar.
   There are nonetheless many problems with the measurement of fiscal deficits in transition
   economies. The most common are that they may be defined differently across countries
   (for example, central versus general government, including or excluding extra-budgetary
   items) or that the definition within one country may have changed over time. In general,
   deficits in the fast reformers may look worse than they actually are as compared to other
   countries simply because accounting practices are better in fast reformers.
                                               -9-




revenues declined sharply.17 (Figure 5). On the other hand, demands on expenditures were
high as investments in reforms undertaken by the state could not be postponed. Also, despite
the financing constraints, spending on human capital (education and health) were not cut, at
least as a share of GDP (Figure 5). Since public debt was generally low and GDP growth
potential was high, a relatively long period of sustained fiscal deficits was consistent with
successful stabilization.

        However, a closer look at country-level data shows that the stabilization process was
not sustained in countries that had persistent fiscal deficits and slow structural reforms; this is
most evident in the case of Russia but it applies also to other OFSU countries such as Belarus,
Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.18 Further, while the sharp fiscal contraction during the initial
years of stabilization in OFSU looks impressive at the macroeconomic level, the revenue
declines were very sharp, and underlying cuts were often not well targeted or planned in
several countries.19 In most OFSU countries, the cuts seemed to have been involuntary as
they occurred because of tight financing constraints.20 The sudden decline in expenditures in
OFSU from an average of 45 percent of GDP in 1992 to 29 percent in 1995 came at a cost.
The cuts were often last minute or arbitrarily shifted off budget or simply led to the non-
payment of bills. The problem of budgetary arrears, significant in some countries, has posed
major threats to stability and budget discipline in both the public and private sectors.

        In sum, the performance of transition economies in bringing inflation down from very
high levels has been impressive virtually across the board. On the fiscal front, even though the


   17
      In OFSU revenue declined by over 11 percent of GDP between 1991-95. Some reasons
   for the revenue decline are higher output losses in traditional tax bases (such as profits of
   state enterprises, industrial production, state trading companies) and revenue-losing tax
   reforms.
   18
    The 12-month inflation rates as of July 1999 for Belarus, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan
   were 343, 38, and 27 percent, respectively.
   19
     Subsidies in targeted sectors continued, a proliferation of exemptions mushroomed, tax
   collection weakened, and the full revenue potential of the energy sector was not realized.
   In the mid-1990s, for example, production subsidies in Kazakhstan, Russia, Ukraine and
   Uzbekistan still amounted to about 11-13 percent of GDP (Cheasty and Davis, 1996).
   20
     Both external private financing and revenues from privatization sales were
   disappointingly low. By some estimates, nine FSU countries, on average, could have
   generated 13 percent of GDP from privatization proceeds annually between 1989-95
   (Cheasty and Davis, 1996). In fact, only about one percent was collected for financing the
   fiscal deficit, either because more than anticipated shares were distributed freely or
   because the privatization process itself did not pick up speed.
                                             - 10 -




balances for the transition countries have generally improved since transition began, there is
no clear relationship between the fiscal balance and GDP growth.


                      III. ACCOUNTING FOR OUTPUT PERFORMANCE

                                    A. Initial conditions

         Despite the similarities in their economic systems and typically very high rates of
human capital development, the economic characteristics of the 25 countries varied widely at
the start of the transition process (Table 3). The OFSU countries were less familiar with
market-based institutions than the Baltics and the CEE, having had 20-30 years more of
communist rule. Natural resources were more abundant in some OFSU, especially Azerbaijan,
Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan, than in the CEE and the Baltics. Per capita incomes varied
quite widely: on average, the CEE countries were better off than those in the FSU, and among
the latter the Baltics had higher per capita incomes. In a similar vein, the countries that had
lower per capita incomes were also more agrarian. Dependence on intra-regional trade was
highest in the Baltics, followed by OFSU and CEE, respectively. Looking forward, the Baltics
and the CEE were geographically better placed than the OFSU to reorient their trade towards
the industrialized countries.

        In general, macroeconomic imbalances were worse in the FSU countries than in the
CEE countries. Czechoslovakia started with the best macroeconomic conditions, with
Hungary also in a relatively good position. Bulgaria, Croatia, Hungary, and Poland had
inherited large external debts, while others had accumulated virtually no debt. Following the
break-up of the Soviet Union, Russia assumed all the Soviet era foreign debt (which was still
relatively modest), thereby freeing other FSU countries from past external obligations.

        It is interesting to explore the extent to which initial conditions alone account for
subsequent performance in the context of a simple cross-section regression. We considered
seven variables that could represent initial conditions: the share of agriculture in GDP, natural
resource endowment index, years under communism, secondary school enrollment ratio, trade
dependency, an index of overindustrialization, and distance of the capital from Duesseldorf.
Of the seven variables considered, only twoCthe number of years under communism, and the
rate of secondary school enrollment, which serves as an index of economic development at the
time of transitionCcan explain much of the cumulative growth performance among the
transition economies. We find that,

cumulative growth until T+6 = -57.2 + 1.1 secondary school - 1.1 years under communism (1)
                              (-2.11) (2.96)                (-4.51)


Adjusted R-squared = 0.460

Number of observations = 25
                                             - 11 -




where T+6 is the 6th transition year for each country, cumulative growth is GDP growth from
T to T+6, secondary school is the secondary school enrollment ratio (Table 3), and the t-
statistics are reported in parenthesis. Thus, years under communism, which indicate how far
removed the countries were from a market economy, and the school enrollment ratio explain
nearly 50 percent of the growth performance.21

                                  B. Transition Strategies

        Within a short time, a consensus -- based in part on Poland=s approach (Lipton and
Sachs, 1990a) -- began to emerge among mainstream economists on the main lines of the
recommended transition strategy. Figure 6, published in 1991, summarizes that consensus.
Looking back, we are struck particularly by the fact that the list included elements that are
now thought to have been overlooked at the initial stages, for instance legal reforms. The
length of time that was then envisaged for both institutional reform and the restructuring of
large-scale enterprises is also noteworthy. Finally, note also that the schedule in Figure 6
envisages more gradual trade reform than actually occurred.

        Several points of controversy emerged within the overall strategy, particularly over so-
called shock therapy, and over sequencing. Rapid policy action was possible in some areas of
reform -- price and trade liberalization, and inflation stabilization, and perhaps small scale
privatization -- but in others it was clear that reform would take a long time. The
controversies over shock treatment related mainly to macroeconomic stabilization and the
pace at which privatization could be attempted, and, to a lesser extent, over the pace of trade
liberalization; for some reason there was less controversy over the pace of price liberalization.
On sequencing, the argument was that some reforms were preconditions for others -- for
instance, that privatization would fail unless the right legal framework or financial system or
both were in place, or that price decontrol should not take place until macroeconomic
stabilization could be assured.

         The shock therapy and sequencing debates were therefore closely related. There is
little question that some sequencing of reforms, along the lines shown in Figure 6, would have
been better in an ideal world in which it was known ex ante that the reforms were certain to be
implemented, than an attempt to move on all fronts simultaneously. That is not to say,
however, that the economics of the optimal pace of reform is well-established, for example,
on price and trade liberalization, or on the right sequencing of privatization and the
development of the financial system.

        Those who advocated moving rapidly where possible based their arguments not only
on the economics -- that the cumulative output loss would be smaller if actions were taken

   21
     Using another set of initial condition variables De Melo, Denizer, Gelb, and Tenev
   (1997), find that initial macroeconomic imbalances had a strong influence on growth and
   inflation in the short run.
                                              - 12 -




quickly -- but especially on political economy grounds. Here Balcerowicz=s notion of
Aextraordinary politics@ carried particular weight: the argument was that following the collapse
of the old system, there was a window in which the consensus for reform was stronger than it
would ever be again, and that was the time to move. Political economy arguments were also
prominent in decisions on Russian reform, both the initial price decontrol and in privatization
(see Boycko, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1993). Veterans of attempted stabilizations and reforms in
developing countries tended to take a robust view of the sequencing debate -- that the best
should not be allowed to become the enemy of the good, and that no reform that looked
politically feasible should be slowed merely on sequencing grounds.

        The most lively debates on privatization focused mainly on the speed with which it
should occur and the form it should take (for example, mass privatization versus direct sales).
Within each country, there was generally a discussion of whether foreigners should be
allowed to buy shares. The big bang arguments that were made then can be found in Lipton
and Sachs (1990a), Balcerowitz (1994), and Blanchard et al. (1992). The main arguments
centered around the need to separate the firms quickly from the state, to stop asset stripping,
and to avoid newly formed vested interest groups from blocking privatization later on. Those
favoring a more gradual approach were Newbery (1991), who was concerned about
inefficiencies arising from monopolies, Dewatripont and Roland (1995), who believed that
rapid privatization might be politically too costly, and Aghion and Blanchard (1994), who
were worried about a rapid increase in unemployment.

                                  C. Aid and Capital Flows

        It was taken for granted by most proponents of reform that external financial
assistance would be needed at the early stages to encourage reform and help sustain the
reformers. External technical assistance would also be necessary in light of the lack of
experience in the running of a market economy and its institutions of control. Despite much
talk of a Marshall Plan, financial assistance on a massive scale simply did not materialize. The
tasks of external financial and technical assistance were assigned largely to the international
financial institutions (IFIs), whose number was augmented by the creation of the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Advice from well-known academics and bilateral
technical and financial assistance, including from the EU, played a prominent part as well.

        A recent paper by Garibaldi, Mora, Sahay, and Zettelmeyer (1999) analyzes the
volume and composition of capital flows in the 25 transition economies and attempts to
account for the nature of inflows in different countries. They find that on average capital
inflows (on a per capita net basis) to the transition region in the 1990s were at similar levels to
those in Latin America and more advanced Asian economies, and much higher than in other
developing countries.

        However, aggregate numbers for the region conceal the fact that the distribution of
inflows across countries has been highly uneven. The CEE and Baltics have received far more
capital inflows per capita than the OFSU countries (Figure 7a). Annual data on capital
inflows (Figure 7b) and foreign direct investment for the four sub-groups (Russia was
                                              - 13 -




considered separately) clearly reveals the success of the CEE and the Baltics, particularly the
latter, in systematically attracting inflows over time.22 While no data is available for Russia
prior to 1994, its situation stands out (Figure 7b): Russia is the only country that on a net basis
exported capital throughout the transition period.

        The composition of inflows, on the other hand, shows some similarities across
countries (Figure 8). Long-term inflows have been significantly higher than short-term
inflows. In addition, there was a large recourse to exceptional financing (defined as debt
forgiveness, restructuring, official aid) at the beginning of the transition period and a
subsequent reorientation of capital flows towards FDI and other private flows. This validates
the notion that provided reforms were implemented, official assistance could speedily be
replaced by private sector inflows.

        Taking stock, large external assistance that was expected to finance the reform process
did not materialize. Instead, technical assistance combined with limited new official aid was
given. Over time, private flows began to trickle in but became significant only in a limited set
of countries in the CEE and the Baltics, those that seemed to have the best records in the
speed with which reforms were implemented.

                               D. Implementation of Reforms

        Many authors (Aslund et al.,1996, Sachs, 1996a, Stiglitz, 1999, Linn,1999, Wyplosz,
1999, EBRD Transition Report, 1999) have recently sought to summarize the extent of policy
change since the start of the transition process. In presenting inflation outcomes and fiscal
data in Figure 4, we have summarized progress in macroeconomic stabilization. To measure
the extent of structural reforms, we rely on information provided by the EBRD and computed
as indices by De Melo, Denizer, and Gelb (1996). These indices are presented in Table 4 and
graphed in Figure 9.23 Three indices are monitored over time: the LIP which measures the
extent of privatization and financial sector reforms, the LIE which measures the extent of the
market-oriented reforms of the external sector, and the LII that captures the degree of internal
liberalization of prices and market, including the extent to which competition exists in the
economy. LI, the overall liberalization index, is computed as a weighted average of the three:
LIP is given the highest weight (40 percent), while the other two are weighted equally. The
highest value that any of these LI measures can take is unity; a value of one indicates the
levels in matured market economies. We also present the CLI index, (for each year it is the
sum of LI=s to that point, starting in 1989), which is a variable reflecting both the speed and
the level of reforms to date.

   22
     The case of Russia was so different from all other countries that for analytical purposes,
   it was considered as a group of one by Garibaldi et al (1999).
   23
    These have been updated by Berg, Borensztein, Sahay, and Zettelmeyer (1999) for
   1996-97.
                                             - 14 -




         The indices presented in Table 4 and Figure 9 confirm that, almost by definition, the
early reformers of the CEE score highest in terms of the extent and speed of reforms, CLI; the
early reformers of the CEE are followed by the Baltics, the later reformers of the CEE, and
then the OFSU. Comparing two-sub periods, 1989-94 and 1995-97, for the LI index, it is
noteworthy that the Baltics caught up with the early reformers in CEE by the second sub-
period, despite the late start. Comparing the performance across the LIP, LIE, and LII index,
less LIP reforms seemed to have occurred than the other two. However, in absolute terms,
both LIE and LII had reached 80 percent of the levels of matured market economies by the
second sub-period. In addition, it is striking to see that LIE in both the early reformers of CEE
as well as the Baltics had reached industrial country levels by 1995-97. n the initial years
(Figure 9). Looking at annual data, we find that as early as in 1992-93, all CEE, including the
late reformers had liberalized the internal and external sectors (measured by LII and LIE) by
90 percent. While the Baltics had also reached these levels by 1993, they had done so even
faster, given that liberalization had begun only in 1991-92. The OFSU had reached only
60 percent by 1993. As can be expected, given the time-consuming nature of the process, the
progress in LIP has been slower for all sub-groups, with OFSU being the slowest.

        Despite the relative lagging of the privatization subindex, the speed with which the
private sector has grown since the start of transition is also impressive. Comparing the private
sector=s share of GDP across the various sub-groups, the Baltics lead with 62 percent in
private hands during 1995-97 (Table 4). For the same period, the Baltics are followed by the
early reformers of CEE (59 percent), the late reformers of CEE (49 percent), and the OFSU
(40 percent), respectively.

                            E. Explaining Growth Performance

        Returning briefly to Figure 2, it can be seen that the maximum annual output decline
occurred in the year that transition began, and that output had fallen substantially before
stabilization began (see last panel). It is also interesting that while the recovery of OFSU is
much slower than other two groups in transition time, it is very similar in stabilization time:
output begins to grow within two years after stabilization began. This suggests that the large
output losses at the start of transition are likely to have been more associated with the
transition process, due to disorganization as modeled by Blanchard (1996), and Blanchard and
Kremer (1997), or due to adverse initial conditions as implied by De Melo, Denizer, Gelb, and
Tenev (1997) and Berg, Borensztein, Sahay and Zettelmeyer (1999), and not due to tight
stabilization policies.24




   24
    Concerns regarding a credit crunch were voiced at the time (see Calvo and Frenkel, 1991
   and Calvo and Coricelli, 1992) . However, supply-side factors seemed to dominate the ex-
   post analysis.
                                              - 15 -




        There has been substantial previous work that analyze the relative contributions of
stabilization and structural reforms to growth.25 In an attempt to be more specific, we now
turn to regression results presented in those studies. In virtually all papers that attempt to
explain growth performance, the common set of explanatory variables are initial conditions,
structural reforms, and macroeconomic policy variables. While the importance of the
explanatory variables within each sub-group differs across the studies, the results generally
confirm that growth is more rapid when macroeconomic stabilization is undertaken early and
the greater the extent of structural reforms.

        Rather than attempt to survey the empirical evidence, we draw on the results presented
in Berg, Borensztein, Sahay, and Zettelmeyer, henceforth referred to as BBSZ. We do this for
three reasons: first, most of the growth models tested in previous papers are nested in the
specifications; second, dynamic effects of the explanatory variables are introduced; and, third,
differential effects of the independent variables on public and private sector output are
allowed for. Using several specifications and a general-to-specific econometric approach ,
BBSZ decompose the relative contributions to growth of initial conditions, structural reforms,
and macroeconomic variables.

        BBSZ find that the decline in output in the initial years is distinctly attributable to
adverse initial conditions and, to a lesser extent, to macroeconomic imbalances (fiscal deficit
and inflation). Importantly, this paper finds no evidence that progress in structural reforms
even in the initial years contributed to the output decline. When the differential impact of
reforms on the state and private sectors is considered, a substantial negative effect on the state
sector is found after two years; however, this is more than offset by the positive impact on the
private sector. Finally, the driving force behind the recovery was found to be the impact of
structural reforms, and to some extent, the positive impact of tight macroeconomic polices.
Unlike in previous studies (Heybey and Murrell,1999 and Wolf, 1997), who find that the
speed of reforms does not matter, BBSZ find that countries that reform faster, recover faster.
The latter is consistent with the findings of Aslund, Boone, and Johnson (1996).

       BBSZ also find that the larger initial output decline in FSU is mainly explained by
slower structural reforms and much less due to more adverse initial conditions.26 Similarly,

   25
     These include De Melo, Denizer, and Gelb (1996), Fischer, Sahay, and Végh (1996a,
   1996b, 1997), Sachs (1996a), Selowsky and Martin (1997), Aslund, Boone, and Johnson
   (1996), Hernández-Catá (1997), Havyrylyshyn, Izvorski, and Ron van Rooden (1998),
   Wolf (1997), Heybey and Murrell (1999), and Berg, Borensztein, Sahay, and Zettelmeyer
   (1999).
   26
     Using a qualitatively different approach, this is supported by the findings of De Broeck
   and Koen (1999). De Broeck and Koen account for the contribution of total factor
   productivity (TFP) and factor input in explaining the output performance in the 15 FSU
   countries. The paper finds that, in addition to the negative effects of a rise in
   unemployment and decline in capital investment, a decline in TFP also contributed to the
                                                                                     (continued…)
                                             - 16 -




the slower growth performance in OFSU in the later years of transition is overwhelmingly due
to slower structural reforms. It is noteworthy that Poland and the Baltics had among the worst
initial conditions (Table 1) but have managed to perform well because of good
macroeconomic and structural reform policies. In sum, adverse starting conditions can and
were overcome by countries that adopted anti-inflationary policies and faster structural
reforms.

        The type of results obtained in these studies is illustrated by the following three
regressions, run with panel data updated until 1998 (data in other studies, including BBSZ=s
study end in 1996 or before).27 The three regression results are:


Annual growth = -7.51 WD - 1.67 INF - 0.16 FIS + 10.38 LI                               (2)
                (-3.41)   (-4.46)    (-2.21)     (3.10)


Adjusted R-squared = 0.428
Number of observations = 164


Annual growth = - 9.02 WD - 1.06 INF - 0.11 FIS + 2.01 EBSM + 5.98 EBLIB                (3)
                  (-4.17)     (-2.66)   (-1.59) (2.79)        (3.35)


Adjusted R-squared = 0.484
Number of observations = 164


Annual growth = - 6.53 WD - 1.68 INF - 0.11 FIS + 11.85 PS                              (4)
                 (-2.97)    (-4.55)    (-1.52)    (3.15)


Adjusted R-squared = 0.443
Number of observations = 164




   sharp decline in output in the initial years. In fact, TFP growth has a distinct V-shaped
   pattern, turning positive from 1995-96 when GDP growth generally resumed.
   27
    The starting year for the annual data was the start of the transition year for each country,
   while the ending year was 1998. The sample was therefore an unbalanced panel.
                                              - 17 -




where, Annual growth = annual growth of GDP, WD = War dummy, INF = natural log of
inflation, FIS = fiscal balance (a surplus is a positive number) in percent of GDP,
LI = Liberalization Index as computed by De Melo, Denizer and Gelb (1996), EBSM =
EBRD small scale privatization index, EBLIB = EBRD price liberalization index, and PS =
share of private sector in GDP as compiled by BBSZ. The starting year for each country was
taken to be the transition year (see footnote 3), and thus differed among countries. All
explanatory variables were lagged one period. The t-statistics are in parenthesis.

        The three regressions contain two types of explanatory variables (excluding the control
for wars which is consistently a significant Ainitial conditions@ variable). They were the
macroeconomic policy variables (inflation and fiscal balance) and structural reform variables
captured by the liberalization index in Equation (2), by the EBRD indices in Equation (3), and
by the share of the private sector in Equation (4). The macroeconomic policy variables were
the same in all three regressions, while the structural reform variables differed according to
the source used.28

         All three results confirm that anti-inflation policies and structural reform policies were
beneficial to growth. Moreover, Equation (4) shows that of the various structural and
institutional variables (see footnote 28) compiled by EBRD, price liberalization and small
scale privatization contributed more to growth than large-scale privatization and other
variables. The results on the fiscal balance are less clear-cut. Fiscal balance is not significant
in equations (3) and (4), while it is in equation (2) and can be interpreted as saying that
deficits help growth provided inflation is under control. However, we do not wish to dwell on
the fiscal variable for reasons explained earlier that relate to measurement problems. This
general message from the regressions is consistent with those found in earlier studies.

                                      IV. TAKING STOCK

        The experience accumulated in the past decade, whether viewed informally or with the
help of data, charts, and regressions, provides support for the view that the most successful
transition economies are those that have both stabilized and undertaken comprehensive
reforms, and that more and faster reform is better than less and slower reform.

       In this section we touch briefly on several critical questions raised by the transition
experiences of the 25 countries studied in this paper: the special cases of Belarus and
Uzbekistan; the role of privatization; governance, the role of institutions, and corruption; the

   28
    In the Equation (3) specification, all the eight EBRD variables were initially used but
   only two were found to be significant and are reported in Equation (3). The eight EBRD
   variables are Large Scale Privatization Index, the Small Scale Privatization Index, the
   Enterprise Restructuring Index, Price Liberalization Index, the Trade and Foreign
   Exchange Index, the Competition Policy Index, the Banking Reform Index, and the
   Securities Markets Index.
                                              - 18 -




role of external assistance; the case of Russia; and importantly, in light of the strong
confirmation of the basic paradigm for successful transition, what determines how rapidly a
country adopts the needed reforms.29

                                  A. Uzbekistan and Belarus

        The output records of Uzbekistan and Belarus, seen in Figure 1, present a challenge to
the standard transition paradigm. Both had relatively low output declines in the initial years of
transition and saw a revival as early as in 1995, despite the fact that their stabilization and
reform process is proceeding slowly (Tables 2 and 4). In both cases, it is clear that the
transition process has hardly begun.

        The case of Uzbekistan is studied by Zettelmeyer (1999), who uses the methodology
in BBSZ (1999) to unravel the Uzbek growth puzzle. Zettelmeyer finds that initial output
declines were low because of favorable initial conditions, the factor that tends to dominate the
growth process in the initial years. These favorable conditions were a low degree of
industrialization, importance of cotton production, and near self-sufficiency in energy. Apart
from the positive contribution of the small-scale services sector that was common across all
countries, the revival came about by combining rigid state control with subsidies that were
largely financed by cotton exports, and by developing the energy sector for domestic
purposes. These two factors, cotton exports and self-sufficiency in energy, mitigated the
external financing constraints faced by other Asian FSU countries at similar levels of
development. It should also be noted that the growth rate in Uzbekistan since the recovery has
averaged only 2.3 percent per annum, about half the OFSU average (Table 1).

         While we are not aware of any published study on why the Belarus output decline was
smaller, the main explanation for its growth performance is its close trade ties with Russia.30
Throughout the transition period, Belarus continued to export consumer goods to Russia,
which helped preserve its industrial production. However, since the Russian crisis in August
1998, Belarus=s economy has undergone a severe shock with output leveling off or even
falling in 1999 and inflation rising to nearly 350 percent (12-month rate) by July 1999.
Belarus, like Uzbekistan, has attempted to insulate itself by following a protective and active
industrial policy. It has also been investing in housing projects to help stimulate domestic
demand and generate employment.

        As is becoming evident in both countries, these policies are not likely to be enough to
sustain growth, and it appears they will both need to undertake the reforms that were

   29
     We omit the much-discussed contrast between the transition strategies and outcomes in
   China and the former Soviet bloc. On this, see Sachs and Wing Thye Woo (1994), with
   whom we fundamentally agree.
   30
        We are grateful to Tom Wolf for his insights on Belarus.
                                              - 19 -




implemented years ago in the more successful transition countries. In the meantime, it is
reasonable to predict that they will grow more slowly than those who have undertaken more
extensive reforms.

                                       B. Privatization

        The statistical evidence presented in this paper highlights the importance of
privatization as a key element in the reform process (see regression presented earlier). Nellis
(1999), Stiglitz (1999), and Frydman, Gray, Hessel and Rapaczynski (1999) provide thought-
provoking assessments of the record on privatization. Given the inherently time consuming
nature of the process, privatization did proceed at a fairly rapid pace in most countries (Table
4), whether by privatizing state owned firms or by the emergence of the new sector. Some
countries chose the mass privatization route (such as Czechoslovakia and Russia) with the use
of vouchers, while others chose to and were able to sell enterprises (Hungary and Poland).

        Several conclusions have emerged. At a general level, the imposition of hard budget
constraints on enterprises, whether public or private, appears to be an important determinant
for successful privatization. Country experiences indicate that insider privatization, whether
worker controlled (as in the former Yugoslavia) or manager controlled (as in Russia), does not
seem to have led to self-induced restructuring, as expected (Frydman and Rapaczynski, 1994;
Frydman et al., 1999). Small-scale privatization, whether by vouchers or by sale to insiders
was generally successful.31 Productivity in private enterprises is higher than in state
enterprises, even after controlling for the fact that the better enterprises were likely to be
privatized first; and privatized firms appear to have performed better than state enterprises
across all samples. Survey data in Estonia show that new firms were more productive than
privatized state firms. Also, experience from Slovenia and the Czech republic indicates that
foreign-owned firms performed better than domestic privatized firms. While restructuring
before privatization seemed to have met with some success in Poland, this was not true in
Romania.

        This suggests that the strategy implied in Figure 6, of starting with rapid small-scale
privatization, and taking longer over the privatization of large enterprises would have been
successful, provided that the larger companies were sold. For instance, the slower more
individualized (by firm) Hungarian approach appears now to have been more successful than
the more rapid Czech voucher scheme. Drawing some of the lessons of recent experience,
countries that still have to privatize, are proceeding very deliberately, with the assistance of
foreign financial advisors at every step in the process as in Uzbekistan and Romania (Nellis,
1999).



   31
     Even in Russia, Barberis, Boyco, Shleifer, and Tsukanova (1996) show positive
   restructuring returns to the privatization of small shops.
                                              - 20 -




                                        C. Governance

        It is commonplace to say that a market economy requires an institutional infrastructure
of laws, regulations, accounting procedures, markets, and the institutions to enforce them,
including a judiciary. The need for legal reform, the creation of financial markets, the
creation of a central bank and effective fiscal system, and other aspects of modern
government, were widely recognized from the start of the transition process. Considerable
amounts of technical assistance in these areas were provided both by the IFIs and also
bilaterally to all the transition economies. Indeed, there has been some success in reducing
corruption via limiting opportunities for rent-seeking by reducing excessive and complex
regulations, such as licensing requirements and various tax exemptions, as well as by
engaging in civil service reforms. The outcomes have, nonetheless, differed a great deal, with
corruption and governance problems apparently endemic in some countries, and far less
prevalent in others.

        There can be little doubt that the absence of a predictable legal framework has
hindered growth, most visibly by reducing the flow of foreign investment, but no less
importantly by reducing domestic investment and encouraging capital flight. The cure for
these problems lies mainly in domestic politics, but external assistance to encourage
transparency and strengthen institutions, and the conditioning of future assistance on progress
in these areas, can contribute. We should also hope that the same process that undermined
support for the communist system -- that people saw that the market system worked better --
will produce an effective political backlash against corruption, as people understand that
corruption is not only immoral and illegal, but also holds back economic growth. That is
more likely to happen in more democratic and open political systems.

                             D. The role of External Assistance

         Although we do not include variables representing the extent of foreign aid in the
regressions, Figures 7 and 8 are consistent with the view that foreign assistance at the early
stages helped sustain reforms, but that foreign assistance on its own was not enough. The
critical question is how to ensure that external assistance supports reform: the international
financial institutions use conditionality for that purpose, but the familiar finding that programs
work best when they are owned by the country means that conditionality is not enough. The
question of whether more massive assistance to the transition economies, especially in the
FSU, would have driven reform ahead more rapidly remains on the table but cannot be
answered definitively: the Marshall Plan analogy is suggestive, but the absorptive capacity of
western Europe after World War II was surely much greater than that of the transition
economies in the early 1990s. The transfer problem, the question of whether resources could
have been transferred to the transition countries on a larger scale without creating the Dutch
disease, also deserves consideration.
                                              - 21 -




        Figures 7 and 8 also show that growth was facilitated by foreign private financing but
only in those countries that had successful stabilizations and reforms. A virtuous circle was
created for the fast reformers.
                                          E. Russia

        The Russian transition experience stands out as unique. Given the size and power of
Russia, that was inevitable. The key question is why, despite a promising start in 1992, rapid
privatization in 1994-95, and stabilization in 1995, the subsequent reform process has been
slow and halting. The structural reform indices in Table 4 show that Russia has lagged in the
implementation of structural reforms. The answer surely lies in large part in the failure to
drive ahead with reforms following the presidential election of 1996, an election in which
powerful vested interests, some of them created by the loans for shares scheme, strengthened
their hold on political as well as economic power, in the process deepening corruption.
Russia, as many countries, seems to have suffered from the curse of oil -- from the availability
of a ready source of wealth, available without much productive effort, a prize to be fought
over, rather than an investment to develop and foster.32

        The failure of Russia to solve its fiscal problems, combined with easy access to
external capital, particularly in 1997, and the continuing capital flight, led to an excessively
large fiscal deficit and significant short-term debt (the stock of which, however, was not large
relative to GDP). When the external environment turned bad, with oil prices falling and the
cost and availability of foreign financing worsening, and in the context of a weak banking
system and an excessively inflexible exchange rate, a financial collapse could not be
prevented. If reforms had been vigorously pursued from 1996, the collapse could have been
avoided.

       The question now is when, rather than whether, the political system will reach the
conclusion that the reform effort has to be renewed. The improvement of governance will
have to be a large part of this effort. It is encouraging that despite the collapse of 1998, the
Russian government has not turned inward, and has continued to seek to maintain its
economic and financial relations with the rest of the industrialized world.

                        F. What Determines the Extent of Reform?

         The main theme of this paper is that the policies to ensure growth are well known.
That immediately raises the next question: what determines the extent to which a country
embraces transition and reform comes to the fore? This is clear from the discussion of Russia.
It is clear also from another aspect of the regressions presented in this paper -- that as a
statistical matter, initial conditions go far in accounting for the performance of output, but that

   32
     See also Fischer (1992), Boycko, Shleifer, and Vishny (1993), Aslund (1996), Boone
   and Fedorov (1997) and Brainard (1998) for an evolving discussion on Russia=s economic
   problems.
                                             - 22 -




the behavior of output can also be accounted for by the extent of stabilization and reform.
That suggests that the extent of reform has been strongly correlated with the initial conditions
-- that the reformers are those closer to Western Europe, with a shorter period under
communism, and more advanced economically when they fell under Soviet control or when
the transition process began. That is a large part of the story, but not the whole story, for
instance because there are both fast and slow reformers in CEE.

        For many countries, the prospect of joining the European Union has been a powerful
spur to reform. The absence of that prospect for the OFSU countries except perhaps
eventually Ukraine must be among the factors retarding reform.

        The benefits of a successful transition process must be clear by now. The challenge
for supporters of reform in those countries in which it is lagging, and for those who would
support them from the outside, is to find a set of incentives that would sustain a reform
coalition.
                                                                                 - 23 -

                                                 Figure 1. GDP Index in Transition Time1
                                                              (T-2=100)

                    Albania                                               Armenia                                                Azerbaijan

120                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

80                                               80     80                                              80    80                                               80

60                                               60     60                                              60    60                                               60

40                                               40     40                                              40    40                                               40

20                                               20     20                                              20    20                                               20

 0                                               0       0                                              0      0                                               0
      T-2   1991    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




                    Belarus                                               Bulgaria                                                Croatia

120                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

80                                               80     80                                              80    80                                               80

60                                               60     60                                              60    60                                               60

40                                               40     40                                              40    40                                               40

20                                               20     20                                              20    20                                               20

 0                                               0       0                                              0      0                                               0
      T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1991    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1990    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




              Czech Republic                                               Estonia                                                Georgia

105                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

95                                               80     80                                              80    80                                               80

90                                               60     60                                              60    60                                               60

85                                               40     40                                              40    40                                               40

80                                               20     20                                              20    20                                               20

75                                               0       0                                              0      0                                               0
      T-2   1991    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




      Source: International Monetary Fund.
      1
        For the definition of transition time, please see footnote 2 in the paper.
                                                                                  - 24 -


                                      Figure 1 (continued). GDP Index in Transition Time1
                                                           (T-2=100)

                   Hungary                                                Kazakhstan                                       Kyrgyz Republic

120                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

80                                               80    80                                               80    80                                               80

60                                               60    60                                               60    60                                               60

40                                               40    40                                               40    40                                               40

20                                               20    20                                               20    20                                               20

 0                                               0      0                                               0      0                                               0
      T-2   1990    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992     T+2    T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




                    Latvia                                                Lithuania                                              Macedonia

120                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

80                                               80    80                                               80    80                                               80

60                                               60    60                                               60    60                                               60

40                                               40    40                                               40    40                                               40

20                                               20    20                                               20    20                                               20

 0                                               0      0                                               0      0                                               0
      T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992     T+2    T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1990    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




                   Moldova                                                  Poland                                               Romania

120                                              120   140                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   120                                              100   100                                              100

                                                       100
80                                               80                                                     80    80                                               80
                                                       80
60                                               60                                                     60    60                                               60
                                                       60
40                                               40                                                     40    40                                               40
                                                       40

20                                               20    20                                               20    20                                               20

 0                                               0      0                                               0      0                                               0
      T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1990     T+2    T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1991    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




      Source: International Monetary Fund.
      1
        For the definition of transition time, please see footnote 2 in the paper.
                                                                                 - 25 -


                                      Figure 1 (concluded). GDP Index in Transition Time1
                                                           (T-2=100)

                    Russia                                          Slovak Republic                                              Slovenia

120                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

80                                               80    80                                               80    80                                               80

60                                               60    60                                               60    60                                               60

40                                               40    40                                               40    40                                               40

20                                               20    20                                               20    20                                               20

 0                                               0      0                                               0      0                                               0
      T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1991    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1990    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




                   Tajikistan                                         Turkmenistan                                                Ukraine

120                                              120   120                                              120   120                                              120

100                                              100   100                                              100   100                                              100

80                                               80    80                                               80    80                                               80

60                                               60    60                                               60    60                                               60

40                                               40    40                                               40    40                                               40

20                                               20    20                                               20    20                                               20

 0                                               0      0                                               0      0                                               0
      T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8               T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                   Transition Time                                        Transition Time                                        Transition Time




                                                                          Uzbekistan

                                                       120                                              120

                                                       100                                              100

                                                       80                                               80

                                                       60                                               60

                                                       40                                               40

                                                       20                                               20

                                                        0                                               0
                                                             T-2   1992    T+2     T+4      T+6   T+8
                                                                          Transition Time



       Source: International Monetary Fund.
       1
         For the definition of transition time, please see footnote 2 in the paper.
                                                                     - 26 -




                           Figure 2. Output Profile in Transition Economies
                                                    Real GDP index (1989=100)
110                                                                                                                                  110

100                                                                                                                                  100

 90                                                                                                                                  90

 80                                                                                                                                  80

 70                                                                                                                                  70
                           Baltics
                           CEE
 60                        OFSU                                                                                                      60

 50                                                                                                                                  50

 40                                                                                                                                  40
          1989        1990             1991             1992         1993            1994               1995         1996     1997
                                                        Calendar Time


                                                        Real GDP index (T-3=100)
110                                                                                                                                  110

100                                                                                                                                  100

 90                                                                                                                                  90

 80                                                                                                                                  80

 70                                                                                                                                  70

 60                          Baltics                                                                                                 60
                             CEE
                             OFSU
 50                                                                                                                                  50

 40                                                                                                                                  40
          T-3       T-2         T-1           T            T+1        T+2           T+3           T+4          T+5      T+6    T+7
                                                         Transition Time


                                                    Real GDP index (S-4=100)
110                                                                                                                                  110

                                                                               Baltics
100                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                               CEE
                                                                               OFSU
 90                                                                                                                                  90

 80                                                                                                                                  80

 70                                                                                                                                  70

 60                                                                                                                                  60

 50                                                                                                                                  50

 40                                                                                                                                  40
           S-4       S-3             S-2          S-1            S            S+1           S+2            S+3         S+4    S+5

                                                        Stabilization Time


      Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                                  - 27 -


             Figure 3. Private Consumption and Investment in Transition Economies
                                            (in percent of GDP)



                                            Private consumption
80                                                                                                                80

75                                                                                                                75

70                                                                                                                70

65                                                                                                                65

60                                                                                                                60

                                                                      Baltics
55                                                                                                                55
                                                                      CEE
                                                                      OFSU
50                                                                                                                50

45                                                                                                                45

40                                                                                                                40
      T-2      T-1       T        T+1       T+2        T+3          T+4         T+5             T+6   T+7   T+8
                                                  Transition Time




                                        Gross fixed capital formation
60                                                                                                                60


50                                                                                    Baltics                     50
                                                                                      CEE
                                                                                      OFSU
40                                                                                                                40


30                                                                                                                30


20                                                                                                                20


10                                                                                                                10


 0                                                                                                                0
      T-2      T-1       T        T+1       T+2        T+3          T+4         T+5             T+6   T+7   T+8
                                                  Transition Time



     Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                                                                                                        - 28 -


                                                                               Figure 4. Inflation and Fiscal Profile in Transition Economies

                                                     Average inflation                                                                                            Fiscal balance (percentage of GDP)
3000                                                                                                            3000   10                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Baltics
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CEE
2500                                                                                                            2500    5                                                                                      OFSU                       5
                                   Baltics
                                   CEE

2000                               OFSU                                                                         2000    0                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                 1989         1990         1991       1992       1993        1994       1995         1996         1997

1500                                                                                                            1500    -5                                                                                                                -5


1000                                                                                                            1000   -10                                                                                                                -10


 500                                                                                                            500    -15                                                                                                                -15


   0                                                                                                            0      -20                                                                                                                -20
         1989       1990         1991         1992        1993       1994       1995            1996     1997                                                                Calendar Time
                                                       Calendar Time


                                                  Average Inflation                                                                                                 Fiscal Balance (percentage of GDP)
3000                                                                                                            3000   10                                                                                                                 10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
2500                                                                                                            2500    5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0

2000                                                                                                            2000    0
                                                                                                                                 S-6    S-5          S-4     S-3      S-2     S-1       S      S+1      S+2      S+3        S+4     S+5   -5
                                                                                      Baltics
                                                                                      CEE
1500                                                                                                            1500    -5                                                                                                                -10
                                                                                      OFSU


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -15
1000                                                                                                            1000   -10
                                                                                                                                                                                              Baltics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -20
                                                                                                                                                                                              CEE
 500                                                                                                            500    -15                                                                    OFSU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -25


   0                                                                                                            0      -20                                                                                                                -30
                                                                                                                                                                             Stabilization Time
         S-6     S-5       S-4     S-3        S-2Stabilization
                                                      S-1      Time
                                                                S        S+1    S+2       S+3      S+4    S+5


       Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                                             - 29 -




         Figure 5. Fiscal Revenue and Selected Expenditure in Transition Economies


                                               Total revenue/GDP (percent)
60                                                                                                           60

50                                                                                                           50

40                                                                                                           40

30                                                                                                           30

20                                                                                                           20
                    Baltics              CEE             OFSU
10                                                                                                           10

0                                                                                                            0
        1989        1990         1991          1992          1993       1994       1995    1996     1997
                                                 Calendar Time



                                         Education expenditures/GDP (percent)
9                                                                                                                9
8                                                                                                                8
7                                                                                                                7
6                                                                                                                6
5                                                                                                                5
4                                                                                                                4
3                                                                                                                3
2                                 Baltics              CEE             OFSU                                      2
1                                                                                                                1
0                                                                                                                0
      1989        1990          1991           1992          1993       1994       1995    1996      1997
                                                  Calendar Time



                                               Health expenditures/GDP (percent)

6                                                                                                                    6

5                                                                                                                    5

4                                                                                                                    4

3                                                                                                                    3

2                                                                                                                    2

1                             Baltics             CEE                 OFSU                                           1

0                                                                                                                    0
       1989        1990           1991          1992           1993      1994       1995     1996     1997

                                                   Calendar Time


     Source: International Monetary Fund.
                                                                           - 30 -




                                                   Figure 6. Phasing of Reform


                                                   Intense                                                Continuing

 Macrostabilization

 Price and Market Reform

 Goods and Services:                  Demonopolize and private distribution

 Price Reform

                                      Remove Q uantitative Restrictions                                      Adjust tariffs to moderate levels

         Trade Reform

                                      Deregulate hiring/firing                          Liberalize wage bargaining

 Labor Market

                                      Preparation                                          Liberalize

 Finance & Banking



 Restructuring and Pri vatization

    Small Scale Privatization
      and Private Sector Dev.

                                      Governance, restructure, and privatize

  Large-scale Governance,
  Restructuring and Privatization



 Redefining Role of State             Intensive (tax, property, commer-
                                      cial, foreign investment, law)                  Continuing

 Legal Reforms

                                      Tax administration, budgeting, legal, regulatory institutions

 Institutional Reform

                                      Emergency                                      Institutionalization

 Unemployment Insurance

 Time (in years)                    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     0          1          2           3         4          5          6          7         8         9        10


Source: Fischer and Gelb (1991) .
                                                                 - 31 -




                                 Figure 7. Capital Flows in Transition Economies
                                                                                        1
                                  Figure 7a. Cumulative Capital Flows (net): 1992-97
    1000                                         (In US$ per capita)
     800
     600
     400
     200
      0
    -200
                        CEE                      BAL                      RUS                         OFSU




                                         Figure 7b. Annual Capital Flows (net)
                                                (In US$ per capita)
                              CEE: 1991-97                                              BAL: 1992-97

      300


      200
                                                                   300

                                                                   200
      100

                                                                   100
           0
                                                                     0

      -100                                                        -100
               1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997                         1992   1993       1994   1995   1996   1997




                              RUS: 1994-97                                          OFSU: 1992-97




       300                                                         300


       200                                                         200


       100                                                         100


           0                                                         0


       -100                                                       -100
                 1994          1995      1996      1997                   1992   1993       1994   1995   1996   1997



Source: Garibaldi, Mora, Sahay and Zettelmeyer (1999).

1
 For Russia, the period covered is 1994-97.
Note: CEE denotes Central and Eastern European countries, BAL denotes the Baltic countries, RUS denotes
Russia, and OFSU denotes the remaining countries of the former Soviet Union.
                                                                              - 32 -


                                                  Figure 8. Composition of Capital Flows
                                                                  (In US$ per capita)



                          Figure 8a. CEE: 1991-97                                                        Figure 8b. BAL: 1992-97
   400                                                                                  400


   200                                                                                  200


     0                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                           XF
                                                                     XF
                                                                                                                                           LT
                                                                     LT
  -200                                                                                  -200                                               ST
                                                                     ST
         1991      1992     1993    1994   1995   1996     1997                                1992   1993    1994   1995    1996   1997   FDI
                                                                     FDI




                          Figure 8c. RUS: 1994-97                                                      Figure 8d. OFSU: 1992-97
   400                                                                                  100



   200                                                                                   50



     0                                                                                    0
                                                                      XF                                                                   XF
                                                                      LT                                                                   LT
                                                                                        -50
  -200                                                                ST                                                                   ST
                                                                                               1992   1993   1994    1995    1996   1997
            1994             1995          1996          1997                                                                              FDI
                                                                      FDI


Source: Garibaldi, Mora, Sahay and Zettelmeyer (1999).

Note: CEE denotes Central and Eastern European countries, BAL denotes the Baltic countries, RUS denotes Russia,
and OFSU denotes the remaining countries of the former Soviet Union. Also, XF is exceptional financing, LT is long-term flows,
ST is short-term flows, and FDI is foreign direct investment.
                                                                                                                             - 33 -


                                                                           Figure 9. Structural Reforms Profile in Transition Economies



                                            Liberalization index                                                                                                            Cumulative liberalization index
1.00                                                                                                                  1.00            7                                                                                                                    7


0.90                                                                                                                  0.90
                                                                                                                                      6                                                                                                                    6
0.80                                                                                                                  0.80

                                                                                                                                      5                        Baltics                                                                                     5
0.70                                                                                                                  0.70
                                                                                                                                                               CEE
0.60                                                                                                                  0.60                                     FSU
                                                                                                                                      4                                                                                                                    4

0.50                                                                                                                  0.50
                                                                                                                                      3                                                                                                                    3
0.40                                                                                                                  0.40

0.30                                                                                        Baltics                   0.30            2                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                            CEE
                                                                                            FSU
0.20                                                                                                                  0.20
                                                                                                                                      1                                                                                                                    1
0.10                                                                                                                  0.10

0.00                                                                                                                  0.00            0                                                                                                                    0
       1989         1990         1991       1992         1993         1994          1995         1996         1997                         1989         1990         1991           1992             1993        1994         1995         1996     1997
                                                   Calendar Time                                                                                                                                Calendar Time




                                             Liberalization index                                                                                                           Cumulative liberalization index
1.00                                                                                                                  1.00            7                                                                                                                    7

0.90                                                                                                                  0.90
                                                                                                                                      6                                                                                                                    6
0.80                                                                                                                  0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                Baltics
                                                                                                                                      5                                         CEE                                                                        5
0.70                                                                                                                  0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                FSU

0.60                                                                                                                  0.60
                                                                                                                                      4                                                                                                                    4

0.50                                                                                                                  0.50

                                                                                                                                      3                                                                                                                    3
0.40                                                                                                                  0.40

                                                                                Baltics
0.30                                                                                                                  0.30            2                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                CEE
                                                                                FSU
0.20                                                                                                                  0.20
                                                                                                                                      1                                                                                                                    1
0.10                                                                                                                  0.10


0.00                                                                                                                  0.00            0                                                                                                                    0
       T-3    T-2          T-1          T     T+1         T+2        T+3      T+4          T+5          T+6     T+7                       T-3     T-2          T-1          T             T+1        T+2        T+3     T+4          T+5      T+6    T+7
                                                   Transition Time                                                                                                                          Transition Time


              Source: De Melo, Denizer & Gelb (1996).
                                                                                 - 34 -



Table 1. Transition Economies: Output Performance, 1989-1998

                                                                                                   Simple                                   Ratio of
                                          Cumulative       Year in              Cumulative       average of                   Ratio of     output in
                                        output decline to   which              output growth   output growth   Year in     output in 98 to TT+6 to
                                          lowest level    output was            since lowest    since lowest which output  output in TT- output in
Country                                  (1989 = 100)1     lowest1                 level2           level    was highest 1
                                                                                                                                 11          TT-1
Albania                                         39.9              1992              43.0             6.3                 1989           0.96            0.88
Armenia                                         65.1              1993              29.7             5.4                 1989           0.53            0.53
Azerbaijan                                      63.1              1995              17.8             5.4                 1989           0.50            0.50
Belarus                                         36.9              1995              24.0             7.0                 1989           0.81            0.81
Bulgaria                                        36.8              1997               4.0             4.0                 1989           0.72            0.70
Croatia                                         37.7              1993              30.8             3.1                 1989           0.82            0.75
Czech Republic                                  15.4              1992              12.8             2.0                 1989           0.97            0.99
Estonia                                         36.4              1994              25.7             4.3                 1989           0.89            0.89
Georgia                                         74.6              1994              30.6             6.7                 1989           0.48            0.48
Hungary                                         18.1              1993              16.3             3.0                 1989           0.95            0.87
Kazakhstan                                      40.0              1998               0.0             NA                  1989           0.69            0.69
Kyrgyz Republic                                 50.4              1995              20.1             4.6                 1989           0.66            0.66
Latvia                                          52.8              1993              17.0             3.0                 1989           0.64            0.64
Lithuania                                       40.8              1994              19.8             4.5                 1990           0.71            0.71
Macedonia, FYR                                  46.6              1995               7.4             2.5                 1989           0.57            0.54
Moldova                                         66.3              1998              0.0              NA                  1989           0.42            0.42
Poland                                          13.6              1991              42.6             5.2                 1998           1.23            1.10
Romania                                         26.7              1992              3.4              0.7                 1989           0.82            0.87
Russia                                          45.1              1998               0.0             NA                  1989           0.61            0.61
Slovak Republic                                 24.7              1993              32.9             5.7                 1998           1.00            0.96
Slovenia                                        20.4              1992              25.4             3.8                 1989           1.00            0.93
Tajikistan                                      74.0              1996               7.1             3.7                 1989           0.45            0.45
Turkmenistan                                    59.5              1997               4.5             4.5                 1989           0.45            0.45
Ukraine                                         63.8              1997               0.8             0.8                 1989           0.42            0.42
Uzbekistan                                      14.4              1995               7.0             2.3                 1990           0.88            0.88

Memorandum items3:
All Transition                                  41.8              1993              17.0              4.0                1989           0.7              0.7
 All CEE                                        28.0              1992              21.9              3.6                1989           0.9              0.9
   CEE: Early Reformers                         21.6              1993              26.8              3.8                1989           0.9              1.0
   CEE: Late Reformers                          37.5              1992              14.5              3.4                1989           0.7              0.8
 Baltics                                        43.3              1994              20.8              3.9                1989           0.7              0.7
 Other Former Soviet Union                      54.4              1995              11.8              4.5                1989           0.6              0.6

Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, World Economic Outlook; IMF Staff estimates.


1
 Output decline from 1989 to the year in which output was the lowest. For countries in which output has not begun to grow, 1998 is taken as the year of minimum
output. Output is real GDP measured on an annual average basis.
2
    Lowest level refers to the lowest output level reached during 1989-1998.
3
 CEE: Early Reformers refer to Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia. CEE: Later Reformers refer to Albania, Bulgaria,
Macedonia, FYR and Romania. Baltics refer to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Other Former Soviet Union refer to Armemia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. Simple average for values and mode for years.
                                                                                      - 35 -

Table 2. Transition Economies: Stabilization Programs and Inflation Performance, 1989-1998

                                                                                                           Year in
                                                                                                           which          Year in
                                                          Pre-                  Maximum                   inflation        which           Exchange
                                 Stabilization          Program Exchange regime  annual                      was       inflation fell       regime         Inflation
                                                                1          2                                                                     2
Country                          program date          inflation   adopted      inflation                  highest      below 50%           today         in 1998

Albania                             August 1992               293         Flexible                  237       1992               1993       Flexible                 8.7
                                                                                         4
Armenia                          December 1994               1885     Flexible/Fixed              10896       1993               1995       Flexible                -1.2
                                                                                         4
Azerbaijan                          January 1995             1651     Flexible/Fixed               1787       1994               1996       Flexible                -7.6
                                                   3                                     4
Belarus                        November 1994                 2180     Flexible/Fixed               1997       1993               1996       Flexible               181.7
                                                   3                                                                                               5
Bulgaria                         February 1991                245         Flexible                 579        1997               1998        Fixed                   1.0
Croatia                           October 1993               1903          Fixed                  2585        1989               1994       Flexible                 5.3
Czech Republic                     January 1991                46          Fixed                    52        1991               1992       Flexible                 6.8
                                                                                  5                                                                5
Estonia                                 June 1992            1086          Fixed                    947       1992               1993        Fixed                   4.5
                                                                                         4
Georgia                         September 1994             56476      Flexible/Fixed               7486       1993               1996       Flexible                10.6
Hungary                             March 1990                26           Fixed                     35       1990                NA        Flexible                10.6
                                                                                         4
Kazakhstan                          January 1994             2315     Flexible/Fixed               2961       1992               1996       Flexible                 1.9
                                                                                         4
Kyrgyz Republic                         May 1993              934     Flexible/Fixed                958       1992               1993       Flexible                18.3
                                                                                         6
Latvia                                  June 1992             818     Flexible/Fixed               1162       1992               1993        Fixed                   2.8
                                                                                         5                                                         5
Lithuania                            June 1992                709     Flexible/Fixed              1162        1992               1994        Fixed                   2.4
Macedonia, FYR                    January 1994                248          Fixed                  1780        1992               1995       Flexible                -2.4
Moldova                         September 1993               1090        Flexible                 2198        1992               1995       Flexible                18.2
Poland                            January 1990               1096          Fixed                   640        1989               1992       Flexible                 8.5
                                                   3
Romania                           October 1993                314         Flexible                 295        1993               1995       Flexible                40.6
                                                   3                                     6
Russia                               April 1995               218     Flexible/Fixed               2510       1992               1996       Flexible                84.4
Slovak Republic                    January 1991                46          Fixed                     58       1991               1990       Flexible                 5.6
Slovenia                          February 1992               288        Flexible                   247       1991               1993       Flexible                 7.5
                                                   3
Tajikistan                       February 1995                  73       Flexible                 7344        1993               1994       Flexible                 2.7
Turkmenistan                        Not Started                 20     Not applicable             9743        1993               1997       Flexible                19.8
                                                                                         5
Ukraine                         November 1994                 645     Flexible/Fixed              10155       1993               1990       Flexible                20.0
Uzbekistan                      November 1994                1555        Flexible                  1281       1994               1996       Flexible                26.1

                           7
Memorandum items :
 All Transition                                               820                                  2764       1992               1996                               19.1
 All CEE                                                      450                                   651       1991               1993                                9.2
 CEE: Early Reformers                                         567                                   603       1991               1992                                7.4
 CEE: Late Reformers                                          275                                   723       1992               1995                               12.0
 Baltics                                                      871                                  1091       1992               1993                                3.2
 Other Former Soviet Union                                   1142                                  4943       1993               1996                               31.2

Sources: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, World Economic Outlook; IMF Staff estimates.
1
 Pre-Program inflation is inflation in the twelve months previous to the month of the stabilization program. For Turkmenistan, the figure is for the latest year
available (1998). All other inflation is calculated from December to December.
2
 Fixed regimes are those that have a currency board, pegged (explicitly or implicitly) at a fixed rate or have a narrow crawling band. Flexible regimes include those
that are free or managed floating.
3
    The date of the first stabilization attempt.
4
    Since 1995, these countries adopted a de-facto peg to the U.S. dollar for one to two years.
5
    Currency board. Lithuania adopted a currency board in April 1994 and Bulgaria adopted one in July 1997.
6
  The Latvian currency was pegged to the SDR in February 1994; Russia announced an exchange rate corridor in July 1995. Both countries had flexible exchange rate
regimes prior to these dates.
7
  CEE: Early Reformers refer to Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia. CEE: Later Reformers refer to Albania, Bulgaria,
Macedonia, FYR and Romania. Baltics refer to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Other Former Soviet Union refer to Armemia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. Simple average for values and mode for years.
                                                                                       - 36 -


Table 3. Countries in Transition: Initial Conditions, 1989-1991

Country                          PPP adjusted      Share of CMEA       Share of         Natural      Distance from   Years under     Foreign debt in    Secondary school enrollment
                                GDP per capita1     trade in 1990     agriculture3     resource       Duesseldorf    communism        pre-transition    in pre-transition year (share
                                   (1989)               GDP2                         endowment4         (in km.)                     year, in percent    of school age population)
                                                                                                                                         of GDP

Albania                                629               102              26               0             1494             45              36.9                      0.78
Armenia                               2453                21              11               0             3143             74               0.0                      n.a.
Azerbaijan                            2466                33              22               2             3270             75               0.0                      0.90
Belarus                               6667               45               22               0             1435             75               0.1                      0.92
Bulgaria                              5740                15              11               0             1574             43              50.6                      0.75
Croatia                               6919                 6              10               0              913             44              74.7                      0.85
Czech Republic                        8207                10               7               0              559             43              12.2                      0.91
Estonia                               6475                27              20               0             1449             51               0.0                      1.00
Georgia                               2203                19              22               1             3069             70               0.0                      0.89
Hungary                               6081               10               14               0             1002             41              64.0                      0.75
Kazakhstan                            4133                18              29               2             5180             75               0.0                      0.96
Kyrgyz Republic                       2770                21              33               0             1293             75               0.0                      0.99
Latvia                                5204                31              19               0             1293             51               0.0                      0.89
Lithuania                             3603                34              27               0             1299             51               0.2                      0.88
Macedonia                             3720                 6              12               0             1522             44               0.0                      0.57
Moldova                               3562               25               32               0             1673             52               0.0                      0.77
Poland                                5687                17              13               1              995             42              63.4                      0.82
Romania                               3535                 3              14               1             1637             43               2.9                      0.92
Russia                                5627                18              15               2             2088             74              12.1                      0.91
Slovak Republic                       6969                10               7               0              824             43               6.8                      0.96
Slovenia                             11525                5               5                0              815             44               0.0                      0.90
Tajikistan                            1778                22              27               0             4938             75               8.6                      1.01
Turkmenistan                          3308                34              29               2             4254             75               0.0                      n.a.
Ukraine                               4658                25              21               1             1664             75               0.0                      0.91
Uzbekistan                            2577                24              31               1             4788             75               0.0                      0.98

Memorandum items5:
All Transition                        4660                23              19               1             2087             58              13.3                      0.88
 All CEE                              5901                18              12               0             1134             43              31.1                      0.82
    CEE: Early Reformers              7565                 9               9               0              851             43              36.8                      0.87
    CEE: Late Reformers               3406                32              16               0             1557             44              22.6                      0.76
 Baltics                              5094                31              22               0             1347             51              0.1                       0.93
 Other Former Soviet Union            3517                25              25               1             3066             73              1.7                       0.92


Source: World Development Indicator; World Economic Outlook; de Melo, Denizer, Gelb & Tenev (DDGT) World Bank Working Paper, WB WP 1866 (1997); and Krajnyak and
Zettelmeyer (1995).
1
  Calculated by dividing PPP adjusted GDP by total population.
2
  Share of intra-FSU trade in 1990.
3
  Share of agriculture in 1989 according to DDGT.
4
  Natural resource endowment according to DDGT (1997); 0="poor", 1= "moderate", 2="rich".
5
  CEE: Early Reformers refer to Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia. CEE: Later Reformers refer to Albania, Bulgaria, Macedonia, FYR and
Romania. Baltics refer to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Other Former Soviet Union refer to Armemia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russia,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. Simple average for values.
                                                                           37




Table 4. Structural Indicators in Transition Economies

                                       Cumulative Lib    Lib Index      Private Sector    External Lib   Internal Lib   Private sector   Unemployment
                                          Index                        Conditions Index      Index          Index       share of GDP         Rate
                               Year        CLI        LI=LIP+LIE+LII        (LIP)            (LIE)           (LII)       (PSDCSD)
Albania                      1989-94        0.8            0.4               0.2              0.5            0.5            26.0             15.5
                             1995-97        3.8            0.8               0.5              0.9            0.9            67.5             13.5
Armenia                      1989-94        0.6            0.2               0.2              0.2            0.3            30.1              4.9
                             1995-97        2.7            0.7               0.5              0.9            0.7            47.5              8.9
Azerbaijan                   1989-94        0.4            0.2               0.1              0.1            0.3            14.0             10.0
                             1995-97        2.0            0.5               0.3              0.5            0.7            25.0             12.2
Belarus                      1989-94        0.4            0.2               0.2              0.2            0.2            11.1              1.0
                             1995-97        1.9            0.4               0.2              0.4            0.7            15.0              3.1
Bulgaria                     1989-94        1.4            0.5               0.2              0.7            0.6            22.5              8.8
                             1995-97        4.1            0.6               0.5              0.8            0.6            37.5             12.1
Croatia                      1989-94        2.5            0.7               0.5              0.7            0.8            27.6             12.5
                             1995-97        6.1            0.9               0.7              1.0            0.9            49.5             16.1
Czech Republic               1989-94        1.5            0.6               0.6              0.6            0.6            31.9              2.5
                             1995-97        5.5            0.9               0.9              1.0            0.9            72.5              3.5
Estonia                      1989-94        1.2            0.5               0.4              0.5            0.6            32.4              5.4
                             1995-97        4.8            0.9               0.9              1.0            0.9            65.0             10.0
Georgia                      1989-94        0.6            0.2               0.2              0.2            0.3            17.9             n.a.
                             1995-97        2.5            0.6               0.5              0.6            0.7            40.0             n.a.
Hungary                      1989-94        2.6            0.7               0.5              0.8            0.8            38.4              8.5
                             1995-97        6.5            0.9               0.9              1.0            0.9            65.0             11.4
Kazakhstan                   1989-94        0.5            0.2               0.2              0.2            0.3            11.5              0.5
                             1995-97        2.6            0.7               0.5              0.9            0.8            32.5              3.1
Kyrgyz Republic              1989-94        0.6            0.3               0.3              0.3            0.3            18.5             n.a.
                             1995-97        3.4            0.8               0.7              1.0            0.8            45.0             n.a.
Latvia                       1989-94        1.0            0.4               0.3              0.4            0.6            32.8              4.5
                             1995-97        4.1            0.9               0.7              1.0            0.9            61.0              6.9
Lithuania                    1989-94        1.1            0.5               0.4              0.4            0.6            30.6              2.0
                             1995-97        4.5            0.9               0.8              1.0            0.8            60.0              6.4
Macedonia                    1989-94        2.4            0.7               0.5              0.8            0.8            22.9             n.a.
                             1995-97        5.9            0.8               0.7              0.9            0.9            45.0             34.0
Moldova                      1989-94        0.6            0.3               0.2              0.3            0.3            14.8              8.4
                             1995-97        3.0            0.7               0.5              0.8            0.8            35.0             13.1
Poland                       1989-94        2.4            0.7               0.6              0.8            0.7            40.7             12.8
                             1995-97        6.2            0.9               0.8              1.0            0.9            59.0             13.0
Romania                      1989-94        0.9            0.4               0.3              0.4            0.4            26.6              6.0
                             1995-97        3.6            0.7               0.6              0.8            0.8            47.5              8.4
Russia                       1989-94        0.7            0.3               0.3              0.3            0.4            28.1              2.1
                             1995-97        3.4            0.7               0.6              1.0            0.7            59.0              9.2
                                                                                      38




Table 4 (concluded). Structural Indicators in Transition Economies

                                            Cumulative Lib    Lib Index           Private Sector        External Lib      Internal Lib      Private sector   Unemployment
                                               Index                             Conditions Index          Index             Index          share of GDP         Rate
                                    Year        CLI        LI=LIP+LIE+LII             (LIP)                (LIE)              (LII)          (PSDCSD)

Slovak Republic                  1989-94          1.5               0.6                 0.6                 0.6               0.6               31.3              7.1
                                 1995-97          5.2               0.9                 0.8                 0.9               0.9               64.5             13.1
Slovenia                         1989-94          2.6               0.7                 0.5                 0.8               0.8               20.2              9.7
                                 1995-97          6.2               0.9                 0.7                 1.0               0.9               42.5             14.1
Tajikistan                       1989-94          0.4               0.2                 0.2                 0.0               0.3               11.9              0.6
                                 1995-97          1.7               0.4                 0.3                 0.3               0.6               17.5              2.5
Turkmenistan                     1989-94          0.3               0.1                 0.1                 0.1               0.2               12.1             n.a.
                                 1995-97          1.1               0.3                 0.2                 0.2               0.4               17.5             n.a.
Ukraine                          1989-94          0.3               0.1                 0.1                 0.1               0.2               21.3              0.4
                                 1995-97          1.9               0.5                 0.4                 0.6               0.7               39.3              1.1
Uzbekistan                       1989-94          0.4               0.2                 0.2                 0.1               0.2               14.6              0.3
                                 1995-97          2.2               0.5                 0.5                 0.5               0.6               35.0              0.4

Memorandum items1:
All Transition                   1989-94          1.1               0.4                 0.3                 0.4               0.5               22.7             5.9
                                 1995-97          3.8               0.7                 0.6                 0.8               0.8               45.8             9.8
    All CEE                      1989-94          1.9               0.6                 0.5                 0.7               0.7               28.6              9.3
                                 1995-97          5.3               0.8                 0.7                 0.9               0.9               55.1             13.9
     CEE: Early Reformers        1989-94          2.2               0.7                 0.6                 0.7               0.7               31.7              8.8
                                 1995-97          5.9               0.9                 0.8                 1.0               0.9               58.8             11.8
     CEE: Late Reformers         1989-94          1.4               0.5                 0.3                 0.6               0.6               23.9             10.1
                                 1995-97          4.3               0.7                 0.5                 0.9               0.8               49.4             17.0
    Baltics                      1989-94          1.1               0.5                 0.4                 0.5               0.6               32.0             4.0
                                 1995-97          4.5               0.9                 0.8                 1.0               0.9               62.0             7.8
    Other Former Soviet Union    1989-94          0.6               0.3                 0.2                 0.2               0.3               20.1             3.1
                                 1995-97          2.8               0.6                 0.5                 0.7               0.7               39.6             6.0


Source: International Monetary Fund; de Melo, Denizer, Gelb & Tenev (DDGT) World Bank Working Paper, WB WP 1/96.
1
 CEE: Early Reformers refer to Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia. CEE: Later Reformers refer to Albania, Bulgaria,
Macedonia, FYR and Romania. Baltics refer to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Other Former Soviet Union refer to Armemia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan. Simple average for values.
                                           - 39 -




                                     REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, and Olivier Jean Blanchard (1994), ‘On the Speed of Transition in Central
      Europe’, in Stanley Fischer and Julio J. Rotemberg (eds), NBER Macroeconomic
      Annual 1994, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 283-320.

Aslund, Anders (1996), ‘Reform vs. >Rent-Seeking= in Russia=s Economic Transformation’,
       Transition 2 (2): 12-16.

       , Peter Boone, and Simon Johnson (1996), ‘How to Stabilize: Lessons from Post-
       Communist Countries’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, 217-313.

Balcerowicz, Leszek (1994), ‘Fallacies and other Lessons’, Economic Policy, December,
       Vol. 9, 18-50.

Barberis, Nicolas, Maxim Boyco, Andrei Shleifer, and Natalia Tsukanova (1996), ‘How
        Does Privatization Work? Evidence from Russian Shops’, Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 104, No.4, 764-790.

Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, Ratna Sahay, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (1999),
       ‘The Evolution of Output in Transition Economies’, IMF Working Paper 99/73,
       Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Blanchard, Olivier and Michael Kremer (1997), ‘Disorganization’, Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, November, Vol. 112, No. 4, 1091-1126.

Blanchard, Olivier (1996), ‘Assessment of the Economic Transition in Central and Eastern
      EuropeCTheoretical Aspects of Transition’, American Economic Review, Vol. 86,
      No. 2, (May), 117-122.

        , Rudiger Dornbusch, Paul Krugman, Richard Layard, and Lawrence Summers
       (1992), Reform in Eastern Europe, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Boone, Peter, and Boris Fedorov (1997), ‘The Ups and Downs of Russian Economic
       Reforms’, in Wing Thye Woo, Stephen Parket and Jeffrey Sachs (eds), The
       Economies in Transition: Comparing Asia and Eastern Europe, Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: MIT Press, pp. 1-33.

Boyco, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1993), ‘Privatizing Russia’, Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, Vol.2, 139-92.

Brainard, Elizabeth (1998), ‘Winners and Losers in Russia=s Economic Transition’,
       American Economic Review, 88 (5), 1094-1116.
                                           - 40 -




Calvo, Guillermo, Ratna Sahay, and Carlos Végh (1996), ‘Capital Flows in Central and
       Eastern Europe: Evidence and Policy Options’, in Guillermo Calvo, Morris
       Goldstein, and Eduard Hochreiter (eds), Private Capital Flows to Emerging Markets
       after the Mexican Crisis, Institute of International Economics, pp. 57-90.

       , and Fabrizio Coricelli (1992), ‘Output Collapse in Eastern Europe: The Role of
       Credit’, IMF Working Paper 92/64, Washington: International Monetary Fund.

       , and Jacob Frenkel (1991), ‘From Centrally-Planned to Market Economies: The
       Road from CPE to PCPE’, IMF Working Paper 91/17, Washington: International
       Monetary Fund.

Cheasty, Adrienne and Jeffrey M. Davis (1996), ‘Fiscal Transition in Countries of the
       Former Soviet Union: An Interim Assessment’, Moct-Most: Economic Policy in
       Transitional Economies, 6, No. 3, 7-34.

De Broeck, Mark and Vincent Koen (1999), ‘The Great Contractions in Russia, the Baltics,
      And the Other Countries of the Former Soviet Union: A View from the Supply Side’,
      Mimeo.

De Melo, Martha, Cevdet Denzier, Alan Gelb, and Stoyan Tenev (1997), ‘Circumstance and
      Choice: The Role of Initial Conditions and Policies in Transition Economies’, World
      Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1866, Washington: the World Bank.

       , Cevdet Denizer, and Alan Gelb (1996), ‘From Plan to Market: Patterns of
       Transition’, World Bank Economic Review, Vol.10, Washington: the World Bank.

Denizer, Cevdet Denizer and Holger Wolf (1998), ‘Aggregate Saving in the Transition: A
       Cross Country Study’, Mimeo, Washington: the World Bank.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Gerard Roland (1995), ‘The Design of Reform Packages
      under Uncertainty’, American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 5, October, 1207-
      1223.

Easterly, William, and Stanley Fischer (1994), ‘The Soviet Economic DeclineCHistorical
       and Republican Data’, Policy Research Working Paper No. 1284, Washington: the
       World Bank.

Fischer, Stanley (1992), ‘Stabilization and Economic in Russian’, Brookings Paper on
       Economic Activity, Vol.1, 77-126.

       , Ratna Sahay and Carlos Végh (1996a), ‘Stabilization and Growth in Transition
       Economies: The Early Experience’, Journal of Economic Perspective, Vol. 10, No. 2,
       Spring, 45-66.
                                           - 41 -




       , Ratna Sahay and Carlos Végh (1996b), ‘Economies in Transition: The Beginnings
       of Growth’, American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 86, No. 2,
       229-233.

       , Ratna Sahay and Carlos Végh (1997), ‘From Transition to Market: Evidence and
       Growth Prospects’, in S. Zecchini (eds), Lessons from the Economic Transition,
       Kluwer Academic Publishers, 79-101.

       , and Alan Gelb (1991), ‘Issues in Socialist Economy Reform’, Journal of Economic
       Perspective, Vol. 5, No. 4, Fall, 91-105.

Frydman, Roman, Cheryl Gray, Marek Hessel, and Andrzej Rapaczynski (1999), ‘When
      Does Privatization Work? The Impact of Private Ownership on Corporate
      Performance in the Transition Economies’, forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of
      Economics.

       , and Andrzej Rapaczynski (1994), Privatization in Eastern Europe: Is the State
       Withering Away?, Budapest, Central European University Press.

Garibaldi, Pietro, Nada Mora, Ratna Sahay, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (1999), ‘What Moves
       Capital to Transition Economies’, mimeo, Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Havrylysyhyn, Oleh, Ivailo Izvorski, and Ron van Rooden (1998), ‘Recovery and Growth in
      Transition Economies 1990-97: A Stylized Regression Analysis’, IMF Working
      Paper 98/141, Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Hernández-Catá, Ernesto (1997), ‘Liberalization and the Behaviour of Output During the
      Transition from Plan to Market’, IMF Working Paper 97/53, Washington:
      International Monetary Fund.

Heybey, Berta, and Peter Murrell (1999), ‘The Relationship between Economic Growth and
      the Speed of Liberalization during Transition’, Journal of Policy Reform, Vol. 3,
      No.2 121-137.

Johnson, Simon, Daniel Kaufmann, and Andrei Schleifer (1997), ‘The Unofficial Economy
      in Transition’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2, No.1, 159-239.

Kornai, Janos (1986), ‘The Soft Budget Constraint’, Kyklos, Vol. 39, pp. 3-30.

Linn, Johannes F. (1999), ‘Ten Years of Transition in Central Europe and the Former Soviet
       Union--The Good News and the Not-so-good News’, paper presented at the
       Dubrovnik Conference on 10 Years of Transition, September.
                                           - 42 -




Lipton, David, and Jeffrey Sachs, 1990a, ‘Creating a Market Economy in Eastern Europe:
       The Case of Poland’, Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, Vol.1, pp. 75-147.

       , 1990b, ‘Privatization in Eastern Europe: The Case of Poland’, Brookings Paper on
       Economic Activity, Vol. 2, 293-341.

Loungani, Prakash, and Nathan Sheets (1997), ‘Central Bank Independence, Inflation and
      Growth in Transition Economies’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.29, no.
      3 August, 381-99.

Nellis, John (1999), ‘Time to Rethink Privatization in Transition Economies?’, IFC
        Discussion Paper No. 38, Washington: the World Bank.

Newbery, David M., (1991), ‘Sequencing the Transition’, CEPR Discussion Paper Series,
      No. 75.

Sachs, Jeffrey (1996a), ‘The Transition at Mid Decade’, American Economic Review,
       Vol. 86, May, 128-133.

       , (1996b), ‘Economic Transition and the Exchange-Rate Regime-- Exchange Rate
       Regimes and Macroeconomic Stability’, AEA Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 86,
       No. 2, May.

       and Wing Thye Woo (1994), ‘Structural Factors in the Economic Reforms of China,
       Eastern Europe, and the Former Soviet Union’, Economic Policy: A European Forum,
       Vol. 9, 101-145, April.

Sahay, Ratna and Carlos Végh (1996a), ‘Dollarization in Transition Economies: Evidence
       and Policy Implications’, in Paul Mizen and Eric J. Pentecost (eds), The
       Macroeconomics of International Currencies: Theory, Policy, Evidence, US: Edward
       Elgar, pp. 193-224.

        , 1996b, ‘Inflation and Stabilization in Transition Economies: An Analytical
       Interpretation of the Evidence’, Journal of Policy Reform, Vol. 1, No.1, 75-108.

Selowsky, Marcelo, and Ricardo Martin (1997), ‘The Transition from Socialism: Policy
      Performance and Output Growth in the Transition Economies’, AEA Papers and
      Proceedings, Vol. 87, No. 2, 350-353.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1999), ‘Whither Reform?’, Paper prepared for the Annual Bank
        Conference on Development Economics, 28-30 April 1999, Washington: the World
        Bank.
                                           - 43 -




Wolf, Holger (1997), ‘Transition Strategies: Choices and Outcomes’, Princeton Studies in
       International Finance, No. 85, June 1999, New York: Stern Business School.

Wyplosz, Charles (1999), ‘Ten Years of Transformation: Macroeconomic Lessons’, Paper
      prepared for the Annual World Bank ABCDE Conference, 28-30 April 1999,
      Washington: The World Bank.

Zettelmeyer, Jeromin and Daniel Citrin (1995), ‘Stabilization: Fixed versus Flexible
       ExchangeRates’, in Daniel Citrin and Ashok Lahiri (eds), Policy Experiences and
       Issues in the Baltics, Russia and Other Countries of the Former Soviet Union, IMF
       Occasional Paper No. 133, December, pp. 93-102.

Zettelmeyer, Jeromin (1999), ‘The Uzbek Growth Puzzle’, IMF Working Paper 98/133,
       forthcoming in IMF Staff Papers , Washington: International Monetary Fund.
