NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY IN THE OPEN ECONOMY REVISITED:
PRICE SETTING AND EXCHANGE RATE FLEXIBILITY
Michael B. Devereux
Charles Engel
Working Paper 7665
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7665
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

We thank an anonymous referee for very helpful comments on an earlier draft. We have also benefitted
greatly from comments by a large number of our colleagues in the profession. Engel acknowledges assistance
from a National Science Foundation grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Devereux thanks
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for financial assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Michael B. Devereux and Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited:
Price Setting and Exchange Rate Flexibility
Michael B. Devereux and Charles Engel
NBER Working Paper No. 7665
April 2000
JEL No. F3, F4

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a welfare-based model of monetary policy in an open economy. We
focus on the extent to which monetary policy should be employed in maintaining the exchange rate.
The traditional approach maintains that exchange rate flexibility is desirable in the presence of real
country-specific shocks that require adjustment in relative prices. However, in the light of empirical
evidence on nominal price response to exchange-rate changes – specifically, that there appears to be
a large degree of local-currency pricing in industrialized countries – the expenditure-switching role
played by nominal exchange rates may be exaggerated in the traditional literature. In the presence
of local-currency, we find that optimal monetary policy in response to real shocks pricing is fully
consistent with fixed exchange rates. On the other hand, when real country-specific shocks are not
important, and when a country’s monetary sector is stable, the case for freely floating rates (a
monetary policy in which exchange rates are not a consideration) is strengthened in the presence of
local-currency pricing.

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
1873 East Mall Bu Tower
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC 997 V6T 121
and CEPR
devm@unixg.ubc.ca

Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER
cmengel@u.washington.edu

In the last decade, one of the central issues facing monetary policy makers in open
economies has been the degree to which policy choices should be affected by exchange-rate
considerations. There is an abundance of different experiences around the world. Eleven countries
of the European Union, by adopting a single currency and eliminating exchange rate changes, have
abandoned independent national monetary policy. The currency boards of Hong Kong and
Argentina have given their monetary policy completely over to the maintenance of an exchange rate
fixed to the US dollar. On the other hand, the US and Japan, and smaller countries like Australia
and Canada, have focused domestic monetary policy on the goal of achieving low and stable rates
of inflation, allowing their exchange rates to fluctuate more or less freely.
There is little clear evidence on the overall success of alternative exchange rate regimes (e.g.
Ghosh, Gulde, Ostroy and Wolf, 1997). Many critics have raised doubts about policies that fix the
exchange rate in the context of the “optimum currency area” criteria, originally enumerated by
Mundell (1961). They argue that free exchange rate movements would improve the functioning of
capital markets and the allocation of resources in Europe, and in the Southeast Asian countries
following the crisis of 1997-1998.1 Frankel (1999) takes an intermediate position, arguing that
exchange-rate objectives for many countries should be but one of several concerns for monetary
authorities.
This paper develops a welfare-based model of monetary policy in an open economy. We
focus on the extent to which monetary policy should be employed in maintaining a fixed exchange
rate. The analysis is based around two very traditional ideas, central to the recent debate on
exchange rate policy: On the one hand exchange rate flexibility is desirable in the presence of real
country-specific shocks that require adjustment in relative prices. But on other hand, a fixed
exchange rate allows a country to inherit monetary stability from a regime that has manifested
strong monetary discipline.

1

The modern case for flexible exchange rates goes back to Friedman (1953). Real countryspecific productivity or demand shocks require adjustment of relative price levels between
countries. If nominal prices adjusted quickly, Friedman argues, the choice of exchange-rate regime
would be irrelevant because the relative price adjustment could be achieved by nominal price
changes:
If internal prices were as flexible as exchange rates, it would make little economic
difference whether adjustments were brought about by changes in exchange rates or
by equivalent changes in internal prices. But this condition is clearly not fulfilled.
The exchange rate is potentially flexible in the absence of administrative action to
freeze it. At least in the modern world, internal prices are highly inflexible.
Freely floating exchange rates allow the needed relative price adjustment to occur
instantaneously when nominal goods price-adjustment is sluggish. As Feldstein (1992) puts it,
Either form of adjustment [exchange-rate or price] can bring the real exchange rate
to its equilibrium value, but a decline in domestic prices is likely to require a period of
increased unemployment. It would certainly be better to have a decline in the nominal
exchange rate. The shift to a single currency in Europe would preclude such nominal
exchange-rate adjustments and force real exchange-rate reductions to be achieved
through lower local wages and prices.
This type of reasoning lies behind the recommendation of the optimum-currency area
literature that countries subject to sizable country-specific real shocks should not target exchange
rates with monetary policy.2 But the argument relies on the notion that exchange-rate movements
have a large immediate impact on aggregate demand, by allowing instantaneous adjustment of
relative prices. Recent empirical work, however, indicates that in the short run there is very little
response of consumer prices to changes in nominal exchange rates.3 The short-run adjustment role
of nominal exchange rates is eliminated to the extent that consumer prices are unresponsive to
exchange rate changes: the so-called “expenditure-switching effect” may be negligible.

1
2
3

See for example, Feldstein (1992) or Obstfeld (1997) on Europe, and Sachs (1997) on Asia..
See Eichengreen (1994), for example, for a survey of optimum currency considerations.
See Mussa (1986), Engel (1993, 1999), Engel and Rogers (1996), and Parsley and Wei (1996, 1999), for example.

2

There is a voluminous literature on optimal monetary policy in open economies under price
stickiness.4 But none of that analysis has been based on choice-theoretic models, and therefore has
lacked an adequate welfare criterion. In this paper we develop a two-country, stochastic, stickyprice general equilibrium optimizing model, drawing on the work of Obstfeld and Rogoff
(hereinafter referred to as OR, 1995, 1998). To conduct a realistic analysis of the role of the
exchange rate in monetary policy, we allow for both country specific productivity or supply shocks,
and country specific monetary or velocity shocks. We evaluate optimal monetary policy using the
welfare of consumers as the criterion. As in OR (1998), our model is simple enough to admit an
exact solution for prices, exchange rates and all real allocations. An implication of this is that
monetary policy rules affect both volatility and levels of macroeconomic variables. This has an
important implication for the conduct of monetary policy with respect to the exchange rate.
While we are solely concerned with monetary policy under sticky prices, a critical
distinction in our analysis is the currency in which prices are set. We allow two different
specifications of price-setting. Our first specification follows OR (1995, 1998), and implicitly the
Friedman and Feldstein analyses, assuming that nominal prices are preset in the currency of the
producer (denoted producer-currency pricing or PCP). As a result, when exchange rates fluctuate,
imported goods prices move one-for-one with exchange rates. But we also allow another type of
price stickiness –prices that are preset in consumers’ currency (denoted local-currency pricing or
LCP).5 This specification is more in accord with the empirical findings cited above.
The model delivers a strikingly simple representation of the objective functions of monetary
policy6. Under PCP, monetary authorities in each country should attempt to minimize a linear

4

See Devereux and Engel (1998) for a long but partial list of citations.
Notably Betts and Devereux (1996, 2000a) have also made this assumption in open-economy sticky-price models,
but not in a fully stochastic model which is required to analyze optimal monetary policy.
6
This contrasts particularly with the older literature on optimal monetary policy in open economies, which often
employed ad hoc objective functions consisting of output and balance of trade volatility. In our analysis the balance of
trade is an entirely irrelevant objective for monetary policy.

5

3

combination of consumption variance, exchange rate variance, and the covariance of consumption
and exchange rates with country specific productivity shocks. Under LCP, the appropriate
monetary policy objective ignores the exchange rate, rather minimizing a linear combination of
consumption variance and the covariance of consumption with productivity shocks.
The distinction between price-setting specifications is critical for our analysis of the
adjustment benefits of the exchange rate in face of country-specific productivity shocks. Under the
Friedman type of price stickiness – PCP – fixed exchange rates are strictly sub-optimal when real
country-specific shocks dominate. The exchange rate must be employed as part of optimal
monetary policy in order to achieve a change in relative prices, precisely as described by Friedman.
In fact, with exchange-rate flexibility, optimal monetary policy can replicate the equilibrium of the
economy with fully flexible prices. Flexible exchange rates are a perfect substitute for flexible
goods prices. In contrast, exchange-rate flexibility confers no advantage if prices are set in
consumers’ currencies, (as the empirical evidence suggests). Under LCP, an optimal monetary rule
does not utilize exchange rate movements at all! Optimal monetary policy, followed by policy
makers in each country, is in fact fully consistent with fixed exchange rates.7
A methodological implication of our results relates to the appropriate mapping between
consumer’s utility functions and monetary policy objectives. In our model, a simple Taylor-series
approximation of utility would suggest that monetary rules should minimize consumption variance
alone. But our exact analysis shows that the optimal rule should take account of both consumption
variance and expected consumption. In fact, it is the incorporation of expected consumption into
the monetary policy objective leads the policy-maker to add exchange rate variance, and the

7

An implication of our analysis is that an optimal monetary policy outcome involves policy-makers in both countries
choosing optimal rules. Although monetary policy is described as a game between policy makers, in this model there is
no welfare losses from independent monetary policy-making, and no therefore no gains (or losses) from policy
coordination.

4

covariance of consumption and exchange rates with productivity disturbances, to the linear policy
objective function to be minimized.
Our formal welfare analysis also allows us to consider the optimal degree of exchange-rate
intervention for a country that experiences shocks to money supply or velocity. In accordance with
traditional thinking, we find that if the variance of domestic monetary shocks is sufficiently large, it
would like to inherit the monetary stability of a country that has a track record of monetary
discipline. But if it has a very stable monetary sector relative to the outside world, it would prefer
more exchange rate flexibility. But we also find here that the type of price-setting behavior is
important. Under PCP, a country would never choose a clean float, even if it had a completely
stable monetary sector, because the volatility of exchange rates imparts a direct welfare cost on
expected consumption. On the other hand, with LCP, exchange rate volatility causes no
independent welfare cost, and a float is fully optimal for a country with complete monetary stability.
Thus, while the traditional case for floating rates as providing an expenditure-switching mechanism
is nullified under LCP, the case is strengthened when considering monetary factors for a country
with a stable monetary sector.
Section 1 sets out the general equilibrium model. In section 2, we discuss features of the
solution to the model . The optimal monetary policy rules are derived and examined in section 3.
Some conclusions follow. Most of the derivations of our results are contained in an Appendix at
the end of the paper.

5

1.

The Model
The model economy has the following structure. There are two countries, home and foreign.

In each country, households maximize expected lifetime utility, taking prices and wages as given.
Firms are monopolistic competitive, and maximize utility for their owners. There are shocks to
both money supply and to production technologies.
We work with two alternative specifications for the pricing of consumer goods. In all
specifications, producers must set prices prior to the realization of shocks. This is an institutional
constraint in our model, although it can be justified by the presence of menu-costs of price
adjustment. Prices fully adjust to all shocks after one period; i.e., there is no persistence to the
price-adjustment process8. In the first specification, producers set prices in terms of their own
currency. For example, the home currency price of home goods is set, and unresponsive to
monetary shocks. The price for home goods paid by foreign consumers then changes when there is
an unexpected exchange rate change. We denote this specification ‘producer-currency pricing’, or
PCP.
In the other specification, producers set prices in consumers’ currencies. For example, home
firms set one price for home-country consumers in the home currency and another price for foreigncountry consumers in the foreign currency. Unexpected changes in exchange rates have no effect
on consumer prices, either at home or in the foreign country. This specification is referred to as
one of ‘local-currency pricing’, or LCP.
It is natural to focus on the two extreme cases of price-setting behavior: complete PCP or
complete LCP. PCP is the traditional assumption in open economy macroeconomics (see for
instance, Obstfeld and Rogoff 1996). Moreover, it is the central core behind the defense of flexible
exchange rates of many writers from Friedman onwards. But there seems to be widespread

6

evidence for LCP in at least in North American and Europe, as discussed in the introduction. On
the other hand, for developing economies, and especially high inflation economies, PPP seems to
hold more accurately in the sense that the nominal exchange rate is significantly more variable than
the real exchange rate (e.g. Obstfeld 1998). In addition, there is evidence that the link between
exchange rates and imported goods prices is much closer for some emerging market economies than
for the economies of the OECD (Takagi and Yoshida 1999).
Betts and Devereux (2000a) develop a model where PCP and LCP coexist, as a fraction of
firms set their export prices in their own currency, while the rest set prices in consumers currency,
and the fraction can vary between zero and one. But incorporating this arrangement in our model
would mean sacrificing the ability to obtain exact solutions. Moreover, because we have essentially
identified either extreme of this continuum, this alternative approach would provide little extra
insight into the properties of exchange rate regimes or monetary policies.

Consumers
The representative consumer in the home country is assumed to maximize
 ∞

U t = E t  ∑ β s −t u s  ,
 s =t


0< β <1

where
1
χ
us =
C s1− ρ +
1− ρ
1−ε

 Ms

 Ps





1− ε

− ηLs ,

ρ > 0, ε > 0 .

C is a consumption index that is a geometric average of home and foreign consumption9:

8

This assumption is made so that monetary rules can be derived analytically. Qualitatively, it affects none of results.
To apply our model to the realistic design of optimal monetary policies, it would be necessary to introduce more
persistent price stickiness, as in Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), or Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (1997).
All variables in this section are implicitly functions of the state of the world zt ∈ Ζ , where Z is a suitably defined
set of all possible states at time t. To economize on space, we omit this state notation until we explicitly define the
stochastic processes governing money and productivity shocks in the next section.
t

9

7

t

C=

C hn C 1f−n
n n (1 − n )1−n

.

We assume that there are n identical individuals in the home country, 0 < n < 1 .

Ch and Cf are

indexes over consumption of goods produced at home and in the foreign country, respectively (see
the Appendix for further details). The elasticity of substitution between goods produced within a
country is λ , where λ > 1. There is a unit elasticity of substitution between the home goods and
foreign goods indexes. M

P

are domestic real balances, and L is the labor supply of the

representative home agent.
This is a special functional form for utility, but it has the appealing property that it allows us
to derive exact expressions for welfare across a range of alternative exchange rate regimes and
monetary policies. It is a slight variant of the specification used by OR (1998). While the
separability of the utility function may be problematic for analyzing some aspects of exchange-rate
and current-account dynamics, it is very helpful in making the model more tractable analytically.
Bacchetta and van Wincoop (1998) have emphasized (in a two-period framework) the importance
of non-separabilities of leisure and consumption for the impact of the choice of exchange-rate
regime on the volume of trade.
The price index, P, is defined by
P = Phn Pf1−n ,

(1.1)

where Ph and Pf are price indexes for home and foreign goods, respectively.
There are 1 − n identical individuals in the foreign country. Their preferences are
identical to those of the home country, except being functions of foreign real balances and foreign
labor supply.
We assume that there are complete asset markets. Residents of each country can purchase a
full set of state-contingent nominal bonds. When the law of one price holds (as it does under the
8

PCP specification), consumption risk is completely shared, even without complete assets markets.10
But under the LCP specification, the law of one price does not hold. We consider the assumption of
complete asset markets to be one of convenience, which approximates the assumption of perfect
capital mobility, while ruling out dynamic effects of wealth redistribution, which in both a
quantitative and welfare sense are likely to be of second order importance.
Consumers obtain wages Wt from working, receive profits from firms and transfers from
government, and get payments on state contingent bonds. They choose their holdings of money
balances, consumption, labor supply and bonds. The money demand equation for the representative
home-country resident is given by:
1

(1.2)

ρ

χ ε Ct ε
Mt
=
,
1
Pt
ε
(1 − Et d t +1 )

 C −ρ P 
where Et d t +1 is the inverse of the gross nominal interest rate, and d t +1 =  β −t ρ+1 t  .
 C t Pt +1 
The optimal trade-off between consumption and leisure implies:
(1.3)

Wt
=η.
Pt C tρ
When consumers have access to a full set of state contingent bonds, Chari, McGrattan, and

Kehoe (1997) show that the following risk-sharing condition obtains
ρ

(1.4)

C 
St Pt*
= Γ0  t*  ,
Pt
 Ct 

where St is the home currency price of foreign currency, and Γ0 is a constant, depending on initial
conditions.11 Consumption will differ across the two countries only to the extent that there are

10

As OR (1998) emphasize, this follows from the property of unit elasticity of substitution between home and foreign
composite goods. See also Cole and Obstfeld (1991) for an analysis of why terms of trade changes can serve as a
substitute for capital mobility.
11
We assume Γ0 = 1.

9

changes in the real exchange rate. In the PCP specification, since purchasing power parity holds,
we have, as OR (1998) derive, Ct = C t* .
Government
Government increases the money supply with direct transfers. The government budget
constraint (in per capita terms) is simply
M t = M t −1 + Tt .
In the discussion below, we will be more specific about the form of the optimal monetary rules.
Firms
Firms are monopolistic competitors. The production function for firm i is given by:
Yit = θ t Lit ,
where Lit is employment of firm i at time t, and θ t represents a country-specific productivity shock.
The objective of the domestic firms is to set prices to maximize the expected utility of the owners.
Because there are complete markets, it does not matter whether the owners of firms are home or
foreign residents. But prices must be set before information about random money supplies and
productivity shocks is known.
The optimization problem can be expressed as maximizing the expected present value of
profits using the market nominal discount factor for the owners of the firm. The solutions for
optimal pricing rules are given in Table 1.
Under the PCP specification, firms choose a single price, in domestic currency, to maximize
the state-contingent value of profits. Take for instance the optimal price set by the home firm,
PhtiPCP = PhtPCP , given in the top left hand entry of Table 1. In a world of certainty, the price would
simply be a fixed mark-up over unit labor costs. Here, there is an additional mark-up arising from
the covariance of nominal wages with Ct1− ρ . The term represents a risk premium arising from the

10

covariance of the firm’s profits with the marginal utility of consumption.12 Specifically, the ex post
increase in costs from lowering prices by one unit is proportional to Pht−λ −1C tWt , while the increase
in revenue is proportional to Pht− λ C t . Then weighting each side by the discount rate for period t-1,
and equating in expectations, we arrive at the optimal price as given by the expression in Table 1.

Table 1
Optimal Prices
Ct1− ρWt
)
λ
θt
=
λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct1− ρ )

PhtLCP = PhtPCP

Et −1 (

PhtPCP

PCP

Pht*PCP = Pht

St

Pht*LCP

Ct*1− ρWt *
)
λ
θ t*
=
λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )

Pft*LCP = Pft*PCP

Et −1 (

Pft*PCP

Wt Ct*1− ρ
Et −1 (
)
λ
Stθ t
=
λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct*1− ρ )

PftPCP = St Pft*PCP
PftLCP

St Ct1− ρWt *
Et −1 (
)
λ
θ t*
=
λ − 1 Et −1 (Ct1− ρ )

The law of one price holds for the price charged to foreigners by the home firm, Pht*PCP , in
the PCP model. Analogous relationships hold for the prices set by the foreign firms, Pft*PCP and
PftPCP .
Under the LCP specification, the firm chooses two different prices – one to charge residents
of its own country, and one to charge residents of the other country. The price charged by the home
12

See OR (1998) and Devereux and Engel (1998) for further discussion of the pricing equations.

11

firm to the home residents is given by the same expression as in the PCP case. The price charged to
foreign residents, Pht*LCP is explained as follows. In selling to the foreign market, the firm calculates
that the ex post increase in costs from lowering prices by one unit is proportional to Pht*−λ −1Ct*Wt ,
while the increase in revenue is proportional to Pht*−λ Ct* S t . Weighting both sides by the marginal
utility of the home consumer, using the risk sharing rule (1.4), and equating, we obtain the
expression for Pht*LCP in Table 1. Note that with perfect certainty, the price would be set so that its
home currency value is a fixed mark-up over unit labor costs. Likewise, under LCP, the price
charged by foreign firms to its own residents is the same as under PCP, but the price charged to
home-country consumers is not.13
Given equal consumption at home and abroad, the goods-market equilibrium condition in
the home country under PCP can be written as
θ t Lt =

(1.5)

Pt Ct
.
Pht

With LCP the goods-market equilibrium in the home country is written as:
(1.6)

θ t Lt = n

P *C *
Pt C t
+ (1 − n) t * t .
Pht
Pht

For suitably defined stochastic processes governing M t , M t* , θ t , and θ t* , the 13 functions
(of the state of the world) C , C * , Ph , Ph* , Pf , Pf* , P , P * , S , W , W * , L , and L* , are determined
by the 13 equations (1.1) and its foreign equivalent, (1.2) and its foreign equivalent, (1.3) and its
foreign equivalent, (1.4), (1.5) (under PCP) or (1.6) under LCP and its foreign equivalent, and the
four pricing equations from Table 1.

13

OR (2000) have criticized the LCP assumption on the grounds that it contradicts some empirical regularities
concerning the terms of trade – that an appreciation of a country’s currency tends to be associated with an improvement
in its terms of trade. LCP pricing implies the opposite relationship. But Devereux, Engel and Tille (1999) show that the
LCP model is equivalent to one in which producers price in their own currency, but in which intermediaries set prices
for consumers in local currencies. That model predicts appreciations lead to improvements in the terms of trade.

12

2. Model Solution
The economy is exposed to two types of disturbances; shocks to money supplies (nominal
shocks) and shocks to productivity (real shocks) 14. We let the productivity disturbances, θ t and θ t* ,
be governed by the following processes
ln θ t = δ ln θ t −1 + u t
ln θ t* = δ ln θ t*−1 + ut*
where 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 , and u t and u t* are mean-zero i.i.d. normally distributed random variables.
The log money supply for each economy is given by:
(2.1)

mt = mt −1 + υ t + γ ( st − Et −1 st ) + a1ut + a2 ut*

(2.2)

mt* = mt*−1 + υ t* + b1u t* + b2 u t

These monetary rules allow for the authorities to react directly to productivity shocks arising from
either country. In addition, (2.1) allows the home country to choose a feedback intervention rule for
adjusting money to movements in the exchange rate. When γ < 0 , this rule displays ‘leaning
against the wind’. For given values of a1 and a 2 , the value of γ defines the exchange rate regime.
When γ=0, we say that the exchange regime is a free float, while as γ → −∞ , the feedback rule
prevents the exchange rate from adjusting at all, so that we have a fixed exchange rate regime. The
υ t and υ t* terms represent uncontrollable mean-zero i.i.d. normally distributed disturbances to the
supply of money15.
Because all shocks are log-normal, the solution of the model will take on a log-normal
distribution. From section 1, all equations save for (1.2) are log-linear, and therefore, in the

14

We ignore shocks to government spending. Since utility is linear in labor effort in this economy, government
spending shocks have no effect on consumption. There is therefore no role for monetary policy in responding to
government spending shocks.
15
These might be thought of as shocks resulting from financial innovation. They are also formally equivalent to
velocity disturbances in the solution of the model.

13

presence of log-normal distributions, offer exact solutions. But the money market equilibrium
conditions in each country require an approximation. Following OR (1998), the appendix shows
that the following approximation can be employed to represent an equilibrium in the home country
money market.
mt − pt =

(2.3)

ρ
1
ct − ( Et pt +1 + ρEt ct +1 − pt − ρct ) + Γm
ε
iε

where Γm is a constant. An analogous condition may be derived for the foreign country. The
accuracy of this approximation may be gauged by the extent to which the parameter ε deviates from
unity. It is shown in Devereux and Engel (1998) that in the case ε=1, the money market clearing
equation may be solved exactly, and thus, (2.3) involves no approximation.
The Flexible Price Solution
To get a perspective on the effect of price rigidities and to understand the motivation for
optimal monetary rules, it is useful to see the solution to the model in an environment of fully
flexible prices. With flexible prices, the profit maximizing price rules obtain in each state of the
world, and not just in expectation. We may then establish that
 λη 
Ct = 

 λ −1

(2.4)

−

1
ρ

(θ

)

θ t*(1− n )

n
t

1
ρ

Consumption is unaffected by money shocks, but depends positively on both home and
foreign productivity shocks. Employment in each country is also equated in the flexible price
economy:
 λη 
Lt = 

 λ −1

−

1
ρ

(θ

θ t*(1− n)

n
t

Finally the terms of trade under flexible prices are given by:

14

1− ρ
ρ

)

.

Pht
θ*
= t .
St Pft θ t
A nice feature arising from the log-normality of shocks is that we can easily express
expected utility of consumption in terms of the mean of consumption and the variance of the log of
consumption:
EC 1− ρ = ( EC )1− ρ exp( −

(2.5)

ρ (1 − ρ ) 2
σc ).
2

Since expected labor supply will be a linear function of EC 1− ρ , it turns out that to understand
optimal policy it is sufficient to understand the effects of policies on the mean and variance of
consumption.
The Appendix gives the solution for the variance and the conditional expectation of
consumption with flexible prices. Consumption variance is positively related to the variance of
productivity shocks. Expected (conditional) consumption is increasing in the variance of (log)
consumption.
Producer-Currency Pricing
Under producer currency pricing, we may obtain an explicit solution for the exchange rate
st − Et −1st =

(2.6)

(a1 − b2 )
(a − b )
(υ − υt* )
ut + 2 1 ut* + t
(1 − γ )
(1 − γ )
(1 − γ )

If the feedback rules on productivity shocks are identical across countries, then the exchange
rate will be independent of productivity shocks. As the degree of exchange rate intervention rises
(i.e. γ → −∞ ), the influence of all shocks on the exchange rate diminishes. We can show (see the
Appendix) that
(2.7)

ct = Et −1ct + Λ 1u t + Λ 2 u t* +

15

φn
φ (1 − γ − n) *
υt +
υt
1− γ
(1 − γ )

where Λ 1 = φ (
ψ=

n(a1 − b2 )
n(a 2 − b1 )
(1 + iε )
+ b2 ) + ψn , Λ 2 = φ (
+ b1 ) + ψ (1 − n) , φ =
, and
1− γ
1−γ
ρ (1 + i )

δi(ε − 1)
.
ρ (1 + i )(1 + iε − δ )
Unlike the flexible price solution, consumption may be either increasing or decreasing in

productivity shocks, in the absence of monetary rules that target these shocks. When a persistent
(i.e. δ > 0 ) positive technology shock occurs, it raises expected future consumption, and reduces
expected future prices. With ε > 1 , the rise in expected future consumption dominates the fall in
expected future prices, so the nominal interest rate rises . Then there is present period excess supply
of real money balances, which with sticky prices, increases current consumption. On the other
hand, when ε < 1 , a productivity shocks leads the nominal interest rate to fall, and therefore current
consumption falls.
Consumption is increasing in shocks to the money supply of both countries. As shown in
OR (1995), a foreign monetary expansion will lead to a home country appreciation, a fall in the
price level, and an expansion in real balances. As a result, consumption will rise. A home money
expansion on the other hand will directly increase consumption, but part of that is dissipated by an
exchange rate depreciation. So consumption rises by less than proportionally to the monetary
expansion. Intuitively, the greater is the degree of foreign exchange rate intervention (the more
negative is γ), the smaller will be the impact of home monetary shocks on consumption.
With sticky prices, the expected level of consumption takes on the form
(2.8)

 (1 − ρ )σ c2 n(1 − n) 2 σ~u2 σ~cu
(σ − σ su * ) 

Et −1Ct = Φ (t − 1) exp −
−
σs −
+
+ n(1 − n) su
2
2ρ
2ρ
ρ
ρ



where Φ (t − 1) is a function of last period productivity shocks, and σ~u2 = nσ u2 + (1 − n)σ u2* ,
σ~cu = nσ cu + (1 − n )σ cu* . Expected consumption depends upon consumption variance, exchange
rate variance, the variance of productivity shocks, and covariance terms.
16

Expected consumption is increasing (decreasing) in consumption volatility as ρ > 1 ,
( ρ < 1 ). It is always decreasing in exchange rate volatility, and for given consumption and
exchange rate volatility, expected consumption is decreasing in the variance of technology shocks.
To see the relationship between consumption volatility and expected consumption, note that from
equation (1.3), the wage is proportional to C ρ . If ρ > 1 , this means that the wage is negatively
correlated with the firm’s marginal utility-discounted demand, C 1− ρ . Therefore, given the price
setting problem facing the firm, the price will be lower the higher is the variance of consumption,
when ρ > 1 . But a lower price implies a higher expected consumption.
Higher exchange rate volatility increases expected marginal costs directly, since when there
is full pass-through of exchange rates to domestic prices, the CPI’s and therefore wages will be
affected by exchange rate volatility. From the pricing equations in Table 1, it can be shown that
higher exchange rate variance raises average prices and leading to lower expected consumption. In
this sense the model implies a pure welfare cost of exchange rate volatility. In the presence of
nominal rigidities and optimal pricing, exchange rate volatility leads to higher average prices. Of
course this welfare effect of exchange rate volatility arises because of nominal price rigidities.
When prices are fully flexible, there is no effect of exchange rate volatility on the average level of
prices.
To compute welfare, we will need to evaluate expected employment. Under PCP expected
employment is
(2.9)

(λ − 1) Et −1C t1− ρ
Et −1 Lt =
,
λη

Expected employment for the foreign country is identical to (2.9).

17

Local-Currency Pricing
Under local-currency pricing, PPP will not generally hold. Thus, home and foreign
consumption will differ. We may combine the pricing equations, the money supply rules (equations
(2.1) and (2.2)) and the money-market clearing condition (2.3) to obtain the value of expected home
country consumption:
γρφ *
1
υt +
ct = Et −1ct + Ω 1u t + Ω 2 u t* + φ (
υt )
1 − φγρ
1 − φγρ

(2.10)

 (a − γρφb2 ) 
 (a − γρφb1 ) 
 + ψn and Ω 2 = φ  2
 + ψ (1 − n) .
where Ω1 = φ  1
 (1 − γφρ ) 
 (1 − γφρ ) 
Home country consumption is affected by both home and foreign productivity shocks, both
because home money responds to productivity shocks in both countries, and because nominal
interest rates are influenced by persistent productivity shocks. But foreign money shocks affect
home consumption only due to the exchange rate intervention undertaken by the home country. In
the absence of intervention, home consumption would be unaffected by foreign money shocks,
since these shocks do not pass through to domestic goods prices under LCP.
In the same way, we may establish that foreign country consumption is
ct* = Et −1ct* + Ω *2 u t + Ω1*u t* + φυ t*

(2.11)

where Ω1* = φb1 + ψ (1 − n) , and Ω*2 = φb2 + ψn . Foreign consumption is unaffected by home
country money shocks, under LCP.
The solution for expected (home country) consumption under LCP is derived in the
Appendix as:
(2.12)

 (1 − ρ )σ c2 σ~u2 σ~cu 

Et −1Ct = Φ (t − 1) exp −
−
+
2
2ρ
ρ 

Unlike (2.8), this does not depend on the distribution of the exchange rate. Without

exchange rate pass-through, wages are not directly affected by exchange rates. Therefore, average
18

prices and expected consumption are unaffected by exchange rate volatility. Expected consumption
for the foreign country is symmetric to equation (2.12).
Expected employment in the LCP specification is determined by using equation (1.6) above.
Again, expected employment is identical for home and foreign countries, and given by:
(2.13)

n(λ − 1) Et −1Ct1− ρ (1 − n)(λ − 1) Et −1Ct*(1− ρ )
Et −1Lt =
+
.
λn
λn

3. Optimal Monetary Policies
We now investigate the optimal choice of monetary policy. Home and foreign governments
choose monetary policy rules to maximize welfare for their domestic residents. Due to the oneperiod ahead pricing policies of firms, and the presence of complete markets, the equilibrium is
stationary. Optimal monetary policies are obtained by maximizing expected utility for any period.
From a welfare perspective, the utility of real balances is likely to be of minor significance.
Hence, following OR (1995, 1998) and Corsetti and Pesenti (1998), we ignore this term. Expected
utility may be represented as
(3.1)

Et −1U t =

Et −1Ct1− ρ
− ηEt −1Lt
(1 − ρ )

The choice of monetary policy rules may be represented as a game between home and
foreign governments. The home government chooses the degree of foreign exchange rate
intervention γ and its response to home and foreign productivity shocks, taking the monetary rule of
the foreign country government as given. The foreign government chooses its response to home
and foreign productivity shocks, taking the home country monetary rule as given. The pair of
monetary rules that satisfy these conditions form a Nash equilibrium of the monetary policy game.

19

3.a Producer Currency Pricing
Under producer currency pricing, consumption and expected employment are identical in
the home and the foreign country, so that both governments will face the same objective function.
Using (2.5), (2.8) and (3.1), we may write common expected utility as

(3.2)

Et −1U t =

(Et −1Ct )1− ρ exp(− ρ (1 − ρ ) σ c2 )  λ − (1 − ρ )(λ − 1) 
(1 − ρ )

2




λ




Using the expressions for the mean and variance of consumption from the Appendix, the
objective function under PCP can be written as
(3.3)

(σ − σ su* )
σ c2 n(1 − n) 2 σ~u2 σ~cu
)
Et −1U t = Θt exp(1 − ρ )(−
−
σs −
+
+ n(1 − n) su
2
2ρ
2ρ
ρ
ρ

 λη nδ *(1−n )δ 
where Θ t = 
θ t −1θ t −1

 λ −1


1− ρ
ρ

 λ − (1 − ρ )(λ − 1) 

 .
λ (1 − ρ )



Equation (3.3) indicates that the objective function of the monetary authority under PCP is
represented in a very simple form; minimize a linear function of consumption variance, exchange
rate variance, and the covariance of consumption and the exchange rate with home and foreign
productivity shocks. Given the simple assumptions of our model, the objective function for
monetary policy becomes a quadratic, as in much of the earlier literature on optimal monetary rules
based on more ad-hoc models and objective functions. The appeal of the present model however is
that it delivers the appropriate welfare-based set of variables to be included in the objective
function, and their relative weighting. Note also that monetary policy should explicitly take account
of its effect on average consumption (and output). A Taylor series approximation to (3.2) around a
constant average consumption level would lead us to conclude that minimizing consumption alone
was the best objective for monetary policy; exchange rate variance and the covariance’s with
productivity shocks would be ignored.

20

Given the dependence of consumption and the exchange rate on the monetary rules, we may
implicitly write expected utility as: EU = EU (γ , a1 , a 2 , b1 , b2 ) .
A Nash equilibrium in monetary policies is defined as the set {γ N , a1N , a 2N , b1N , b2N } which
satisfies the problem Ρ1,

P1

Max
γ , a1 , a 2

Max
b1 , b2

EU (γ , a1 , a 2 , b1N , b2N )

EU (γ N , a1N , a 2N , b1 , b2 )

Both countries face the same objective function. So in fact it is clear that the solution to Ρ1
is identical to the equilibrium of a cooperative monetary policy game, where the governments of
both countries jointly choose the monetary rules to maximize joint welfare. Therefore, in the PCP
environment, there are no gains to monetary policy coordination16.
We characterize the solution to Ρ1 in two stages. First, we describe the solution for the
monetary rules when there are only productivity shocks, holding the home country intervention rule
γ fixed. Then, we solve for the optimal intervention rule in the presence of monetary shocks.
Productivity Shocks
The values of a1 , a 2 , b1 , b2 that satisfy Ρ1 are given by
(3.4)

a1 = 1 − γ −

(3.5)

b1 = 1 −

ni(ε − 1)
(1 + iε − δ )

a2 = γ −

(1 − n)i (ε − 1)
(1 + iε − δ )

b2 = −

(1 − n)i (ε − 1)
(1 + iε − δ )

ni (ε − 1)
(1 + iε − δ )

For the foreign country government, the optimal monetary rule is to respond positively to
foreign productivity shocks, but respond negatively (positively) to home country productivity
shocks as ε > 1 ( ε < 1 ). For the home country government, the optimal response to productivity

16

If we had allowed discretionary monetary policy rather than a system of rules as in (2.1) and (2.2), policy
coordination would make a difference - see Betts and Devereux (2000b).

21

shocks depends on the degree of foreign exchange market intervention. With zero intervention, the
rule is the mirror image of the foreign rule: respond positively to home country shocks and either
negatively or positively to foreign shocks, depending on ε. But when there is positive exchange rate
intervention, the response to productivity shocks for the home country may be in the opposite
direction.
Monetary authorities attempt to use the rules (3.4) and (3.5) to sustain the flexible price
allocation. Essentially, the economy has three departures from full efficiency. Prices are sticky, so
consumption and employment do not respond to money and productivity shocks as they would in a
flexible price environment. There are monopolistic competitive markups. Finally, there is a
departure from the Friedman rule of zero nominal interest rates. The second loss cannot be
affected by the monetary rules (2.1) and (2.2), since these rules cannot influence the markups
obtained in Table 1.17 The third loss is neglected from the analysis because we ignore the utility of
real balances. Thus, the best that the monetary policy rules can do is to attempt to replicate the
flexible price equilibrium.18
To attain the flexible price allocation, the authorities must ensure that consumption equals
(2.4). This requires that in the aggregate, monetary policy should react in a pro-cyclical manner to
productivity shocks19. Take the case where there is only a home country productivity shock. Then
in face of a u shock, if the world money supply responds by n

(1 + i − δ )
, consumption variance is
(1 + iε − δ )

the same as in the flexible price equilibrium. But expected consumption would not necessarily be at
its desired level. For instance, if both home and foreign monetary authorities reacted in the
17

Although monetary policy rules do influence expected output levels in our model, they cannot eliminate the distortion
from imperfect competition, because the markup depends only on constant elasticities. Gali and Monacelli (1999) show
that the welfare impact of deviations from competitive pricing can be eliminated by a production subsidy to firms that
operates independently of monetary policy. In our analysis, it is easy to show that an equivalent optimal production
subsidy exists. But this does not affect any of our conclusions below.
18
Similar observations in a related model have been made by OR (2000).

22

identical manner, so as to achieve an average monetary policy response given by n

(1 + i − δ )
the
(1 + iε − δ )

exchange rate would have zero variance. From (2.8) however, expected consumption would then be
too low. In order to achieve the desired level of expected consumption, it is necessary that the
exchange rate responds positively to u shocks. This is facilitated by the monetary rules (3.4) and
(3.5), which ensure that the home country money supply response is positive and exceeds that of the
foreign country.
An alternative intuition on the role of exchange rate changes may be described in terms of
the movements in employment. In order to achieve the optimal employment response in the home
and foreign economy, it is necessary to alter world relative prices, through movements in the
nominal exchange rate. In response to a home country productivity shock, the nominal exchange
rate must depreciate, to ensure world demand is substituted towards the home country’s products.
For this, it is necessary that the home country monetary reaction to a home productivity shock is
positive and exceeds that of the foreign country. Optimal monetary policy therefore relies on the
expenditure switching mechanism of the exchange rate under the PCP pricing regime. The
exchange rate movement in fact replicates the required terms of trade movement that would take
place under fully flexible prices20.
It is easy to establish that with the monetary rules given in (3.4) and (3.5), the equilibrium
under PCP replicates the flexible price allocation under productivity shocks alone. This can be
shown by substituting (3.4) and (3.5) into (2.7) and deriving the expression for expected utility (3.2)
with the optimal monetary rules, when υ = υ* = 0 . An immediate implication of this is that
exchange rate flexibility is a requirement for an optimal monetary policy rule, under PCP, in the

Note the even if γ is sufficiently positive that a1 is negative, the overall money supply will still be increasing in u
shocks.
20
The objective function (3.2) does not contain employment. But from (1.5) and (2.7) it may be established that there is
an equivalence between using monetary rules to achieve the desired mean and variance of consumption and achieving
the desired mean and variance of national employment levels.
19

23

presence of productivity shocks. The optimal monetary policy is one that must not only ensure that
distribution of consumption is identical to that under flexible nominal prices, but also that the
distribution of the exchange rate is identical to that of the terms of trade under flexible prices.
Exchange rate adjustment is necessary to achieve the desired terms of trade adjustment. This is the
essence of Friedman’s argument for floating exchange rates quoted in the introduction.
A critical aspect of the optimal monetary rules given in (3.4) and (3.5) is that they require
participation by both monetary authorities. It is interesting to contrast problem P1 with an
alternative case, where only the home monetary authority chooses optimal feedback rules, assuming
that the foreign monetary authority follows a purely passive monetary policy, where bi=0, i =1,2.
Problem P2 is thus defined as
Max
γ , a1 , a 2

P2

EU (γ , a1 , a 2 ,0,0)

The optimal rules for a1 and a 2 are now given by
(3.6)

a1 =

(φn + (1 − n) − ψnρφ )
(1 − γ )
((1 − n) + φ 2 ρn)

a2 =

(1 − n)(φ − 1 − ψρφ )
(1 − γ )
((1 − n) + φ 2 ρn)

It can easily be established that a1 is consistent with the solution for P1 only when ε = 1 ,
and a 2 is in general never consistent with the solution for P1. A policy maker optimizing alone
cannot support the flexible price allocation. Take the case where ε > 1 . Under problem P1, the
home monetary authority will expand money supply in response to a home country productivity
shock, while the foreign authority will contract money supply. This achieves the right combination
of increasing world demand and exchange rate depreciation. But with problem P2, the rule given
by (3.4) would entail too high a response in consumption, since the foreign government does not
respond to the disturbance. The optimal rule under P2 is to respond to domestic productivity shocks
less than is indicated in rule (3.4). Consumption still rises by too much, while the exchange rate
rises by too little, relative to P1. Also, in response to a foreign technology shock, the home
24

government cannot adequately respond. The reason is that the desire to increase domestic
consumption calls for a monetary expansion ( a 2 > 0 ), but the desire to generate a terms of trade
improvement calls for a monetary contraction ( a 2 < 0 ). The optimal a 2 may therefore be either
positive or negative.
Monetary Shocks
Given optimal choices ai , the home country government chooses the degree of exchange
rate intervention according to P1. From (2.6), we see that the optimal intervention rule is that which
minimizes the following function of consumption variability and exchange rate variability:
σ c2
σ2
+ n(1 − n) s
2
2ρ
The optimal intervention rule is given by
(3.7)

γ =−

σ v2
σ v2
1
n
(
1
)(
1
)(
1
)
+
−
−
+
σ v2*
ρφ 2
σ v2*

The rule depends solely on monetary variability. It is independent of the distribution of real
shocks.21 The optimal intervention depends on the strength of home country monetary variability
relative to foreign monetary variability. When foreign monetary variability tends to zero, γ tends to
negative infinity; i.e. the exchange rate is prevented from moving at all in response to monetary
disturbances. This supports the traditional result that a fixed exchange rate regime is optimal when
the only shocks arise from the domestic monetary sector. One might think then that a floating
exchange rate ( γ = 0 ) would be preferable when home country monetary variability becomes
arbitrarily small. But in fact we see that as home country monetary variance gets arbitrarily small,
the intervention coefficient approaches a limit of

21

This property that the intervention rule is independent of the distribution of supply shocks will remain even if the
authorities do not target supply shocks at all. If monetary rules (3.4) and (3.5) did not contain a response to supply
shocks, the exchange rate would be independent of supply shocks. Therefore, the degree of exchange rate intervention
could not alter the economy’s response to supply shocks.

25

γ = (1 − n )(1 −

1
)
ρφ 2

The optimal intervention in face of foreign monetary shocks will lie between a fixed exchange rate
and a free float, when ρφ 2 > 1 .
The reason that a free float is not in general desirable is that the authorities are not trying to
minimize consumption variance only, but are also concerned with exchange rate variance. Floating
exchange rates would tend to minimize the extent to which foreign monetary disturbances
contribute to consumption variance, but would leave exchange rate variance too high. Excessive
exchange rate variance has a welfare cost through the reduction in expected consumption. An
optimal intervention rule will trade off the benefits of exchange rate adjustment in reducing
consumption variance against the welfare costs of exchange rate variability itself.
3.b Local Currency Pricing
Under LCP, home and foreign consumption are not equated, because the real exchange rate is no
longer constant. This implies that the objective functions for home and foreign governments will
differ. For the home government, the objective function depends on expected consumption,
consumption variance, and expected employment. Substituting (2.13) into expected utility given in
(3.1), gives
 λ − n (λ − 1)(1 − ρ )  (1 − n )( λ − 1)
Et −1U t = Et −1C t1− ρ 
 −
Et −1C t*(1− ρ )
−
λ
(
1
ρ
)
λ


In a symmetric fashion, foreign country expected utility equals:
 λ − n( λ − 1)(1 − ρ )  (1 − n )(λ − 1)
Et −1U t* = Et −1C t*1− ρ 
Et −1Ct(1− ρ )
 −
λ (1 − ρ )
λ


These functions may again be decomposed into means and variances of consumption. Then
substituting for these values from the Appendix, we can establish:

26

(3.8)

Et −1Ct

(3.9)

σ c2 σ~u2 σ~cu
)
−
+
2 2ρ
ρ

1− ρ

∝ exp((1 − ρ )(−

*(1− ρ )

∝ exp((1 − ρ )(−

Et −1Ct

σ c2* σ~u2 σ~c*u
)
−
+
2 2ρ
ρ

The optimal monetary rule with LCP requires policymakers to target a combination of two separate
functions of consumption variance and the covariance between consumption and productivity
shocks. But because under LCP, foreign consumption is independent of the parameters of the home
country monetary rule, the home country problem amounts to simply minimizing the expression:
σ c2 σ~u2 σ~cu
+
−
.
2 2ρ
ρ
An essential difference from the PCP case is that exchange rate volatility is no longer an
independent argument in the objective function.22
The determination of monetary rules in the LCP case can be described as the Nash
equilibrium {γ N , a1N , a 2N , b1N , b2N }

Ρ3

Max
γ , a1 , a 2

Max
b1 , b2

EU (γ , a1 , a 2 , b1N , b2N )

EU * (γ N , a1N , a 2N , b1 , b2 )

Again, we characterize the solution to P3 first in the presence of productivity shocks, and then we
allow for monetary shocks and optimal intervention.
Productivity Shocks
The solution to P3, holding γ constant, is given by
(3.10)

a1 = n

(1 + i − δ )
(1 + iε − δ )

a 2 = (1 − n)

22

(1 + i − δ )
(1 + iε − δ )

The parameters of the foreign country’s money rule do enter into home country consumption as long as home engages
in some exchange rate intervention. But in the first order conditions for the choice of the optimal policy rule for the
foreign country, envelope conditions imply that this dependence is ignored.

27

b1 = a 2

(3.11)

b2 = a1

Again, as in the case of PCP, these rules ensure that consumption is identical across
countries, and has the same variance as in the flexible price equilibrium. But unlike the case of
PCP, these rules do not entail exchange rate adjustment. Each government responds in an identical
way to a home or foreign productivity shock. The optimal monetary rules are consistent with a
fixed exchange rate.23
The reason that optimal monetary rules do not require exchange rate adjustment in the LCP
case is that the exchange rate plays no role in determining expected consumption. Exchange rate
changes do not pass-through to price levels and therefore do not influence wages. Thus, they do not
influence either marginal costs or expected prices and expected consumption.
An equivalent perspective on the monetary rules (3.10) and (3.11) is that in the LCP case,
exchange rate adjustment does not play a role in altering patterns of expenditure between home and
foreign goods. Therefore, it cannot influence the determination of employment in either country.
Optimal monetary policy no longer tries to move the exchange rate so as to achieve an optimal
terms of trade adjustment, since the terms of trade do not influence demand or employment.
The absence of exchange rate movement in the optimal rules in the LCP environment is at
variance with the Friedman/Mundell argument for exchange rate flexibility, and more generally
with the conventional statement of the costs of a single currency area. In the conventional
argument, countries that are subject to idiosyncratic real shocks will benefit from exchange rate
adjustment in face of these shocks. This argument is borne out in the PCP case. But with LCP,
even country-specific shocks do not require exchange rate movement as part of an optimal policy
response. Thus, even in the presence of distinct country specific real disturbances, there is no

23

Equation (A.17) of the appendix gives the exchange rate equation under LCP.

28

sacrifice of macroeconomic adjustment by eliminating the exchange rate as a tool of
macroeconomic management (when the predominant disturbances are country specific productivity
shocks), if we take the institutional structure of goods pricing as given.
Although optimal monetary policy under LCP does not require exchange rate adjustment, a
natural guess would be that the absence of exchange rate pass-through comes at a cost. This is
correct. The optimal monetary policy under LCP does not support the full flexible price optimum.
While the monetary rules (3.10) and (3.11) keep the response of home and foreign consumption
equal to that at the flexible price optimum, they cannot ensure that employment in each country is
identical to the flexible price optimum. Equivalently, the monetary rules lead consumption variance
to match the flexible price equilibrium, but the mean level of consumption falls short of the flexible
price equilibrium. Thus, the presence of LCP imposes welfare costs on the world as a whole, by
preventing terms of trade adjustment from having macroeconomic effects.
Problem P3 describes an environment where both domestic and foreign governments choose
an optimal response to productivity shocks. What happens when the home country alone chooses
an optimal monetary policy, assuming that the foreign government follows a purely passive
monetary growth rule? Defining a choice for the home country government analogous to P2 gives
optimal monetary rules equal to:
(3.12)

a1 = n

(1 + i − δ )
(1 − γφρ )
(1 + iε − δ )

a 2 = (1 − n)

(1 + i − δ )
(1 − γφρ )
(1 + iε − δ )

Examining (3.12) allows us to establish that the home country consumption variance is identical to
problem P3. But the foreign country consumption variance is not the same as under P3. Thus, as
regards home country consumption, the home country government, acting alone, can do as well as it
can when the foreign government also chooses optimal monetary policy. Unlike the PCP case,
there is no alteration in the policy rules when governments act alone – the optimal rules support the
same consumption process for the home government. Of course, because expected utility does
29

depend upon both home and foreign consumption, overall welfare must be lower when the foreign
country government does not follow an optimal rule.
Monetary Shocks
Under LCP, the government’s choice of exchange rate intervention is designed simply to
minimize the variance of consumption. The optimal exchange rate intervention rule is given by
γ =−

σ v2
ρφσ v2*

Again, the rule trades off the benefit of a fixed exchange rate, insulating the economy from
domestic monetary shocks, against the benefits of exchange rate adjustment, cushioning the
economy from foreign monetary disturbances. Unlike the rule under PCP, the intervention rule
under LCP will vary between fully fixed exchange rates to fully floating exchange rates, as the
importance of home and foreign monetary disturbances change in relative terms. In particular, if
there are no home monetary shocks at all, then the monetary authority should follow a clean float.
This is because, unlike the PCP case, there are no independent costs of exchange rate volatility
under LCP. The optimal intervention rule does not have to take account of the way in which
intervention affects exchange rate volatility. When there are only foreign monetary disturbances, a
floating exchange rate achieves the maximum insulation of home country consumption from the
effects of the shocks.
When productivity shocks dominate, we have shown that welfare under LCP must be lower
than that under PCP. But the same result does not apply in the case of money shocks. A simple
example may be used to illustrate this. Say that the variance of productivity shocks is zero in both
countries, and that money shocks have identical variance equal to σ v2 in both countries. Finally,
imagine that the home country follows a zero exchange rate intervention rule (this is easily relaxed
– see below). Then in the PCP case, expected utility is a positive function of
30

−

σ c2 n(1 − n)σ s2
φ 2 (n 2 + (1 − n) 2 )σ v2 n(1 − n)σ v2
−
=−
−
2
2ρ
2
ρ

Under the same conditions, expected utility under LCP is a positive function of

σ c2
φ 2σ
−
= −
2
2

2
v

From these two expressions, we see that the welfare comparison between PCP and LCP contains
two elements. On the one hand, consumption variance is lower under PCP, because part of a
monetary shock is dissipated through exchange rate adjustment. On the other hand, the exchange
rate volatility driven by money shocks imparts a welfare cost under PCP, but does not under LCP.
Expected utility is higher under LCP (PCP) whenever φ 2 ρ > 1 (<1). In general, either inequality
may be satisfied. Therefore, the welfare comparison across the two pricing specifications is
ambiguous; the adjustment benefits of the exchange rate in response to monetary shocks are
tempered by the welfare costs of exchange rate volatility.

4. Conclusions
The optimal response of monetary policy to exchange rates is an old theme in openeconomy macroeconomics. The novel aspect of this paper is that the analysis is undertaken within
an expected-utility-maximizing framework in the presence of nominal rigidity. We find that the
optimal monetary policy depends in a fundamental way on the type of price stickiness. Traditional
studies have assumed prices are fully preset in the currency of the producer, so that exchange rate
changes “pass through” one hundred percent to consumer prices. This modeling contrasts with the
recent empirical evidence suggesting very small short-run responses of consumer prices to
exchange-rate changes. When prices are not very responsive to exchange rates, monetary policymakers cannot rely on the exchange rate to provide the necessary adjustment to real shocks. To the
extent that consumers do not interpret exchange-rate changes as relative price changes in the short
31

run, monetary policy can only achieve an inferior outcome in which it is unable to control the
relative demand for domestic and foreign goods. The benefits of floating exchange rates are
diminished in the absence of strong expenditure-switching effects.
There is a new literature on open-economy monetary policy-making, based on models in
which agents optimize. McCallum and Nelson (1999) and Svensson (2000) exemplify this recent
work, which builds on the earlier work by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997). These models are, in
many ways, more sophisticated than the model of this paper. In those models, prices adjust only
slowly over time, while here prices adjust fully after one period. They allow for investment
dynamics, while our model has ignored the role of investment in short-run macroeconomic
dynamics. But in our model, firms’ objectives are clearly integrated with the objectives of the firm
owners. We allow for deviations from the law of one price, in contrast to this new literature. And,
we do not take linear approximations around the steady state in solving the model. If we were to
follow the techniques of this recent literature, we would lose the important insights about the effects
of monetary policy on the expected levels of consumption and employment. Clearly a challenge for
the future is to merge the best elements of the literature generated by OR (1995, 1998) with the
research program initiated by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997).
Finally, our modeling strategy follows the recent literature in taking the currency of price
setting as exogenous. A more sophisticated model would endogenize that choice. The choice of
currency to set prices in may not be independent of the monetary policy regime. Devereux, Engel
and Tille (1999) and Tille (2000) have enriched the current framework by introducing middlemen
that buy from producers at prices set in the producers’ currencies, and sell to consumers at prices set
in consumers’ currencies. We have noted that this model is equivalent to the one presented here
under complete financial markets. When asset markets are less fully developed, the structure of the
marketing and distribution scheme may depend on monetary and exchange rate regimes. The

32

interaction between price setting and monetary policy is likely to be a fruitful area for future
research into our understanding of optimal monetary policy in open economies.

References
Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop, 1998, Does exchange rate stability increase trade and
capital flows, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, working paper no. 9818.
Betts, Caroline and Michael B. Devereux, 1996, The exchange rate in a model of pricing-to-market,
European Economic Review 40, 1007-1021.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 2000a, Exchange rate dynamics in a model of pricing-tomarket, Journal of International Economics 50, 215-244.
Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 2000b, International Monetary Policy Coordination and
Competitive Depreciation: A Re-evaluation, Journal of Money Credit and Banking,
forthcoming.
Chari, V.V.; Patrick J. Kehoe; and, Ellen McGrattan, 1997, Monetary policy and the real exchange
rate in sticky price models of the international business cycle, National Bureau of Economic
Research, working paper no. 5876.
Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, Commodity trade and international risk sharing: How
much do financial markets matter?, Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 377-400.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Paolo Pesenti, 1997, Welfare and macroeconomic interdependence,
National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 6307.
Devereux, Michael B., and Charles Engel, 1998, Fixed vs. floating exchange rates: How price
setting affects the optimal choice of exchange-rate regime, National Bureau of Economic
Research, working paper no. 6867.
Devereux, Michael B.; Engel, Charles; and, Cedric Tille, 1999, Exchange rate pass-through and the
welfare effects of the euro, National Bureau of Economics, working paper no. 7382.
33

Eichengreen, Barry, 1994, International monetary arrangements for the 21st century (Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution.)
Engel, Charles, 1993, Real exchange rates and relative prices: An empirical investigation, Journal of
Monetary Economics 32, 35-50.
Engel, Charles, 1999, Accounting for U.S. real exchange rate changes, Journal of Political Economy
107, 507-538.
Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 1996, How wide is the border?, American Economic Review
86, 1112-1125.
Feldstein, Martin, 1992, The case against the EMU, The Economist (June 13th, 1992), 19-22.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1999, No single currency regime is right for all countries or at all times, National
Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 7338.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, The case for flexible exchange rates, in Essays in Positive Economics
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 157-203.
Gali, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli (1999), "Optimal Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
Variability in a Small Open Economy" mimeo Boston College
Ghosh, Atish R., Anne-Marie Gulde, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Holger C. Wolf (1997) ``Does the
Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?’’ National Bureau of Economic Research, working
paper no. 5864.
McCallum, Bennett and E. Nelson, 1999, Nominal income targeting in an open-economy
optimizing model, Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 553-578.
Mundell, Robert A., 1961, A theory of optimum currency areas, American Economic Review 51,
509-517.
Mussa, Michael, 1986, Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real exchange rates:
Evidence and implications, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 36, 163209.
34

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1997, Europe’s gamble, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2, 241317.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1998, Open economy macroeconomics: Developments in theory and policy,
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 100, 247-275.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1996, Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, Exchange rate dynamics redux, Journal of Political
Economy 103, 624-660.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 1998, Risk and exchange rates, National Bureau of
Economic Research, working paper no. 6694.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000, New directions for stochastic open economy models,
Journal of International Economic 50, 117-153.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, 1997, An optimization-based econometric framework
for the evaluation of monetary policy, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 297-346.
Sachs, Jeffrey, 1997, Personal views, Financial Times of London (July 30, 1997).
Svensson, Lars E.O., 2000, Open-economy inflation targeting, Journal of International Economics
50, 155-183.
Takagi, Shinji, and Yushi Yoshida (1999) Exchange Rate Movements and Tradable Goods Prices in
East Asia: An Analysis Based on Japanese Customs Data, 1988-98, IMF Working Paper
WP/99/31
Tille, Cédric, 2000, ‘Beggar-thy-neighbor’ or ‘beggar-thyself’? The income effect of exchange rate
fluctuations, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, working paper.

35

Appendix
Consumers
The indexes of consumption of home and foreign goods are given by:
n
λ −1
−1
C h = n λ ∫ C h (i ) λ di 


0

λ

λ −1

λ −1
−1
1
C f = (1 − n ) λ ∫ C f (i ) λ di 


n

;

λ

λ −1

.

The price indexes for home and foreign goods are given by:
1 n

Ph =  ∫ Ph (i )1−λ di 
0
n


1
1− λ

 1 1

Pf = 
Pf (i )1− λ di 
∫
n
1 − n


,

1
1− λ

.

The intratemporal decisions by households can be characterized by the following relationships:

−λ

1  Pf (i ) 
C f (i ) =


1 − n  Pf 

1  P (i ) 
C h (i ) =  h  C h ,
n  Ph 
Ph C h = nPC ,

∫

n

0

−λ

Cf ;

Pf C f = (1 − n ) PC ;
1

∫ P (i )C

Ph (i )C h (i )di = Ph C h ,

n

f

f

(i )di = Pf C f .

Firms
The optimization problem can be expressed as maximizing the expected present value of profits
using the market nominal discount factor for the owners of the firm. Given that there is no
intertemporal aspect to the firms’ optimization problems (see, Obstfeld and Rogoff (1998)), this
reduces to maximizing in the PCP case:

[ (

)]

nEt −1 [d tπ t (i )] = Et −1 d t ( Pht (i ) − Wt )( X ht (i ) + X ht* (i )) ,
where X ht (i ) = nC ht (i ) is total sales of firm i to home residents and X ht* (i ) = (1 − n )C ht* (i ) is total sales
to foreign residents.

1

In the LCP model, the firm chooses two different prices – one to charge residents of its own
country, and one to charge residents of the other country. The typical home firm maximizes:

[ (

)]

Et −1 d t −1 Pht (i ) X ht (i ) + S t Pht* (i) X ht* (i ) − Wt ( X ht (i ) + X ht* (i )) .

Optimal prices in both cases are presented in Table 1 in the text.
Money Demand Approximation

The money market equilibrium condition (1.2) may be approximated by first writing (1.2) as:

 P
1 −  t
 Mt

(A.1)

ε

 ρ
PC ρ
 C t χ = βEt t t ρ
Pt +1C t +1


The right hand side may be expressed as
2
σp
Pt Ctρ
2 σc
=
β
exp(
p
+
ρ
c
−
E
p
+
−
ρ
E
c
+
ρ
− ρσ cp )
t
t
t t +1
t −1 t +1
2
2
Pt +1C tρ+1
2

(A.2)

βEt

The left-hand side of (A.1) may be approximated around a steady state where the nominal interest rate
is constant, so that βEt

Pt C tρ
1
. This gives
=
ρ
Pt +1C t +1 1 + i
ρ

(A.3)

ln(1 −

1

Pt ε ε
i
1
Ct χ ) ≈ ln(
) + i(ε (mt − pt ) − ρct ) + i ln(
χ −1 )
Mt
1+ i
1+i

Equating the log of (A.2) and (A.3) gives the money market clearing condition (2.3) of the text.

2

Solution for PCP Specification
Under PCP, there is full PPP at all times, so we have Pt = S t Pt* and C t = C t* . By subtracting
the foreign country money market clearing condition from the home condition, using PPP and the
assumption of random walk money supply, we may derive a solution for the exchange rate given by
st = Γs + mt − mt* ,

(A.4)
where Γs is a constant.

Now from (1.3) (and its foreign equivalent), and the pricing equations in Table 1, we may write
implicitly the equation which determines the period t-1 expected value of consumption as
n

1−n  
−n




 Et −1  C t S t    Et −1  Ct S t
 θ*
 θ  

λ
t
 t

 

1=
η
1− ρ
λ −1
Et −1 (C t )

(A.5)

1−n






Now using (A.4) and (A.5), imposing the fact that the solution for consumption and the exchange rate
will be log-normal, and taking logs, we may solve for the value of expected consumption as

( n ln θ t −1 + (1 − n ) ln θ t*−1 )
λη
1
(2 − ρ ) 2 n (1 − n ) 2
Et −1ct = − ln(
σc −
σs +δ
)−
ρ
λ −1
ρ
2
2ρ

(A.6)

−

( nσ u2 + (1 − n )σ u2* ) ( nσ cu + (1 − n )σ cu* )
(σ − σ su* )
+
+ n(1 − n ) su
2ρ
ρ
ρ

Now combine the home and foreign money market equilibrium conditions to obtain the
equation:
(A.7)

ρ
ρ
1
~ −~
m
pt = ct − ( Et ct +1 − ct ) − ( Et ~
pt +1 − ~
pt ) + Γm
t
ε
iε
iε

3

~ = nm + (1 − n)m * . Using (A6), taking
where Γm is a constant, and ~
pt = np ht + (1 − n) p *ft , m
t
t
t
expectations dated period t-1, and solving for ~
pt gives:
~
~ − δ (1 + i − δ ) (n ln θ + (1 − n) ln θ * )
pt = − Γm + m
t −1
t −1
t −1
(1 + iε − δ )

(A.8)

Using (A.7) and (A.8), we may solve for time t consumption as :
~ −m
~ ) + ψ (nu + (1 − n)u * )
ct = Et −1ct + φ (m
t
t −1
t
t

(A.9)
where

φ=

(1 + iε )
ρ (1 + i )

and

ψ=

δi(ε − 1)
.
ρ (1 + i )(1 + iε − δ )

Now assume that governments follow the following monetary rules given in equations (2.1)
and (2.2). Substituting these two equations into (A.4), we obtain the solution for the exchange rate
given by equation (2.6).
Substituting (2.1) and (2.2) in (A.9), using the exchange rate solution (A.10), we obtain the
solution for consumption given in equation (2.7).
The variance of the log of consumption can be calculated from equation (2.7) and is reported in
Table A1. We can obtain the expected level of consumption by using the relationship
(A.10)

Et −1Ct = exp( Et −1ct + 12 σ c2 )

and using equation (A.6). Equation (2.8) gives expected consumption.
To evaluate welfare, we must compute expected utility, including expected utility from
employment. Employment for the home country may be written as in equation (1.5). Using the
pricing equation from Table 1, we may write expected employment as in equation (2.9). Substituting
this into expected utility gives equation (3.2).

4

By the properties of the lognormal distribution
Et −1C t1− ρ = exp(1 − ρ )( Et −1 ct +

(A.11)

(1 − ρ ) 2
σc )
2

Using the expression for Et −1ct in (A.6) and for σ c2 from Table A1, we can derive equation (3.3).

Solution for the LCP specification
Under the LCP specification, PPP does not generally hold, and so there is a failure of full risksharing. By using equation (1.3) and its foreign equivalent, the risk-sharing condition (1.4), and the
pricing equations in Table 1, we may write the equation which implicitly defines expected home
country consumption as
n

C 
C 
Et −1  t  Et −1  *t 
λ
 θt 
θt 
1=
η
λ −1
Et −1 C t1− ρ

(

(A.12)

1− n

)

Using the log-normality assumption, and taking logs, we may solve for expected consumption as

Et −1ct = −
(A.13)
−

1
λη
(2 − ρ ) 2
( n ln θ t −1 + (1 − n ) ln θ t*−1 )
ln(
)−
σc +δ
ρ
λ −1
2
2ρ

( nσ u2 + (1 − n )σ u2* ) (nσ cu + (1 − n )σ cu * )
+
2ρ
ρ

A similar procedure establishes that
Et −1ct* = −
(A.14)
−

( n ln θ t −1 + (1 − n ) ln θ t*−1 )
1
(2 − ρ ) 2
λη
ln(
)−
σ c* + δ
ρ
λ −1
2
ρ

(nσ u2 + (1 − n )σ u2* ) ( nσ c*u + (1 − n )σ c*u* )
+
ρ
2ρ

The critical difference from (A.6) is that exchange rate variability does not affect expected
consumption.
5

From the home economy money market clearing condition (2.3), taking expectations, and using
(A.13), we may solve for the home price level as
(A.15)

pt = − Γm + mt −1 − δ

(1 + i − δ )
( n ln θ t −1 + (1 − n ) ln θ t*−1 )
(1 + iε − δ )

Home consumption is determined again from the home money market clearing condition as
ct = Et −1ct + φ (mt − mt −1 ) + ψ (nu t + (1 − n)u t* )

(A.16)

We can use the risk-sharing condition (1.4), the money-market equilibrium conditions, and
equation (A.15) to solve for the exchange rate as:
st = ρφ (mt − mt* ) −

(A.17)

i (ε − 1)
( pt − pt* ) + Γs ,
1+ i

where Γs is a constant term.
Assume that the monetary policy rules followed by the home and foreign governments are
given by (2.1) and (2.2). Then we can use equation (A.17) to write home monetary policy as
(A.18)

mt − mt −1 =

1
φργ
a1u t + a 2 u t* + υ t −
b2 u t + b1u t* + υ t*
1 − φργ
1 − φργ

(

)

(

)

Substituting (A.18) into (A.16) gives equation (2.10). The variance of the log of consumption can be
derived directly from equation (2.10), and is reported in Table A1. The expected level of consumption
can be derived as before using the relationship in equation (A.10), and is given in equation (2.12).
Using (1.6), and the pricing rules in Table 1, we may write expected employment as (2.13).

6

Table A1
Variance of log consumption
n 2σ u2 + (1 − n) 2 σ u2*
ρ2

Flexible Prices

PCP

φ2(

n2
(1 − γ − n) 2 2
2
σ
+
σ v* ) + Λ21σ u2 + Λ22σ u2*
v
2
2
(1 − γ )
(1 − γ )

PTM (Home)

1
(
φργ )2
2
φ (
σv +
σ v2* ) + Ω12σ u2 + Ω 22σ u2*
2
2
(1 − γφρ )
(1 − γφρ )

PTM (Foreign)

φ 2 (σ v2* ) + Ω *22σ u2 + Ω1*2σ u2*

2

φ=

(1 + iε )
ρ (1 + i )

ψ=

7

δi(ε − 1)
ρ (1 + i )(1 + iε − δ )

Table A2
Expected Value of Consumption
Flexible Prices

PCP

 λη 
Et −1Ct = 

 λ −1

−

1
ρ

−

1
ρ

(θ

 λη 
Et C t − 1 = 

 λ −1

(

)

1
δn *δ (1 − n ) ρ
θ t −1θ t −1

)

1
δn *δ (1− n ) ρ
θ
t −1 t −1

 1 n 2σ u2 + (1 − n )2 σ u2* 

exp  2

2
ρ



 (1 − ρ )σ c2 n (1 − n ) 2 
−
exp  −
σ s 
2
2ρ



(σ − σ su*) 
 nσ 2 + (1 − n )σ u2* nσ cu + (1 − n )σ cu*

× exp  − u
+
+ n(1 − n ) su

2
ρ
ρ
ρ


PTM (Home)

 λη 
Et −1Ct = 

 λ −1 

−

1
ρ

(θ

)

1
δn *δ (1− n ) ρ
θ
t −1 t −1

 (1 − ρ )σ c2 nσ u2 + (1 − n )σ u2* 

exp −
−
2
2ρ



 nσ + (1 − n)σ cu* 

× exp cu
ρ



PTM (Foreign)

Et Ct*−1

 λη 
=

 λ −1

−

1
ρ

(

)

1
δn *δ (1− n ) ρ
θ t −1θ t −1

 (1 − ρ )σ c2* nσ u2 + (1 − n )σ u2* 

exp  −
−
2
2
ρ



 nσ + (1 − n)σ c*u* 

× exp c*u
ρ



φ=

(1 + iε )
ρ (1 + i )

ψ=

8

δi(ε − 1)
ρ (1 + i )(1 + iε − δ )

