                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                PARENTAL EMPLOYMENT AND
                               CHILD COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT


                                          Christopher J. Ruhm


                                          Working Paper 7666
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7666

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




I thank Carey Borkoski for research assistance and Li Gan, Hilary Hoynes, Shelly Lundberg, Dan
Rosenbaum, Donna Ruane Morrison, Steven Stern, David Wildesin and seminar participants at Georgetown
University, the University of California at Berkeley, University of Kentucky, University of Texas, University
of Virginia, and Vanderbilt University for helpful comments. Financial support from the University of North
Carolina Greensboro and the National Science Foundation (SES-9876511) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 by Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development
Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 7666
April 2000
JEL No. I12, J13, J18, J22



                                              ABSTRACT


      This study investigates the relationship between parental employment and child cognitive

development using data from multiple years of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Maternal

labor supply during the first three years of the child's life is predicted to have a small negative effect

on the verbal ability of 3 and 4 year olds and a substantial detrimental impact on the reading and

math achievement of 5 and 6 year olds. Working during the second and third years appears to have

less favorable or more deleterious consequences when the mother is also employed in the first year.

The results are robust to the inclusion of controls for day care arrangements or paternal job-holding

and there is some indication that early employment may be particularly costly for children in

“traditional” two-parent families. Finally, the data suggest that paternal and maternal employment

have qualitatively similar effects, hinting at the importance of time investments by fathers. The

overall conclusion is that previous research may have provided an overly optimistic assessment of

the effects of parental employment on child cognitive development.



Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
c_ruhm@uncg.edu
                      Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development
        The first three years of life are increasingly recognized as a critical period for children
(e.g. Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children, 1994; Council of Economic
Advisers, 1997). Recent research emphasizes the long-lasting effects of early environmental
influences on brain development (Shore, 1997), and environmental factors could also be
significant for the development of learning skills, self-esteem and emotional security.1 Time
investments of parents during the first years may therefore promote healthy development.
        In 1980, 44 percent of single and 45 percent of married females with children under the
age of 6 participated in the labor force. By 1996, participation had increased to 55 and 63
percent.2 Over the same period, the fraction of children raised in single parent households rose
from 20 to 28 percent (U.S. Department of Commerce, 1997). These changes suggest that
parents have less time to invest in children, with potentially deleterious effects.3 However,
increased employment may also yield benefits, most obviously by providing extra income.
        This paper analyzes the relationship between parental employment and child cognitive
development. Data are from multiple years of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
(NLSY). The dependent variables are scores on three high quality assessments of cognitive skill.
Despite considerable prior investigation, the effects of parental labor supply remain uncertain.
One reason is that it is difficult to adequately control for characteristics that simultaneously
affect employment decisions, the home environment, and the quality of time investments. To

1
  Heckman (1999) stresses the importance of human capital investments in early childhood, focusing on
the role of dynamic complementarities whereby early skill development fosters subsequent learning.
2
  The growth has been even more rapid for mothers with very young children. In the 1994/5 period, 56
percent of mothers with a one year old child participated in the labor force (Klerman & Leibowitz, 1998).
3
  Increased female employment has not been offset by substantial reductions in male work hours;
however, the time women spend in housework has declined substantially since the 1960s, potentially
raising that available for children (Juster & Stafford, 1991; Mayer, 1997). According to a recent estimate
by the Council of Economic Advisers (1999), the time parents could potentially spend with children
declined by 22 hours per week (or 14 percent) between 1969 and 1999. One obvious question is whether
employment translates into less actual time with children. Hofferth’s (1999) analysis of time-diary data
from the 1997 Child Development Supplement to the Panel Study of Income Dynamics indicates that
employed mothers devote less time to their children (aged 12 and under) than their counterparts without
jobs and that work hours are negatively correlated with parental involvement for both employed mothers
and fathers. However, nonworking fathers spend less time with children than their employed peers. This
last issue receives attention in the analysis of paternal employment below.


                                                 Page 1
remedy these shortcomings, this study uses a larger and more representative sample than most
previous research, a particularly comprehensive set of explanatory variables, and analyzes a
wider set of outcomes and age range of children. The effects of maternal work are also more
carefully modeled and job-holding by fathers receives some attention.
       The empirical results suggest that maternal employment during the early years has
negative effects on child cognitive development. Working during the child’s first year is
associated with reductions in the verbal ability of 3 and 4 year olds that are partially (but not
completely) offset by increases related to employment during the second and third years. Job-
holding by mothers results in considerably larger decreases in the expected reading and
mathematics achievement scores of 5 and 6 year olds, with particularly pronounced declines
associated with employment during the second and third year of the child's life. For all three
cognitive outcomes, the effects of employment in the second and third years appear more
deleterious (or less favorable) when mothers also hold jobs during the first year. Finally, the data
hint that paternal and maternal employment affect child cognitive development in similar ways,
suggesting that time investments by fathers are also important. One implication of these
findings is that prior research, by failing to adequately control for the heterogeneity between
working and nonworking parents and focusing on a narrow age range of children, may have
provided an overly optimistic assessment of the effects of parental employment.
                                       A. Previous Research
       The impact of maternal employment on child cognitive development has been widely
studied. Much of the research focuses on common outcomes and age groups, most frequently
scores of 3 and 4 year olds on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), and analyzes data
from the NLSY. As detailed in Table 1, some investigations find positive effects (Vandell &
Ramanan, 1992; Parcel & Menaghan, 1994), others uncover negative impacts (Leibowitz, 1977;
Stafford, 1987; Mott 1991), and many obtain differing findings depending on the timing of the
employment or specific group analyzed (Desai et al., 1989; Baydar & Brooks-Gunn, 1991; Blau




                                               Page 2
& Grossberg, 1992; Parcel & Menaghan, 1994; James-Burdumy, 1998).4 The only previous
study of paternal employment (Parcel & Menaghan, 1994), also obtains inconclusive results.5
        A careful reading of this literature suggests that overall impact of maternal job-holding
during the first three years is fairly small, with deleterious effects during the first year offset by
benefits for working during the second and third. The patterns may vary with factors such as sex
of the child or family income but these differences are not well understood. Mothers with
observable characteristics associated with high ability (e.g. education levels, AFQT scores) tend
to have relatively elevated employment rates, but selection based on less easily observable
factors is poorly identified.
        These inferences should be viewed as tentative because the samples have typically been
small and unrepresentative, and the outcomes and age groups studied quite limited. Most
importantly, mothers who work when their children are young may differ from those who do not
in ways that have not been fully accounted for. For example, Vandell & Ramanan (1992) show
that job-holding is more common for women with high levels of education and cognitive skill. If
working mothers also have high ability in home activities, employment is likely to be positively
associated with child outcomes, even absent a causal impact. Conversely, a spurious negative
correlation occurs if women returning to work quickly are more “career” oriented and have less
interest or ability in home production. One way to reduce or eliminate the potential bias due to
unobserved heterogeneity is to include a comprehensive set of explanatory variables. The results
may be difficult to interpret, however, if endogenous regressors such as controls for the home
environment are included, since they could absorb a portion of the effect of employment.6

4
  A related line of inquiry examines whether early child care harms child-mother attachment relationships
(e.g. Belsky & Rovine, 1988; Clarke-Stewart, 1989; Lamb & Sternberg, 1990; NICHD Early Child Care
Research Network, 1997b). The somewhat ambiguous results of this research suggests that maternal
employment, by increasing the use of day care, could reduce the security of infant-mother attachments in
some situations. However, the size and pattern of the effect is uncertain and none of the studies use
nationally representative samples or contains sufficient controls for parental abilities or attitudes.
5
  Parcel and Menaghan’s study contains several potential shortcomings. Most importantly, the reference
group includes both fathers working 35-40 hours per week and those with missing values (either because
they are not present in the household or because work hours are not reported).
6
  There are similar difficulties in interpreting results of the related literature on day care (e.g. Clarke-
Stewart, 1991; Field, 1991; Caughy et al., 1994). NICHD Early Child Research Network (1997a) shows


                                                  Page 3
                                    B. Conceptual Framework
        Economic models portray households as productive entities where parents allocate
resources to maximize an objective function that includes the health and development of children
as one of its arguments. Holding marital status and household size constant, more time and
income will therefore be devoted to children as more of each is available to the parents.7 The
psychological and sociological literatures emphasize other, generally complementary, pathways
through which parental employment may affect children. Belsky (1988) argues that a mother’s
absence during the first year of life could disrupt mother-child attachment relationships and
deprive the child of the stimulation that promotes cognitive development. Hoffman (1980) states
that the stress of maternal employment may yield fewer and lower quality interactions. Coleman
(1988) expresses concern that the job-holding will weaken the “social capital” that depends on
the relationships in which children are embedded.
        The effects of parental employment may also vary with household characteristics and age
of the child. If well-off parents provide higher quality time, for instance, employment could be
more harmful in rich than poor families (Vandell & Ramanan, 1992). However, wealthier
families can afford better day care and educated women spend a greater proportion of their time
at home in child-related activities (Leibowitz, 1974b), possibly reversing this pattern.8

that the age at which children are placed in non-parental care varies significantly with maternal and
family characteristics. For instance, those beginning child care prior to 3 months of age come from
families with relatively low non-maternal incomes whereas those placed in care at 3-5 months of age have
the highest family incomes and maternal earnings. Norberg (1998) indicates that mothers of infants with
relatively high development scores or more difficult temperaments begin work relatively soon after giving
birth. A few studies use quasi-experimental designs to control for omitted variables (e.g., Currie &
Thomas, 1995). See Karoly et al. (1998) for an in-depth review of research examining early intervention
programs. The available evidence suggests more uniformly beneficial impacts of job-holding by mothers
of older children, particularly for daughters where role model effects of maternal employment appear
important (Haveman & Wolfe, 1995; Blau, et al., 1998).
7
  Leibowitz (1974a) provides an early example of work highlighting the role of time investments in
children. There is wide agreement that children benefit from being in households with higher incomes
but debate over the nature of the relationship. Duncan & Brooks-Gunn (1997) emphasize the causal
effect of poverty, whereas Mayer (1997) suggests weaker income effects, possibly because a greater
portion of family income is devoted to children in poor than wealthy families (Lazear & Michael, 1988).
All else equal, more time will also be invested in children with few siblings and in two-parent (versus
single-parent) households (Haveman & Wolfe, 1995; McLanahan, 1997).
8
  The average quality of child care increases with income, although center-based care for low-income
children appears to be of relatively high quality (NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 1997a).


                                                 Page 4
        All of the aforementioned approaches stress the beneficial effects of household income
and parental time, suggesting a potential tradeoff between the two. To illustrate, consider a
production function where child outcomes depend on previous status (Ct-1), the non-market
“leisure” time of parents (L), purchased inputs like food or medical care (F), and exogenous
determinants or production shocks (V) according to:
(1)                                      Ct = C(Ct-1,Lt,Ft,Vt).9
Using subscripts to indicate partial derivatives, CL and CF are positive. The production function
has several important characteristics. First, parental time is assumed to be good for children.
This occurs either through direct time investments or indirectly through reductions in stress,
increased energy levels, and so forth. Second, higher incomes raise the ability of parents to
purchase productive inputs and influence their time allocation decisions.10 Third, child outcomes
depend partly on prior status and therefore on the past choices of parents.
        Parents have a time constraint
(2)                                      Lt + Ht = 1,
where H (L) is the proportion of time spent in employment (leisure) activities, and a budget
constraint that limits purchases of child inputs and other consumption by the amount of earned
and nonearned income.11 Solving (2) for H and recursively substituting in for lagged values of
C, equation (1) can be rewritten as:
(3)                                      Ct = C(Ht,Ft,Vt),
where H, F, and V are vectors of current and lagged values (e.g. Ht={Ht, Ht-1, … Ht-n}), for t-n
the first period in which parental inputs affect child outcomes). The empirical analysis does not


This is probably due to early intervention programs (such as Head Start) available to poor families.
Greenstein (1995) presents evidence suggesting that advantaged children are not disproportionately
harmed by maternal employment.
9
  This model follows Becker (1981) in emphasizing the role of non-market time in household production
and Grossman (1972) in treating health as an outcome produced by investment activities.
10
   Formally, parents solve a dynamic programming problem where utility depends on child outcomes,
parental consumption and non-market time, and is maximized subject to time and budget constraints.
Under fairly general conditions, the reduced-form leisure time and child outcome functions vary with
wages, prices, non-labor income, and health or utility shocks. Blau et al. (1996) detail such a model.
11
   Total time is actually endogenous since it varies with the number of parents and children in the
household. The econometric analysis deals with this by including detailed controls for family structure.


                                                 Page 5
estimate the structural production function described by (3), but rather focuses on the reduced-
form model:
(4)                                      Ct = C(Ht,X),
where X is a vector of parental and family background characteristics.
        The employment coefficients obtained from equation (4) show the “net” impact of
parental job-holding and reflect the (presumably) offsetting effects of increased income and
decreased leisure. Ideally, X accounts for all other factors influencing the structural
determinants of child outcomes. For example, the proportion of total income devoted to children
could vary with parental and family background characteristics. Similarly, parental attitudes
about labor supply could be correlated with other investments in children.12 If the supplementary
regressors do not adequately control for these factors, the reduced-form estimates may be biased.
        A further difficulty is that child outcomes will generally depend on the quality as well as
the quantity of parental time investments, and on the “technologies” in place when decisions are
made. For instance, since child care is one purchased input, the effects of parental employment
are partially a function of the difference in the quality of parental and nonparental care.
Therefore the productivity of non-market time is likely to rise as the (price-adjusted) quality of
nonparental day care falls.13 A fully specified model would account for the endogeneity between
these technologies and parental decisions but the regression estimates below do not. Instead, the
employment coefficients indicate the “effects” of working given the average differences in other
factors (such as child care) that accompany the variation in labor supply. This procedure is
reasonable if the time allocation decision precedes and determines the use of these other inputs.
It is less appropriate for considering how parental employment might affect child development in
a different institutional environment.




12
  In a formal model, these would be reflected by preference or production shifters.
13
  This could be modeled by specifying the child production function as Ct = C(Ct-1,qtLt,Ft,Vt), where q is
an efficiency parameter translating parental time into child outcomes that partly depends on differences in
the quality of parental and nonparental care. Parental time could then have a negative effect (q<0), if its
quality is sufficiently low relative to day care.


                                                 Page 6
                                          C. Econometric Issues
          The reduced-form model in equation (4) can be operationalized by assuming that the
cognitive assessment score (C) for child i at age t is a function of observable characteristics (X),
parental employment (H) at t-j, time-invariant unobserved parental characteristics (M), and
child-specific endowments (K), according to:
(5)                                Cit = a + Xitb + Hit-jct-j + Mi + Ki + eit,
where e is an i.i.d. error term.14 The basic econometric model is:
(6)                                        Cit = α + Xitβ + Hit-jγ + εit,
where εit = Mi + Ki + eit. The coefficient of primary interest γˆ measures the impact of parental
employment but will yield biased estimates if cov(Hit-jεit) ≠ 0. This occurs if M or K are
correlated with H. For example, a spurious positive relationship is induced if employed women
have relatively high home productivity (cov(Hit-jMi) > 0) or if the children of working mothers
have endowments resulting in high levels of cognitive skill (cov(Hit-jKi) > 0).
          The primary econometric strategy is to use the detailed information available in the
NLSY to directly account for many potential confounding factors. Omitted variables bias will be
further reduced by controlling for maternal employment prior to birth or after the third year of
life. To show how this is useful, assume that regressions of equation (6) yield E( γˆ t-j) = c t-j + d +
f, where d is the bias due to the correlation between work hours and a maternal fixed effect and f
is that due to the association between employment and unobserved child characteristics. Notice
that for period t-p in which parental job-holding has no causal effect, ct-p=0 and E( γ̂ t− p ) = d + f.
Including Hit-p in the model will therefore “soak up” much of the unobserved heterogeneity.
Therefore, the estimating equations often take the form:
(7)                                Cit = α + Xitβ + Hit-jγ + Hit-pδ + εit,
where Ht-j indicates work in the period of primary interest (the first three years of life) and Ht-p
refers to labor supply in earlier and later time periods.
          Sibling fixed-effect (FE) models are also useful because they are likely to provide an


14
     H is generally a vector indicating parental employment at various child ages.


                                                    Page 7
upper-bound (lower-bound) on the benefits (costs) of maternal employment. To see this,
consider the regression equation:
(8)                            Ciqt = α + Xiqtβ + Hiqt-jγ + Mqδ + εiqt,
where Ciqt indicates the assessment score of child i with mother q at age t and M is a vector of
mother-specific dummy variables that captures the effects of unobserved parental characteristics.
The regression error term in (8) is εiqt = Ki + eiqt, implying that γˆ will be upwards biased if
cov(HiqtKi) > 0, as seems likely. For instance, this occurs if mothers are less likely to be
employed (or work fewer hours) if their children have health or developmental problems.
                                 D. Data and Descriptive Results
       Data for this project are from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, a national
sample of U.S. residents born between January 1, 1957 and December 31, 1964 who have been
surveyed since 1979.15 In 1982 the NLSY began including questions on pregnancy, pre-natal,
and post-natal care. Information on children born to and living with female NLSY respondents,
referred to as the Children of the NLSY, has been collected at two year intervals beginning in
1986 with information used below through 1996. The combined data set provides a unique
source of longitudinal information on a large sample of children and their parents, including
great detail on maternal, child, and household characteristics, and various child assessments.
       The NLSY (through 1996) supplies data on children born to women aged 29 to 38 at the
end of 1995. This covers approximately 80 percent of childbearing for this cohort but is not
completely representative of all fertility, since some children born to older mothers (who tend to
have high incomes and education levels) are excluded. This selection should be kept in mind
when interpreting the results. However, the sample is more representative than that in almost all
previous studies. As shown in Table 1, prior research typically used only the 1986 or 1988
waves of the NLSY, when less than half of the cohort’s fertility had occurred.


15
  The NLSY originally included a representative sample of 6,111 youths, an oversample of 5,295 blacks,
Hispanics and economically disadvantaged whites, and a supplemental sample of 1,280 persons in the
military in September 1978. Interviews with the military subsample were suspended after 1984 and for
economically disadvantaged non-Hispanic whites after 1990. This data set is now sometimes referred to
as the NLSY79, to distinguish it from the new NLSY97 survey which covers a younger cohort.


                                                Page 8
        Cognitive development is proxied by scores on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(PPVT) and the Peabody Individual Achievement Test Reading Recognition subtest (PIAT-R)
and Mathematics subtest (PIAT-M).16 These are among the most widely used assessments of
preschool and early school-aged children and are known to have high test-retest reliability and
concurrent validity (Baker et al., 1993). The PPVT measures receptive vocabulary for Standard
American English and provides a quick estimate of verbal ability and scholastic aptitude. The
PIAT-M measures attainment in mathematics beginning with early skills, such as recognizing
numerals, and progressing to advanced concepts in geometry and trigonometry. The PIAT-R
measures word recognition and pronunciation ability; skills examined include matching letters,
naming names, and reading single words aloud.
        The PPVT was administered to children aged 3 and over in 1986, with additional
assessments for previously untested age-eligible children in 1988, 1990, 1992, 1994, and 1996.17
This investigation examines results for 3 and 4 year olds. The PIAT-M and PIAT-R were given
to children 5 and over in each survey year; this project uses data on 5 and 6 year olds.18 The
analysis below focuses on the “standard” cognitive assessment scores. These represent
transformations (on an age-specific basis) of the raw scores that were originally (during the
1970s) designed to have a normal distribution with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15.
Standard scores have been commonly used by previous researchers (e.g. Baydar & Brooks-
Gunn, 1991; Blau & Grossberg, 1992, Parcel & Menaghan, 1994); however, some models are
also estimated using raw and “percentile” scores, to insure that the results are not sensitive this
choice.19 For ease of interpretation, the dependent variables have been normalized to have a



16
   The PPVT test in the NLSY is a revised version of the original assessment and is frequently
abbreviated as the PPVT-R.
17
   All age-eligible children were assessed in 1992, even if they had previously been tested.
18
   Reading comprehension is also assessed for children receiving sufficiently high PIAT-R scores.
However, this test rarely provides useful information for children under 7 and is not utilized here.
19
   The percentile scores are derived from the standard scores and represent the ranking of individuals in
the age-normed distribution. Thus, they were uniformly distributed for the original norming population.
The raw scores are closer to a log-normal distribution, particularly for the PIAT-R and PIAT-M
assessments. One implication is that the percentile scores will tend to place more weight on observations
in the middle of the distribution and raw scores on those at its upper-tail than will the standard scores.


                                                 Page 9
standard deviation of one. Therefore, the regression coefficients show the standard deviation
change in the test score predicted by a one unit change in the explanatory variable.
        Maternal employment is measured for the quarter prior to pregnancy (the fourth quarter
before birth), the pregnancy period (the next 3 quarters), and the first through fourth years of the
child's life. Although most regressions control for average weekly employment hours divided by
40, the proportion of weeks worked is sometimes examined as an alternative.20 Thus, a one unit
change in the labor supply variable corresponds to switching from no employment to 40 hours
per week of work or from never holding a job to working in every week of the period.
Information is also available on when prior to delivery the mother stopped working and how
soon after it she returned to a job. These data are used to analyze decisions to stop and restart
employment during the period surrounding birth.
        The NLSY contains limited information on the employment of fathers who reside with
interviewed mothers. Specifically, data on hours or weeks worked in the calendar year
preceding the survey date are used to construct variables indicating average weekly work hours
(divided by 40) or the proportion of weeks worked during the year.21 The analysis of paternal
employment is restricted to children with fathers living in the household at the interview date of
the fourth calendar year after birth, since these men are likely to have been with the child during
the first three years. For children born before (on or after) July 1, year 1 refers to the calendar
year of birth (the next calendar year). Thus, year 1 includes the majority of the child’s first year
of life. Years 2 through 4 are defined in reference to year 1.22
        This analysis exploits the extensive child, maternal, and household information available
in the NLSY. The vector of background variables, labeled “basic” characteristics because they


20
   Work weeks and hours cover all jobs held by the respondent. In the few cases where information on
secondary jobs is missing, the variables are calculated using data for the main job only. NLSY mothers
with a job but on maternity leave are generally categorized as employed. Thus, employment rates
immediately after birth will be overstated and the effects of maternal work during this period may be
underestimated. However, few women are on maternity leave for more than a few weeks (Klerman &
Leibowitz, 1994), so the resulting bias is likely to be small.
21
   The more detailed employment history included for mothers is not available for spouses.
22
   Father’s weeks worked are not reliably reported prior to 1981 (there are virtually no observations with
zero weeks.) Therefore, the data on paternal employment are restricted to the period after 1980.


                                                 Page 10
have frequently been controlled for in previous research, contains continuous measures of birth
order, mother's age at child birth (in years), her highest grade completed, and a quadratic for
child age (in months). Also included are dummy variables for race/ethnicity (2 variables),
residence in an SMSA or central city (2 variables), and sex of the child. Unless otherwise noted,
all explanatory variables are measured as of the child assessment date. Table A.1 provides a
detailed description of the variables used in this analysis.
        A second set of regressors, called “supplemental” characteristics encompass personal and
household information that has generally not been held constant in prior work such as: the
mother's number of siblings, her Armed Forces Qualifications Test (AFQT) score, place of birth,
location at age 14 (3 variables), and whether magazines, newspapers, or library cards were in her
home at 14 (3 variables). Also included are data on the relative ages of the child’s siblings (4
variables), the mother’s marital status at the survey date before pregnancy and the next 3 surveys
(8 variables), the place of birth and education of her parents, her family structure at age 14,
whether she attended a public or private secondary school, if the child's father lived in the home
at the assessment date, and whether family income was below the poverty line in the second
calendar year before the child's birth.23 These characteristics may directly influence the quality
of home investments or proxy unobserved determinants of them.
        “Attitude” characteristics control for maternal attitudes and experiences that may be
correlated with factors affecting child outcomes. These include religious affiliation and church
attendance in 1979 (6 variables), age at which the mother smoked her first cigarette (4 variables),
drug use prior to age 21 (4 variables), and her cumulative score on a family roles attitude scale.24
        “Pregnancy behaviors and birth outcomes” indicate pregnancy characteristics and early
child health or developmental problems that might affect future cognitive attainment and be

23
   Poverty status in the second year prior to birth is used to avoid confounding caused by any changes in
employment during pregnancy.
24
   The scale was constructed by assigning a value of 0 or 1 to each of eight questions and then summing
the results. Higher scores indicate greater work orientation and less traditional attitudes. For instance,
one was added to the scale for women who disagreed or strongly disagreed with the statement “a wife
who carries out her full family responsibilities doesn’t have time for outside employment” and for those
who agreed or strongly agreed that “men should share the work around the house with women, such as
doing dishes, cleaning, and so fourth”.


                                                 Page 11
correlated with maternal employment. Included are indicators of low birth weight (4 variables),
premature births (3 variables), long hospital stays at birth, hospitalization during the first year of
life, physician visits related to illness in the first 12 months, excessive or deficient weight gain by
the mother during pregnancy (3 variables), height-adjusted weight prior to pregnancy (4
variables), smoking and alcohol consumption during pregnancy (2 variables).25 This information
is used cautiously below, since employment in year 1 could affect infant health.
        “Maternal employment characteristics” control for weekly work hours in the fourth
quarter prior to birth, during pregnancy, and in year 4, as well as hourly wages (6 variables) and
the mother's occupation (6 variables) in the fourth quarter before birth. These variables supply
information on the opportunity costs of not working in the early years and may be correlated
with unobserved parental influences on child development. Some models hold constant family
incomes and the use or type of day care. Finally, age and highest grade completed by the father
(in the calendar year of birth) are controlled for when analyzing paternal employment.
        Data on one or more background characteristics are missing for some respondents. To
avoid excluding these persons, the relevant regressors were sometimes set to zero and dummy
variables created denoting the presence of missing values. For example, mothers not reporting
an AFQT score were given a value of zero and the “missing AFQT” variable was set to one.26
Alternatively, some dummy variables were given a one when the specified condition was met
and a zero when either it was not or the relevant data were missing.27
D.1 Patterns of Maternal Employment
        Figures 1 through 5 provide descriptive information on maternal employment during
pregnancy and the first three years of the child's life. Data are from the nationally representative


25
   Height-adjusted weight is categorized by body mass index (BMI) – weight (in kilograms) divided by
height (in meters) squared. Height is measured in 1981 and weight immediately before pregnancy.
26
   This strategy was used for number of siblings, marital status, age of smoking initiation, location and
language spoken in the home at 14, presence of the father in the household, poverty status before birth,
education of the mother's parents, birth weight, and gestational age. If information on maternal education
was missing when the child was 3 or 4 but available for ages 5 and 6, or vice versa, the earlier or later
value was used.
27
   For example, this was done for hospitalizations or doctor visits in the first year, pregnancy behaviors,
and residence in an SMSA at the survey date.


                                                 Page 12
subsample of the NLSY, although similar results are obtained using weighted data for the full
sample. Figure 1 displays histograms of weeks worked during the specified period. There is
always substantial bunching at the extremes of employment in all weeks or none at all – these
two categories account for 55 percent of pregnant women, 54 percent of mothers during year 1,
and 63 percent in years 2 and 3. There is somewhat more dispersion in work hours, but Figure 2
demonstrates that most women either do not hold jobs or work quite intensively. For instance,
66 percent are not employed or average more than 30 hours per week during pregnancy, as do
64, 66, and 66 percent in the first, second, and third years of the child's life.28
          The concentration of employment is more sharply highlighted in Figure 3, which
calculates average hours in weeks of work. Conditional on some employment, between 26 and
35 percent of women work exactly 40 hours per week and 67 to 74 percent average 30 or more
hours. By contrast, fewer than 1 in 4 (1 in 6) are employed less than 25 (20) hours per week.
Thus, most mothers with young children either do not hold jobs or work close to full-time,
suggesting that the econometric analysis is likely to obtain similar results whether controlling for
average work hours or the proportion of weeks worked.
          The “unconditional” probabilities in Figure 4 indicate that 72 percent of mothers hold
jobs while pregnant but less than one-fourth (24 percent) do so until giving birth. The
“conditional” estimates show employment probabilities for those working at some point during
pregnancy and demonstrate that one-third of such women remain employed until delivery. The
figure also illustrates that weekly hazard rates out of employment (displayed in percent terms and
multiplied by 5) are less than 2 percent per week during the first two-trimesters of pregnancy,
before increasing to around 3 percent in the seventh month, 4 to 5 percent in month 8, and then
rising to almost 20 percent in the week before birth.
          Figure 5 summarizes reemployment rates following the birth. One-fourth of mothers are
absent from jobs for less than one week after delivery, although some “employed” women may
initially be on maternity leave. Weekly reemployment hazard rates average 4 to 8 percent for the
next 10 weeks and then decline rapidly to 1 to 2 percent in the fourth through sixth months of the

28
     Work hours are top-coded at 50 in the histograms for expositional convenience.


                                                  Page 13
child's life and less than 1 percent for the remainder of the first year. The hazard rates typically
range between 0.2 and 0.6 percent per week during the second year and 0.1 to 0.2 percent in year
3. Seventy-seven (84) percent of women return to jobs by their child's second (third) birthday, as
do 70 (79) percent of those taking some time off work after birth.
D.2 Paternal Employment
        Most mothers stay home with their infants for a substantial period of time. The same is
not true of fathers. As detailed in the top half of Figure 6, 64 percent of men hold jobs in all 52
weeks of year 1 and 84 percent are employed at least 10 months; conversely, only 3 percent do
not work at all during the period and just 8 percent for less than 6 months.29 Similarly, 41
percent of fathers are employed in all weeks of the first three years and 84 percent average 10 or
more months of work annually. By contrast, less than 1 percent do not hold a job in any week
and fewer than 4 percent work in less than half of them.
        There are at least four reasons to believe that most joblessness does not occur because
fathers are choosing to invest time in young children. First, the nonemployment is
approximately evenly distributed across the first three years, rather than being concentrated in
the year 1 as expected if the absences are motivated by a desire to be with infants.30 Second,
over half (53 percent) of nonemployment is spent on temporary layoff or looking for new work,
suggesting that most work absences are involuntary.31 Third, fathers with substantial joblessness
possess characteristics associated with employment instability, implying that their time away
from work may be due to these factors.32 Fourth, time-diary evidence analyzed by Hofferth
(1999) indicates that nonworking fathers spend less time with their children than employed men.



29
   The information in this section refers to fathers living with mothers in the nationally representative
subsample of the NLSY at the survey date of the fourth year after birth.
30
   Among fathers jobless for less than six months during the three years (84 percent of the sample), 34
percent of the weeks occur during year 1 and 31 percent in year 3. By contrast, 63 percent of weeks
corresponding mothers are off work occur during the first year and just 22 percent in year 3.
31
   A larger proportion of nonemployment is devoted to job search or spent on layoff in year 1 than in
years 2 and 3, which would not be expected if fathers were choosing to spend time with infants.
32
   For instance, 28 percent of fathers jobless at least six months during the three years had less than 12
years of education, compared to 11 percent of those out of work fewer than 26 weeks; 28 percent of the
former group were under the age of 25 versus 19 percent of the latter.


                                                 Page 14
          The bottom half of Figure 6 shows the distribution of paternal hours in weeks of
employment.33 Once again, there is considerable bunching around 40 hours per week – over half
of men work exactly this amount in year 1. However, in sharp contrast to mothers, a large
proportion of fathers also work considerably longer hours. For example, 38, 29, and 12 percent
average at least 45, 50, and 60 hours of work per week in year 1 and 41, 23, and 8 percent do so
throughout the first three years. Conversely, only 10 percent of mothers average 45 or more
hours in weeks of employment during the child’s first year.
D.3 Descriptive Relationships
          Children with employed mothers have relatively high levels of cognitive achievement.
As shown on the top panel of Table 2, maternal employment of 30 or more hours per week is
associated a .2 to .3 standard deviation increase in PPVT, PIAT-R, and PIAT-M scores,
compared to nonworking women. Conversely, few differences are associated with part-time
employment (compared to full-time work). The bottom panel of the table demonstrates the need
for caution in placing any causal interpretation on these results, however, since the backgrounds
of children with nonworking mothers differ markedly in other ways as well. For example,
nonemployed women have relatively limited education, low AFQT scores, are much more likely
have been poor prior to pregnancy, and have high rates of low birth weight. These and other
factors are likely to be important sources of at least some of the disparities in child outcomes,
suggesting the need for a careful multivariate investigation.
                                         E. Regression Estimates
          The econometric analysis first examines the relationship between maternal employment
and the PPVT scores of 3 and 4 year olds. This outcome has received the most attention in prior
studies and the results obtained can be directly compared to that work. The reading and
mathematics skills of 5 and 6 year olds are considered next, followed by tests of the sensitivity of
the estimates to changes in samples or regression models.
          Table 3 displays the findings of 10 specifications for each of the three cognitive
assessments. The dependent variables in models (a) through (h) are standard test scores,

33
     Hours are top-coded at 70 in the histograms for expositional convenience.


                                                  Page 15
normalized to have a standard deviation of one. The last two columns show results for the
(similarly normalized) percentile and raw scores. Maternal employment refers to average
weekly work hours (divided by 40) in the specified period, except for column (h) which controls
for the fraction of weeks worked. Year 1 includes the first through fourth quarters after birth and
years 2 and 3 to the fifth through twelfth quarters subsequent to it. All models include
assessment year dummy variables. Additional regressors are detailed at the bottom of the table:
B, F, A, C, and E refer to the vectors of basic, supplemental, and maternal employment
characteristics described previously and detailed in Table A.1; I indicates controls for total
family income ($1996) during the calendar year before birth and the next 4 years.34
E. 1 Verbal Skills of 3 and 4 Year Olds
        The top panel of Table 3 summarizes the results for PPVT scores. Column (a) controls
only for maternal employment and the assessment year. As in the descriptive analysis, 3 and 4
year olds with working mothers have relatively high verbal ability – switching from no job to 40
hours of employment per week during the first (second and third) year of life is associated with a
.10 (.21) standard deviation rise in the PPVT score. However, much of this is due to
confounding factors rather than maternal job-holding. Thus, inclusion of the basic set of
covariates substantially reduces the parameter estimate for years 2 and 3 and switches the year 1
coefficient from positive to negative (model b). Taken at face value, these results suggest
harmful “effects” of maternal employment during the first year but with roughly offsetting
benefits for working during the next two years and closely resemble the findings of previous
researchers using similar models. However, the estimates are not robust to further controls for
heterogeneity. For instance, the supplemental characteristics added in column (c) virtually
eliminate the predicted benefit of working in years 2 and 3. Once this is done, however, the
extra variables in specifications (d) and (e) have little additional effect.




34
  This includes income from jobs, business/farm activities, government transfers (AFDC, Food Stamps,
SSI/public assistance, unemployment insurance, veteran's/disability benefits), alimony, and child support.


                                                Page 16
        Since labor supply is correlated over time, models (a) through (e) could combine the
effects of working in the first three years of life with those of jobs held at earlier or later dates.35
Previous and subsequent employment might also proxy some of the remaining heterogeneity.
For these reasons, column (f) adds controls for maternal employment characteristics during
pregnancy, in the quarter before it, and in year 4. Their inclusion strengthens the negative
predicted effect of working during year 1 (to .13 standard deviations), while modestly increasing
the (insignificant) positive coefficient for years 2 and 3. In this specification, a 40 hour per week
increase in employment throughout the first three years is correlated with a .07 standard
deviation decline in PPVT scores. These results suggest that maternal employment has more
negative effects than have been indicated by prior studies using less comprehensive controls for
maternal, family, and child characteristics.
        Maternal job-holding could benefit children by raising earnings. If so, the employment
coefficients would decline when income is held constant. However, as shown in specification
(g), controlling for family income has little effect on parameter estimates. A possible
explanation is that work is associated with decreases in other sources of financial support (e.g.
transfer payments or spousal earnings), so that family incomes actually do not rise very much.
However, the direct income effects, estimated from the regressions, are also small.
        Column (h) differs from model (f) by controlling for the proportion of weeks worked,
rather than average weekly work hours. In models (i) and (j), percentile and raw scores, rather
than the standard scores, are the dependent variables. Holding constant weeks rather than hours
of work attenuates the estimated effects, as expected since some variation in hours occurs within
weeks of employment, but only slightly. The negative impact predicted for job-holding in year 1
is somewhat greater when using percentile scores and that for employment in years 2 and 3
slightly smaller for the raw scores, however neither difference is large or significant. Thus, the
predicted impact of maternal employment appears to be robust to these changes in specification.



35
 The correlation between hours of work during pregnancy and year 1 is .700, for the representative
NLSY subsample. The correlation between years 2/3 and year 4 is .754.


                                                Page 17
E.2 Are the Results Consistent Across Alternative Cognitive Assessments?
       The findings above suggest that previous research focusing on the PPVT scores of 3 and
4 year olds may have presented an overly optimistic evaluation of the effects of early maternal
employment. This section demonstrates that the relationship between job-holding and child
development is also sensitive to the age of testing and the skills assessed, with more negative
results obtained when considering 5 and 6 year old children.
       PIAT-R and PIAT-M assessments are the dependent variables in the middle and bottom
panels of Table 3. The patterns of changes in parameter estimates across specifications are
broadly consistent with those for PPVT scores. Absent covariates other than the survey year,
there is again a positive association between maternal employment and cognitive achievement
(column a). The correlation shrinks and loses statistical significance when the “basic” regressors
are included (column b), declines further or becomes negative when supplemental characteristics
are added (specification c), but with little additional change for the extra controls in models (d)
and (e). The coefficients decrease still more when maternal employment characteristics are held
constant (column f). Finally, the inclusion of family incomes (specification g) does not
materially affect the results, and similar parameter estimates are obtained when the fraction of
weeks worked are controlled for or when percentile or raw scores are the dependent variables
(models h through j).
       Despite these similarities, the expected impact of early employment is markedly more
negative for 5 and 6 year olds than it was for younger children. Most strikingly, job-holding
during years 2 and 3 is predicted to have strongly detrimental impacts on PIAT-R and PIAT-M
performance. In specification (f), 40 hours per week of additional work is associated with
statistically significant .15 and .12 standard deviation reductions in reading and mathematics
scores. This contrasts with a small positive correlation for the PPVT assessment. As a result,
switching from no work to full-time employment throughout the first three years is predicted to
lower PIAT-R and PIAT-M scores by .24 and .16 standard deviations, compared to a much
smaller .07 standard deviation decrease in expected PPVT performance.




                                              Page 18
E.3 Timing and Interaction Effects of Early Maternal Employment
        Specifications with separate controls for work hours in years 2 and 3, summarized in the
top panel of Table 4, indicate that parental time investments during the second year of the child’s
life are particularly important for the reading skills of 5 and 6 year olds, whereas those occurring
in year 3 are more crucial for mathematics.36 Thus, a 40 hour increase in weekly labor supply
during year 2 reduces predicted PIAT-R scores by a statistically significant .13 standard
deviations, with no change in expected PIAT-M performance. A corresponding rise in work
hours during the third year is unrelated to reading achievement but is predicted to reduce math
scores by a statistically significant .12 standard deviations. Combined with the results for PPVT
scores, these findings suggest that the returns to parental time investments vary with the age of
the child and the type of cognitive skills considered.
        Maternal employment during years 2 and 3 raises the expected verbal scores of 3 and 4
year olds by about half as much as job-holding in the first year is predicted to reduce them. This
could occur because infants suffer losses when their mothers work but “catch-up” if the
employment continues for the next 2 years. Alternatively, the latter gains may be concentrated
among children whose mothers were not employed in year 1. The reductions in the PIAT-R and
PIAT-M scores associated with work in the second and third year could similarly vary with labor
force status in the first year.
        To address these issues, the bottom panel of Table 4 allows the employment coefficient
for years 2 and 3 to differ depending on whether or not the mother worked in year 1. The results
indicate that labor supply in the later period has more favorable effects if no job was held during
in the first year. For example, switching from 0 to 40 hours of work per week in years 2 and 3
raises predicted PPVT scores by .10 standard deviations if the mother was not employed in year
1 but by half as much if she was. The same change lowers the expected reading scores of 5 and
6 year olds by .11 standard deviations conditional on no job in year 1, with no effect on predicted
math performance, but is anticipated to reduce PIAT-R and PIAT-M scores by .17 and .16

36
  Except where noted otherwise, the remaining estimates control for the same covariates as column (f) of
Table 3 and use standard test scores as outcomes.


                                                Page 19
standard deviations if the mother also worked in the first year. This supplies further evidence of
the importance of time investments during infancy.
E.4 Employment Exit and Reentry
       An important decision made by mothers is when (if at all) during pregnancy to stop work
and how soon after birth to resume employment. To address these issues, I estimated models
with controls for average weekly work hours replaced by quadratics in the number of weeks
before birth the mother left employment (BEFORE) and after it (AFTER) until she returned to a
job.37 These regressions (not shown) suggest that PPVT, PIAT-R and PIAT-R scores reach a
maximum when mothers stay away from jobs for 90, 113, and 153 weeks after delivery.
Compared to an immediate resumption of employment, absences of this length increase expected
test performance by .09, .19, and .11 standard deviations.38 Thus, by this criteria, the “optimal”
post-birth employment absence exceeds 20 months for the verbal ability of 3 and 4 year olds and
two years for the reading or mathematics achievement of 5 and 6 year olds. These findings are
broadly consistent with the previously obtained results controlling for average work hours.
E.5 Subsamples
       Table 5 summarizes the findings of models estimated for population subgroups. The
specifications are the same as column (f) of Table 3, except that a combined indicator of
employment during the first three years is used. Full sample results, displayed in the top panel,
confirm that maternal job-holding has a small statistically insignificant negative predicted effect
on PPVT scores and a larger deleterious impact on expected PIAT-R and PIAT-M performance.
Switching from no work to full-time employment is predicted to reduce the three cognitive
scores by .04, .23, and .16 standard deviations respectively.




37
   BEFORE was top-coded at 40, since weeks greater than 40 imply no employment during pregnancy.
AFTER was top-coded at 156, reflecting the focus of this paper on employment during the first three
years. I also augmented the models with dummy variables indicating no work during pregnancy and a
return to a job within one week of giving birth, under the assumption that this might capture some
otherwise uncontrolled for heterogeneity. However, the inclusion of these variables never materially
affected the results.
38
   The p-values on the null hypothesis of no effect are .251, .002, and .113.


                                               Page 20
           The second panel limits the analysis to first-born children. The impact of maternal
employment on younger siblings could be influenced by family dynamics not fully accounted for
in the econometric models. For example, the health or psychological problems of an older child
might affect both maternal job-holding and the allocation of non-market time between children.
However, the estimates are similar to those for the full sample – a 40 hour increase in weekly
employment reduces PPVT, PIAT-R, and PIAT-M performance by .10, .23, and .12 standard
deviations – suggesting that these omissions do not introduce serious bias.
           Time and income are likely to be particularly limited in single-parent households, and
family composition could be correlated with characteristics affecting the quality of time
investments or of the home environment. These possibilities are investigated in the third and
fourth panels of Table 5. The “father present” category refers to children whose biological
fathers are in the household on the survey date of the fourth calendar year after birth. The
“father not present” results are for children whose fathers are not in the home at that time. The
“spouse present” and “spouse not present” subsamples are divided by whether a husband (not
necessarily the biological father) is in the household during all or none of the survey dates in the
first three calendar years following the child's birth.39
           Given the relatively small sample sizes, the employment coefficients are estimated
imprecisely. Nevertheless, the results hint that maternal job-holding is more harmful for
“traditional” than “nontraditional” families. Thus, early employment is negatively related to
PPVT scores for two-parent families but positively correlated with them in female-headed
households. A similar pattern holds for the reading and math skills of 5 and 6 year olds,
although there is some variation across outcomes and stratification criteria. These findings are
consistent with the possibility that the quality of the home environment or of parental time is
relatively high in two-adult families, or that the income provided by maternal employment is
especially beneficial in those headed by the mother.




39
     Children with a male adult present in some but not all years are excluded from this analysis.


                                                    Page 21
          The last panel divides the sample into working women earning more or less than $10 per
hour ($1996) in the fourth quarter before birth.40 Maternal employment is negatively related to
the PPVT scores of high but not low earners, which is consistent with the possibility that the
mother’s earnings yield relatively large benefits when wages are low. However, a similar result
is not obtained for the PIAT-R or PIAT-M assessments.
E.6 Alternative Specifications
          The robustness of the results was tested across a variety of alternative econometric
specifications. Potential nonlinearities in the effects employment were examined by including a
quadratic for maternal work hours or dummy variables indicating hours above or below specified
thresholds (e.g. 25 hours per week). These estimates generally indicated a monotonic
relationship between labor supply and cognitive outcomes, although with some suggestion that
employment exceeding 20 hours per week in the first (second and third) year had particularly
negative effects on PPVT (PIAT-R and PIAT-M) performance.
          The impact of maternal job-holding was allowed to differ across high and low achievers
through a series of quantile regression models examining the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th
percentiles of the test scores. These estimates did not reveal a pattern of differential effects
across achievement levels for the PIAT-R and PIAT-M assessments. Conversely, employment
was predicted to have more negative impacts on high than low PPVT scores; the coefficient
(standard error) on average weekly hours in years 1 through 3 was .113 (.089), .005 (.095), -.066
(.062), -.105 (.075), and -.196 (.079) at the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles.41
          Fixed-effect models were estimated by restricting the sample to siblings and including a
vector of mother-specific dummy variables. As discussed, these models will understate the costs
of maternal employment if women supply less labor when their children have health or
developmental problems. The results are consistent with this expectation. The FE estimate
(standard error) for average weekly work hours in years 1 through 3 is .077 (.095), -.166 (.101)
and -.114 (.104) for PPVT, PIAT-R and PIAT-M scores, compared to corresponding OLS results

40
     Women not working at this time are excluded. Other wage thresholds were also considered.
41
     The standard errors are bootstrapped estimates obtained by resampling the data 20 times.


                                                 Page 22
of -.058 (.095), -.282 (.069), and -.188 (.070).42 However, even with a likely upwards bias, the
point estimates from the FE models suggest a negative relationship between early maternal
employment and the reading or mathematics achievement of 5 and 6 year olds.
        A final set of specifications added controls for the incidence or duration of breast-
feeding, which has been linked to improved cognitive development (Anderson, Johnstone, and
Remley, 1999). Working mothers are less likely to breast-feed, which could explain a portion of
the negative effect of maternal employment, particularly during the first year. However, the
results provide little support for this possibility. Breast-feeding is positively associated with the
assessment scores but its inclusion only slightly reduces the magnitude of the year 1 employment
coefficient, and has no impact for working in years 2 and 3.43
                                            F. Child Care
        Nonparental child care has been ignored until now. One concern is that the type or
amount of care might be influenced by work decisions, in which case controlling for it might
inappropriately attenuate the effects of maternal employment. However, the impact of job-
holding could also vary with day care arrangements. For instance, the negative effects of
working might be due to the low average quality of nonparental care in the United States.44 This
section addresses these issues by incorporating a limited analysis of child care. The NLSY is
less than ideal for this purpose. Information is available on the number and type of arrangements
but not (after 1989) on the intensity, cost, or quality of care. Also, the family background
characteristics controlled for are likely to better account for heterogeneity in the home
environment or parental time investments than of child care, implying a greater role for omitted
variables bias. These restrictions should be kept in mind when interpreting the results.
        The first panel of Table 6 displays the percentage of children, in the nationally
representative subsample of the NLSY, receiving nonparental care during the first three years

42
   The sample sizes were 3111, 3596, and 3686 for the PPVT, PIAT-R and PIAT-M scores.
43
   The most significant change is that the coefficient for year 1 work hours on PIAT-M scores increases
from -.036 without controls for breast-feeding to -.033 (-.021) when the incidence (duration) of breast-
feeding is held constant.
44
   Helburn & Howes (1996) indicate that 86 percent of day care centers provide “mediocre or poor”
services and that only 9 percent of family child care homes supply “good” quality care.


                                                 Page 23
and the type of the first arrangement of that care.45 The second panel shows the fraction
receiving any day care or center-based care, as a function of maternal work hours. Employment
and child care are closely connected – over 85 percent of mothers working 30 or more hours per
week use nonparental care, compared to less than one-fifth of women who do not hold jobs. Day
care use also rises with child age, from 44 percent in year 1 to 54 percent in year 3, because
nonemployed mothers are more likely to place toddlers (than infants) in care and since women
with older children are more likely to work. Interestingly, the increase in day care use between
the first and third year is entirely accounted for by growth in center-based care. Also, relatively
few children are placed in multiple types of care during a single year, implying that little
information is lost by focusing on the first arrangement.
        Table 7 summarizes the results of econometric models that include interactions between
maternal work hours and the use of day care or the type of the first arrangement.46 The first row
of column (a) shows the predicted effect of full-time employment but no nonparental care. The
second row indicates the additional impact of placing the child in day care; specification (b)
illustrates the corresponding differentials associated with alternative types of care.
        Holding maternal work hours constant, nonparental care does not have a consistent
relationship with child cognitive development. Children placed in care during the first year have
slightly lower verbal ability at ages 3 and 4 but marginally higher levels of reading or
mathematics achievement two years later (see model a), although fairly large standard errors
imply that these results need to be interpreted with caution. Day care in years 2 and 3 is
associated with insignificantly higher PPVT and PIAT-M scores but with no difference in PIAT-
R performance. Interestingly, the estimates in specification (b) hint that children in center-based
care during the first year of life do relatively poorly, whereas the reverse is true when this

45
   Types of care are not mutually exclusive. For example, a child can be cared for by a relative in the
mother’s home.
46
   The regression model is: Cit = α + Xitβ + Hit-jγ + Hit-jDit-jδ + εit, where Dit-j indicates whether
nonparental care is used or the type of the first arrangement. Table 7 displays γ̂ and δ̂ . The child care
arrangements are defined here so as to be mutually exclusive. When the first arrangement in year 2 is
with a relative but in year 3 it is in a center, the combined year 2 and 3 dummy variable for relative care is
set to 1, while that for center-based care is coded as 0.


                                                  Page 24
arrangement is chosen in years 2 and 3. Generally, these results conform to prior research
finding small and inconsistent effects of nonparental care on child development. Most
importantly for this analysis, the addition of controls for day care has little impact on the results
for maternal employment.
                                     G. What About Fathers?
       The preceding analysis suggests the importance of maternal time investments. But what
about fathers? While it is possible that mothers provide unique inputs, it seems likely that there
is at least some substitutability of time investments between parents. Since men are typically
paid more than women, however, larger income benefits could accrue to paternal employment.
       These issues are addressed in Table 8, which summarizes econometric results for NLSY
children with both parents in the household on the interview date of the fourth calendar year after
birth. Parental employment refers to average weekly work hours (divided by 40) during years 1
through 3. Column (a) holds constant maternal hours, as well as the standard set of covariates.
The labor supply of mothers is once again estimated to have a small and insignificant negative
impact on the verbal ability of 3 and 4 year olds but substantial detrimental effects on the reading
and math achievement of children aged 5 and 6. Column (b) adds controls for paternal
employment. This has virtually no effect on the estimates for maternal job-holding, indicating
that the findings of previous sections are unlikely to be seriously biased by this omission, but
suggests that the employment of fathers has a beneficial impact on children – working 40 extra
hours per week throughout the first three years is associated with .18, .07, and .09 standard
deviation increases in PPVT, PIAT-R, and PIAT-M scores.
       This positive “effect” of paternal employment is probably due to omitted variables bias.
As discussed, joblessness is concentrated among a relatively small fraction of fathers who are
likely to provide low quality time investments. Regressions corresponding to specification (b),
but controlling weeks rather than hours worked, reveal a strong positive relationship between
weeks of employment and child test scores; switching from no work to employment in all 156
weeks is predicted to raise PPVT, PIAT-R, and PIAT-M performance by .40, .34, and .24
standard deviations (with standard errors of .10, .11, and .11). Such large positive correlations


                                               Page 25
are to be expected if men working few weeks have unobserved characteristics associated with
poor child outcomes. Column (c) partially addresses this possibility by including controls for the
father’s work hours in year 4 and his age and education in the calendar year of the child’s birth.
Doing so reduces the paternal employment coefficient for PIAT-R scores by over one-half but
has little effect on the PPVT or PIAT-M parameter estimates.47
        The remainder of the table details several strategies for better accounting for the
heterogeneity between working and nonworking fathers. Specification (d) averages paternal
hours over weeks of employment, rather than all weeks.48 These “conditional” averages are
useful if differences in weekly employment probabilities are unrelated to desired time
investments in children. The last 4 columns of Table 8 delete from the sample children whose
fathers work less than a minimum number of weeks during years 1 through 3. Models (e) and (f)
require employment in at least three-quarters of all weeks; columns (g) and (h) impose the more
stringent criteria that joblessness totals 13 weeks or less. Given the high rates of paternal
employment, relatively few children are excluded by these work restrictions – 12-13 percent in
the first case and 24-25 percent in the second. At a minimum, these specifications show the
effects of paternal hours for the vast majority of children whose fathers hold jobs most of the
time. More optimistically, they may control for the heterogeneity associated with differences in
weeks worked.
        These estimates never reveal a large or significant positive correlation between paternal
labor supply and the child outcomes. Instead, negative effects are quite commonly predicted. In
column (d), a 40 hour per week increase in fathers’ employment is associated with a .17 standard
deviation reduction in PIAT-R scores and modest .05 and .04 standard deviation increases in
PPVT and PIAT-M performance. The small gains for 5 and 6 year olds are eliminated when
restricting the sample to children whose fathers have worked most of the first three years. For
instance, in specifications (g) and (h), an extra 40 hours of weekly employment reduces

47
   I experimented with including paternal work hours in year 0. The results were similar to those shown
but are more difficult to interpret because of the larger number of missing values.
48
   Children whose fathers do not work at all during the three years (less than one percent of the sample)
are excluded.


                                                 Page 26
anticipated PIAT-R (PIAT-R) performance by .16 to .17 (.07 to .09) standard deviations. These
decreases are one-half to three-quarters as large as those predicted for corresponding maternal
job-holding.49
        The coefficients on maternal and paternal employment have the same signs in columns
(e) through (h). This suggests that time investments of mothers and fathers have qualitatively
similar effects on children, raising the possibility of substitution across parents. The stronger
negative impacts observed for mothers could reflect actual differences. For instance, only
women can breast-feed and men receive higher average wages, implying potentially larger
income effects. Alternatively, they may occur because heterogeneity across fathers has been less
adequately controlled for.
                                             H. Discussion
        This research suggests that parental investments at the beginning of life play an important
role in fostering the cognitive development of children. Maternal employment in the child’s first
year is associated with lower verbal ability at ages 3 and 4, with only partially offsetting
increases for working during the second and third year. When the reading and mathematics
performance of 5 and 6 year olds are considered, the predicted effect of job-holding remains
negative during the second and third years, and the cumulative effect of early employment
appears quite detrimental. These findings suggest that prior research may have presented an
overly optimistic assessment of the impact of work by mothers. Paternal employment is harder
to examine because the data are less adequate and most periods of joblessness are likely to be
unrelated to investments in young children. However, the analysis hints that fathers’ time is also
important, raising the possibility of substitution between maternal and paternal investments.
        Our confidence in these results will be strengthened if future research confirms these
patterns and identifies mechanisms for the effects. We need to better understand the role of child
care, the impact of maternal labor supply on other child outcomes (e.g. health or socioemotional

49
  Specifications that include a quadratic in paternal work hours suggest that the negative effects for 5 and
6 year olds are concentrated among fathers employed relatively long hours. For instance, in models
corresponding to specification (g), PIAT-R and PIAT-M scores are predicted to peak at 34 and 50 hours
of work per week. However, the coefficients are imprecisely estimated.


                                                 Page 27
development), and the role of paternal employment. Notwithstanding these caveats, the
estimates suggest that substantial cognitive gains accrue to children whose mothers stay home
for at least two to three years after giving birth. For instance, working 40 hours per week
throughout the first three years is associated with a .23 (.16) standard deviation reduction in the
reading (math) performance of 5 and 6 year olds. Losses of this size are qualitatively significant
– they are equivalent to those predicted by a 2 to 5 year increase in maternal education – and
Currie & Thomas (1999) provide evidence that early test scores have important effects on future
educational and labor market outcomes, indicating that the cognitive gains may translate into
lasting economic effects.50
        By contrast, 77 (84) percent of the mothers in the representative portion of the NLSY
return to work before their child's second (third) birthday. One possible reason is that there has
been a concerted effort, since the mid-1980s, to increase the employment rates of women with
young children through changes in welfare and Medicaid policies, the Earned Income Tax
Credit, and government funding for child care (Meyer & Rosenbaum, 1999). A second is that,
even after enactment of the Family and Medical Leave Act, rights to maternity leave are limited
in the United States compared with other industrialized countries. Evidence of deleterious
impacts of maternal employment during the early years may be relevant for these policies.
        Parental investments during infancy appear particularly important. Not only is maternal
employment during this period associated with decreased verbal ability among 3 and 4 year olds,
but work during the second and third years is correlated with especially low performance on all
three cognitive assessments if the mother also held a job in the child’s first year. This suggests
potential benefits to children from expanded entitlements to parental leave or other “family-
friendly” policies that facilitate time at home with infants.
        Child cognitive development is just one argument in the household utility function,
however, raising the possibility of tradeoffs between this and other desirable outcomes. In
addition, the consequences of parental employment are likely to depend on the technologies and

50
  Currie & Thomas analyze the effects of reading test scores at age 7 on outcomes at age 33, using data
from the British National Child Development Survey.


                                                Page 28
institutional arrangements in place. For example, many European countries heavily subsidize
child care as the first step in the system of public education. The effects of early job-holding
could be quite different in such an environment. A better understanding of how the cognitive
development of children is affected by parental employment might facilitate designing less costly
ways of achieving the same benefits. These represent important topics for future research.




                                              Page 29
                                             References

Anderson, James W., Bryan M. Johnstone, and Daniel T. Remley. 1999. “Breast-feeding and
   Cognitive Development: A Meta-Analysis” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 70, 525-
   535.

Baker, Paula C., Canada K. Keck, Frank L. Mott, and Stephen V. Quinlan. 1993. NLSY Child
   Handbook, 1986-1990. Columbus, OH: Center for Human Resource Research.

Baydar, Nazli and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 1991. “Effects of Maternal Employment and Child-Care
   Arrangements on Preschoolers’ Cognitive and Behavioral Outcomes: Evidence from the
   Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth” Developmental Psychology 27(6),
   932-945.

Becker, Gary S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Belsky, Jay. 1988. “The ‘Effects’ of Infant Day Care Reconsidered” Early Childhood Research
    Quarterly, 3, 235-272.

Belsky, Jay. And Michael J. Rovine. 1988. “Nonmaternal Care in the First Year of Life and the
    Security of Infant-Parent Attachment” Child Development 59, 157-167.

Blau, David M., David K. Guilkey, and Barry M. Popkin. 1996. “Infant Health and the Labor
    Supply of Mothers” Journal of Human Resources 31(1), 90-139.

Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber, and Anne E. Winkler. 1998. The Economics of Women,
    Men, and Work, third edition. Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Blau, Francine B. and Adam J. Grossberg. 1992. “Maternal Labor Supply and Children’s
    Cognitive Development” The Review of Economics and Statistics 74(3), 474-481.

Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children. 1994. Starting Points: Meeting
    the Needs of Our Youngest Children. New York: Carnegie Corporation of New York.

Caughy, Margaret O’Brien, Janet A. DiPietro, and Donna M. Strobino. 1994. “Day-Care
   Participation as A Protective Factor in the Cognitive Development of Low-Income
   Children” Child Development 65, 457-471.

Clarke-Stewart, K. Alison. 1989. “Infant Day Care: Maligned or Malignant?” American
    Psychologist 44(2), February, 266-273.

Clarke-Stewart, K. Alison. 1991. “A Home is Not A School: The Effects of Child Care on
    Children’s Development” Journal of Social Issues 47(2), 105-23.

Coleman, James S. 1988. “Social Capital and the Creation of Human Capital” American Journal
    of Sociology, 94, s95-s120.




                                           Page 30
Council of Economic Advisers. 1999. Families and the Labor Market, 1969-1999: Analyzing the
   “Time Crunch”. Washington, DC: Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the
   President, May.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1997. The First Three Years: Investments that Pay. Washington,
   DC: Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the President, April 17.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 1999. “Early Test Scores, Socioeconomic Status, and Future
    Outcomes”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #6943, February.

Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 1995. “Does Head Start Make A Difference” American
    Economic Review 85(3), June, 341-364.

Desai, Sonalde, P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, and Robert T. Michael. 1989. “Mother or Market?
    Effects of Maternal Employment on the Intellectual Ability of 4-Year Old Children”
    Demography 26(4), November, 545-561.

Duncan, Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 1997. “Income Effects Across the Life Span:
   Integration and Interpretation” in Greg J. Duncan and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (eds.)
   Consequences of Growing Up Poor. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 596-610.

Field, Tiffany M. 1991. “Quality Day-Care and Grade School Behavior and Performance” Child
     Development 62(4), August, 863-870.

Greenstein, Theodore N. 1995. “Are the “Most Disadvantaged” Children Truly Disadvantaged
    by Early Maternal Employment?” Journal of Family Issues 16(2), March, 149-169.

Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health”
    Journal of Political Economy 98(5, Part 1), 983-1007.

Harvey, Elizabeth. 1999. “Short-Term and Long-Term Effects of Early Parental Employment on
    Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth” Developmental Psychology 35(2),
    445-459.

Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. 1995. “The Determinants of Children’s Attainments: A
   Review of Methods and Findings” Journal of Economic Literature 33(4), December, 1829-
   1878.

Heckman, James J. 1999. “Policies to Foster Human Capital” National Bureau of Economic
   Research Working Paper No. 7288, August.

Helburn, Suzanne W. and Carollee Howes. 1996. “Child Care Cost and Quality” The Future of
    Children 6(2), Summer/Fall, 62-82.

Hofferth, Sandra L. 1999. “Women’s Employment and Care of Children in the United States”,
    mimeo, University of Michigan, August.




                                          Page 31
Hoffman, L.W. 1980. “The Effects of Maternal Employment on the Academic Studies and
    Performance of School-Age Children” School Psychology Review, 9, 319-335.

James-Burdumy, Suzanne. 1998. “The Effect of Maternal Labor Force Participation on Child
   Educational Attainment”, mimeo, Johns Hopkins University, October.

Jessup, Amber. 1998. “Production of Child Health and Maternal Labor Supply”, mimeo,
    University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, November.

Juster, F. Thomas and Frank P. Stafford. 1991. “The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
     Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement” Journal of Economic Literature 29(2),
     June, 471-522.

Karoly, Lynn A., Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Houbé, M. Rebecca Kilburn,
    C. Peter Rydell, Matthew Sanders, James Chiesa. 1998. Investing in Our Children: What We
    Know and Don’t Know About the Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa Monica,
    CA: RAND.

Klerman, Jacob A. and Arleen Leibowitz. 1998. “FMLA and the Labor Supply of New Mothers:
    Evidence from the June CPS”, mimeo, RAND, March.

Klerman, Jacob A. and Arleen Leibowitz. 1997. “Labor Supply Effects of State Maternity Leave
    Legislation” in Francine Blau and Ronald Erhenberg, eds., Gender and Family Issues in the
    Workplace. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 65-85.

Klerman, Jacob A., and Arleen Leibowitz. 1994.”The Work-Employment Distinction Among
    New Mothers” Journal of Human Resources, 29(2), 277-303.

Lamb, Michael E. and Sternberg, Kathleen J. 1990. “Do We Really Know How Day-Care
   Affects Children?” Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 11, 351-37.

Lazear, Edward and Robert Michael. 1988. Allocation of Income Within the Household.
    Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Leibowitz, Arleen. 1974. “Education and Home Production” American Economic Review, 64(2),
    May, 243-250. (1974a)

Leibowitz, Arleen. 1974. “Home Investments in Children” Journal of Political Economy, 82(2,
    part 2), s111-s131. (1974b)

Leibowitz, Arleen. 1977. “Parental Inputs and Children’s Achievement” Journal of Human
    Resources, 12(2), 242-251.

Lindberg, Laura D. 1996. “Women’s Decisions About Breastfeeding and Maternal Employment”
    Journal of Marriage and the Family 58(1), February, 239-251.




                                           Page 32
Mayer, Susan E. 1997. “Indicators of Children’s Economic Well-Being and Parental
   Employment” in Robert M. Hauser, Brett V. Brown, and William R. Prosser (eds.)
   Indicators of Children’s Well-Being. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 237-257.

McLanahan, Sara S. 1997. “Parental Absence or Poverty: Which Matters More? In Greg J.
   Duncan and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (eds.) Consequences of Growing Up Poor. New York:
   Russell Sage Foundation, 35-48.

Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 1999. “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
   the Labor Supply of Single Mothers”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper No. 7363.

Moore, Kristin A. and Anne K. Driscoll. 1997. “Low-Wage Maternal Employment and
   Outcomes for Children: A Study” The Future of Children 7(1), Spring 1997, 122-127.

Mott, Frank L. 1991. “Developmental Effects of Infant Care: The Mediating Role of Gender and
   Health” Journal of Social Issues 47(2), 139-58.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 1997. “Familial Factors Associated With the
   Characteristics of Nonmaternal Care for Infants” Journal of Marriage and Family 59, May,
   389-408. (1997a)

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 1997. “The Effects of Infant Child Care on Infant-
   Mother Attachment Security: Results of the NICHD Study of Early Child Care” Child
   Development 68(5), October, 860-879. (1997b)

Norberg, Karen. 1998. “The Effects of Daycare Reconsidered” National Bureau of Economic
   Research Working Paper #6769, October.

Parcel, Toby L. and Elizabeth G. Menaghan. 1994. “Early Parental Work, Family Social Capital,
    and Early Childhood Outcomes” American Journal of Sociology 99(4), January, 972-1009.

Shore, Rima. 1997. Rethinking the Brain: New Insights Into Early Development. New York:
    Families and Work Institute.

Stafford, Frank P. 1987. “Women’s Work, Sibling Competition, and Children’s School
     Performance” American Economic Review, 77(5), December, 972-980.

U.S. Department of Commerce. 1997. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1997 (117th
    Edition). Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Vandell, Dobrah L. and Janaki Ramanan. 1992. “Effects of Early and Recent Maternal
   Employment on Children from Low-Income Families” Child Development 63(4), August,
   938-949.




                                           Page 33
                                             Appendix

                              Table A.1: Variables Used in Analysis
Variable            Description
                                           Outcomes
PPVT                Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised: 3-4 year Olds
PIAT-M              Peabody Individual. Achievement Test, Mathematics: 5-6 year olds
PIAT-R              Peabody Individual. Achievement Test, Reading Recognition: 5-6 year olds
                                      Maternal Employment
Hours Worked        Hours worked (divided by 40) during specified period after giving birth
Weeks Worked        Proportion of weeks the mother worked during specified period after giving birth
Weeks Before        Weeks before birth of child since mother last worked
Weeks After         Weeks after birth of child until mother began employment
Weeks Pregnancy     Proportion of weeks worked during the 3 quarters before birth
                   “Basic” Child, Maternal, and Household Characteristics (B)
Age                 Age of child (in months) at assessment date
Age Squared         Age Squared of child at assessment date
Race/Ethnicity      Child is Hispanic or a non-Hispanic Black (2 d.v.’s)
Female              Child is Female (d.v.)
Parity              Birth order of child
Residence           Lives in SMSA or central city at assessment date (2 d.v.’s)
Mother's Age        Age (in years) of mother at the time of child's birth
Education           Highest grade completed by mother at assessment date
                     Supplemental Family and Maternal Characteristics (F)
Father Present      Father living in household at assessment date (d.v.)
Married             Mother is married at survey date before pregnancy and next 3 surveys (4 d.v.’s)
Divorced            Mother is separated, divorced, or widowed at survey date before pregnancy and
                    next 3 surveys (4 d.v.’s)
Poverty             Family income below poverty line in 2nd calendar year before child's birth (d.v.)
Siblings            Mother's number of siblings (top-coded at 15)
AFQT Score          Mother's score on the Armed Forces Qualification Test in 1980
Foreign Born        Mother born outside the United States (d.v.)
Foreign Language    Foreign language spoken in the mother's home at age 14 (d.v.)
Location            Mother lived outside U.S., in Southern U.S., or in rural area at age 14 (3 d.v.’s)
Magazines           Mother had magazines in home at age 14 (d.v.)
Newspaper           Mother's family received a newspaper at age 14 (d.v.)
Library Card        Someone in mother's household had a library card at age 14 (d.v.)
Grandmother1        Mother's mother was born outside the United States (d.v.)
Grandmother2        Highest grade completed by mother's mother
Grandfather1        Mother's father was born outside the United States (d.v.)
Grandfather2        Highest grade completed by mother's father
Private             Mother's current or last secondary school attended in 1979 was private (d.v.)
Both Parents        Mother lived with both mother and father at age 14 (d.v.)
Mother Only         Mother lived with mother but no male in household at age 14 (d.v.)
Siblings            Sibling born ≤ 18, 19-36 months before/after child’s birth (4 d.v.’s)
Religion            Religion was Baptist, Catholic, or no religious affiliation in 1979 (3 d.v.’s)
                                         Table A.1 (Continued)
                           Maternal Attitudes, Religion, and Drug Use (A)
Church                Attended church < once per week, weekly, > once per week in 1979 (3 d.v.’s)
First Smoked          Smoked first cigarette by ≤ 10, 11-13, 14-16 years old, had not smoked by 1984 (4
                      d.v.’s)
Drug Use              Mother had tried marijuana/hashish, amphetamines/stimulants, cocaine, other
                      drugs (barbiturates, sedatives, tranquilizers, psychedelics, heroin, other narcotics,
                      or inhalants) by age 21 (4 d.v.’s)
Attitudes             Cumulative Score on 8 Family Roles Attitude Questions
                      Pregnancy Characteristics and Child Birth Outcomes (C)
Gestation             Length of Gestation <35, 35, or 36-37 weeks (3 d.v.'s)
Birth Weight          Birth weight <57, 57-72, 73-88, or 89-112 ounces (4 d.v.'s)
Long Hospital Stay    Child stayed in hospital longer than mother following birth (d.v.)
Hospitalization       Child was hospitalized during first year of life (d.v.)
Doctor Visit          Child visited doctor due to illness during first year of life (d.v.)
Prenatal Care         1st Prenatal Care in 1-2, 3-4, 5-6 month of pregnancy (3 d.v.'s)
Alcohol               Mother drank at least one alcoholic beverage per month during pregnancy (d.v.)
Smoker                Mother smoked during pregnancy (d.v.)
Weight Gain           Weight gain during pregnancy <0, 0-15, >50 lbs. (3 d.v.'s. ref. group, 16-49 lbs.)
Body Mass Index       Mother’s BMI before pregnancy <18.5, 25-30, 30-35, >35 (4 d.v.'s)
                 Previous and Subsequent Maternal Employment Characteristics (E)
Hours                 Average weekly work hours in the 4th quarter before birth, during pregnancy, and
                      Year 4 (3 variables)
Wages                 Hourly wages ($1996) in 4th quarter prior birth were: <$5, $7-$7.49, $7.50-$10,
                      $10-$15, $15-$20, >$20 (6 d.v.’s)
Occupation            Occupation of main job in 4th quarter prior to birth was: professional/technical,
                      managerial, sales, clerical, operative, service (6 d.v.’s)
                                            Other Regressors
Income                Family income ($1996) in calendar year before birth and next 4 years (5 variables)
Day Care              Child in regular nonparental care in specified year after birth
Day Care Mode         First day care arrangement during specified period provided by relative,
                      nonrelative, or in group care center/nursery school/preschool (3 d.v.’s)
                                           Paternal Variables
Paternal Hours        Father’s average weekly work hours in years 1 through 3. Year 1 refers to the
                      calendar year of birth (the next year) for children born before (on or after) July 1
Paternal Age          Father’s age in calendar year of child’s birth
Paternal Education    Father’s highest grade completed in calendar year of child’s birth

Note: All variables are obtained from the NLSY. Body Mass Index is calculated using weight
immediately before pregnancy and height at the 1981 interview.
   Table 1: Previous Research Examining The Effects of Parental Employment On Cognitive Development
  Study      Data/Sample                           Results                                    Comments
Baydar &     NLSY, 572      Maternal employment during the first year of life    Other controls limited to
Brooks-      white 3-4      has negative effects on PPVT. No negative            maternal AFQT score, child
Gunn         year olds (in  effects for working in second or third year.         gender, parity, poverty status.
(1991)       1986)          Possible positive effects for working all three      Nonlinear relationship between
                            years. Some evidence of bigger negative effects      work hours in first year and
                            for entering work earlier in the first year.         outcomes.
Blau &       NLSY, 874      Maternal employment in the first (second &           Controls for parent’s education,
Grossberg 3-4 year olds     third) years of life associated with lower (higher)  household incomes,
(1992)       (in 1986)      PPVT scores. No net effect of working in all         race/ethnicity, gender, parity, %
                            three years. Much of second & third year benefit     of life in female-headed
                            is due to higher incomes. Larger negative first      household. IV models estimated,
                            year effects for high income households.             but few plausible instruments.
Desai,       NLSY, 503 4 Negative effect of maternal employment on               Controls for maternal
Chase-       year olds (in  PPVT scores, particularly for continuous             characteristics (age, verbal
Lansdale,    1986)          employment in first 4 years. Strong negative         ability, education, marital
& Michael                   effect of continuous maternal employment and         history, race/ethnicity),
(1989)                      job-holding in the first year for boys in high       household income, birth order,
                            income families. Possible positive effect of         sibling age, number of day care
                            employment beginning in the second year for          arrangements.
                            girls. Maternal employment negatively related to
                            fertility. More siblings and more closely spaced
                            siblings sometimes negatively related to PPVT.
Greenstein NLSY, 2040       Little relationship between maternal employment      Controls for child and maternal
(1995)       4-6 year olds  and PPVT score. Interactions between maternal        characteristics and family
             (in 1986,      employment and family income or cognitive            environment. Results difficult to
             1988, 1990)    stimulation also insignificant. No evidence that     interpret because of potential
                            maternal employment has more detrimental             collinearity between regressors.
                            effects for high income households.
Harvey       NLSY, 3-12     Negative effect of maternal work hours on PPVT       Individual, maternal, and
(1999)       year olds in   and PIAT scores at young ages, which weakens         household characteristics
             1986, 1988,    or disappears at later ages. Some differences        controlled for. Regressors and
             1990, 1992,    with marital status, income, or paternal             samples vary across models
             1994 (sample employment.                                            making the results difficult to
             sizes vary)                                                         interpret, often subject to omitted
                                                                                 variables bias.
James-       NLSY, 2119     Maternal employment in first (second) year of        Controls for individual, maternal
Burdumy      3-4 year olds  life lowers (raises) PPVT scores. The cumulative and household characteristics.
(1998)       (1986, 1988)   effect of working in all of the first three years is Household fixed-effect and
                            slightly negative. Mothers with high abilities       instrumental variable techniques
                            tend to work relatively few hours in first year but  used to control for selection bias
                            more hours in later years.                           and unobserved heterogeneity.
Leibowitz Sesame data,      Full-time maternal employment negatively (but        Controls for parent’s education,
(1977)       805 3-5 year   not quite significantly) associated with PPVT.       race/ethnicity, native language,
             olds (in 1969) No effect of part-time employment. Positive          home environment, day care
                            effect of labor saving devices (dishwashers) in      arrangements, number of
                            home and of reading to children/self, but negative children.
                            effects of other activities. Negative relationship
                            between number of children & PPVT.
Moore &     NLSY, 1154      Maternal employment in 1991 associated with          Controls for sex, age, birth order,
Driscoll    5-14 year       higher PIAT Reading and Math scores. Most            health, birth weight, maternal
(1997)      olds (1992);    effects eliminated after controlling for child,      characteristics & attitudes,
            mothers on      maternal, & household characteristics, although      family employment & AFDC
            AFDC during     behavioral problems and higher math scores           history. Omitted variable bias
            1986-1990       persist for daughters of higher earning women.       probably persists and may
                                                                                 explain benefits of working.
Mott        NLSY, 2387      Maternal employment averaging more than 20           Comprehensive controls for
(1991)      1-4 year olds   hours per week in second quarter of child’s life     child & family characteristics
            (in 1986)       negatively related to PPVT scores (ages 3-4); no     including early health problems
                            effect on MFL scores (ages 1-3). No effect of        and substance use during
                            lower work hours. Employment in first quarter        pregnancy. Collinearity between
                            insignificantly negatively related to MFL scores.    maternal employment and child
                                                                                 care arrangements makes results
                                                                                 difficult to interpret.
Parcel &    NLSY, 768       Maternal employment during the first year or first   Comprehensive controls for
Menaghan    3-6 year olds   three years positively correlated with PPVT          child and parent characteristics,
(1994)      with            scores. Effect is not monotonic in work hours.       the home environment, and
            employed        Subsequent full-time maternal work correlated        working conditions. Results are
            mothers (in     with higher PPVT, compared to working part-          difficult to interpret because of
            1986)           time. Early (current) full-time paternal             potential endogeneity (e.g. home
                            employment associated with insignificantly lower     environment and work hours)
                            (higher) PPVT scores. Some evidence that             and collinearity (e.g. wage,
                            maternal employment is more problematic for          occupational complexity, and
                            less well-off women.                                 work hours) of regressors.
Stafford    SRC Time        Cognitive skills (measured by 7 indicators and a     Detailed teacher evaluations of
(1987)      Use Study, 77   composite) fall with the number of siblings          cognitive development.
            elem. school    (particularly males), rise with family income, and   Maternal employment refers to
            students (in    decline with mother’s market work hours in the       various ages prior to start of
            1981/2)         pre-school years.                                    school.
Vandell &   NLSY, 189       Maternal employment in first three years (and        Controls for the child’s race,
Ramanan     low income      subsequently) positively correlated with the         gender; mother’s age, education,
(1992)      non-Hispanic    mothers’ education, AFQT score, family income,       marital status, family income,
            second-         and quality of home environment. Employment          attitudes, AFQT and Rosenberg
            graders (in     in first three years correlated with higher PIAT-    self-esteem scores, and HOME
            1986)           math and insignificantly lower PPVT scores.          scale. Sample selection criteria
                            Recent employment correlated with higher PIAT-       is not specified.
                            reading and PPVT scores.

Notes: Abbreviations: NLSY: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth; SRC: Survey Research Center; MFL:
Memory for Location score; PIAT: Peabody Individual Achievement Test; PPVT: Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test.
                  Table 2: Sample Means of Selected Variables By Average
                    Weekly Work Hours of Mother in Specified Periods

                                                 Work Hours                   Work Hours
Variable                    Full                During Year 1             During Years 2 and 3
                           Sample
                                          0         1-29        ≥ 30      0        1-29        ≥ 30
Outcomes

PPVT                         92.2       89.2        94.0        94.1    87.9       93.7       93.5
                            [20.0]      (0.8)       (0.6)       (0.8)   (1.0)      (0.6)      (0.7)
PIAT-R                      105.5      104.2        106.0    107.0      103.3      105.9      106.8
                            [13.4]     (0.4)        (0.4)    (0.5)      (0.5)      (0.4)      (0.5)
PIAT-M                      101.0       99.5        101.7    102.5      98.7       101.6      102.0
                            [13.8]      (0.4)       (0.4)    (0.5)      (0.5)      (0.4)      (0.5)

Selected Regressors

Mother's Age at Birth        24.7       24.3        24.4        25.9    24.8       24.1       25.6
(in years)                              (0.1)       (0.1)       (0.1)   (0.1)      (0.1)      (0.1)
Mother's AFQT Score          67.9       61.9        70.6        73.8    61.5       68.4       72.6
                                        (0.6)       (0.6)       (0.7)   (0.8)      (0.6)      (0.6)
Mother's Education           12.5       12.0        12.6        13.2    12.0       12.4       13.1
(in years)                              (0.1)       (0.1)       (0.1)   (0.1)      (0.1)      (0.1)
Family in Poverty in 2nd     18.8       29.9        14.4         6.3    31.2       18.5        8.4
Year Before Birth (%)                   (1.3)       (1.2)       (0.9)   (1.7)      (1.1)      (0.1)
Low Birth Weight (%)          6.5        7.7         5.8         5.5     8.6        5.4        6.2
                                        (0.7)       (0.7)       (0.9)   (0.9)      (0.6)      (0.8)

Notes: Table displays averages for the nationally representative subsample of the NLSY. Year 1
refers to the first 4 quarters after birth; years 2 and 3 to the fifth through twelfth quarters after
birth. Standard deviations are in brackets; standard errors are in parentheses. The PPVT, PIAT-
R and PIAT-M indicate standard scores on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised, and
the Peabody Individual Achievement Reading Recognition and Mathematics Subtests. The
sample for these tests are 5-6 year (60-83 month) old children, except for the PPVT, where 3-4
year (36-59 month) old children are assessed. Mother's education is measured at the time her
child is 5 or 6 years old. Low birth weight indicates that the child weighed less than 5.5 pounds
at birth.
                                                           Table 3:
                Regression Estimates of the Effects of Maternal Employment on Child Cognitive Development
Time Period          (a)       (b)        (c)        (d)        (e)        (f)        (g)        (h)         (i)        (j)

                                                        PPVT Score
Year 1              .099      -.083      -.080      -.076      -.078      -.130      -.129      -.110      -.182       -.131
                   (.057)     (.048)     (.046)     (.046)     (.046)     (.054)     (.054)     (.052)     (.054)      (.048)
Years 2 and 3       .205       .120       .034       .043       .049       .063       .058       .052       .052        .042
                   (.054)     (.045)     (.045)     (.045)     (.045)     (.055)     (.055)     (.055)     (.055)      (.049)

                                                       PIAT-R Score
Year 1              .168       .028      -.004       .004       .013      -.085      -.086      -.125      -.082        -.092
                   (.054)     (.050)     (.049)     (.049)     (.049)     (.058)     (.058)     (.055)     (.058)      (.051)
Years 2 and 3       .125      -.009      -.069      -.070      -.080      -.151      -.149      -.115      -.141        -.120
                   (.051)     (.047)     (.047)     (.047)     (.047)     (.058)     (.058)     (.058)     (.058)      (.051)

                                                      PIAT-M Score
Year 1              .159       .034       .016       .020       .019      -.036      -.041      -.036      -.042        -.050
                   (.054)     (.050)     (.050)     (.050)     (.050)     (.059)     (.060)     (.056)     (.059)      (.053)
Years 2 and 3       .088       .004      -.061      -.064      -.065      -.119      -.118      -.127      -.125        -.096
                   (.051)     (.047)     (.048)     (.048)     (.048)     (.060)     (.060)     (.059)     (.060)      (.053)

Additional                                                               B,F,A,     B,F,A,     B,F,A,      B,F,A,      B,F,A,
                    None        B         B,F       B,F,A     B,F,A,C
Regressors                                                                C,E       C,E,I       C,E         C,E         C,E
Dependent         Standard   Standard   Standard   Standard   Standard   Standard   Standard   Standard   Percentile   Raw
Variable           Score      Score      Score      Score      Score      Score      Score      Score       Score      Score
Employment
                   Hours      Hours      Hours      Hours      Hours      Hours      Hours     Weeks       Hours       Hours
Variable
Notes: The table shows coefficients for OLS regressions of the specified assessment score, normalized to have a standard deviation of
1. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. PPVT scores are measured for children 36-59 months of age; PIAT scores for those
aged 60-83 months. “Standard” scores are used in all specifications except columns (i) and (j), where percentile and raw scores are
utilized. “Hours” indicate average weekly work hours divided by 40. “Weeks” refers to the proportion of weeks worked during the
specified period. Year 1 includes the first four quarters after birth; years 2 and 3 refer to the fifth through twelfth quarters after birth.
All models control for the assessment year. The categories of additional regressors are “Basic” Child, Maternal, and Household
Characteristics (B); Supplemental Family and Maternal Characteristics (F); Maternal Attitudes, Religion, and Drug Use (A);
Pregnancy Characteristics and Child Birth Outcomes (C), Previous and Subsequent Maternal Employment Characteristics (E), and
Family Incomes (I) in the calendar year before birth and the next 4 years. Full descriptions are provided in Table A.1 Sample sizes in
the hours equations range between 4200 and 4213 for PPVT scores, 4716 to 4729 for the PIAT-R, and 4875 to 4838 for the PIAT-M
assessment.
     Table 4: Alternative Regression Estimates of the Effects of Maternal Employment


Time Period                           PPVT                  PIAT-R                 PIAT-M


Year 1                                -.147                  -.064                   .057
                                      (.057)                 (.060)                 (.061)

Year 2                                 .050                  -.132                  -.004
                                      (.055)                 (.056)                 (.058)

Year 3                                 .013                  -.019                  -.116
                                      (.054)                 (.057)                 (.058)


Year 1                                -.114                  -.063                   .019
                                      (.062)                 (.066)                 (.067)

Years 2 and 3 if Hours in              .095                  -.106                  -.001
 Year 1 = 0                           (.083)                 (.088)                 (.090)

Years 2 and 3 if Hours in              .051                  -.167                  -.161
 Year 1 > 0                           (.060)                 (.063)                 (.064)


Notes: See notes on Table 3. The models control for the same variables as specification (f) of
that table, except that the effects of maternal employment are separately estimated for years 2
and 3 in the top panel; in the bottom panel, the effects of maternal employment in years 2 and 3
are allowed to differ depending on whether or not the mother worked in year 1.
            Table 5: Regression Estimates of the Overall Effect of Maternal
      Employment During the First Three Years For Alternative Groups of Children

Group                                  PPVT                  PIAT-R                  PIAT-M


Full Sample                            -.044                   -.234                  -.159
                                       (.056)                  (.060)                 (.061)


First-Born Children                    -.097                   -.229                  -.121
                                       (.078)                  (.090)                 (.090)

Father Present                         -.081                   -.186                  -.211
                                       (.067)                  (.073)                 (.074)
Father Not Present                      .098                   -.236                  -.022
                                       (.112)                  (.113)                 (.119)

Spouse Present                         -.089                   -.205                  -.096
                                       (.072)                  (.079)                 (.079)
Spouse Not Present                      .251                   -.061                   .095
                                       (.125)                  (.126)                 (.138)

Wage ≥ $10/hour                        -.162                   -.206                  -.087
                                       (.125)                  (.142)                 (.142)
Wage <$10/hour                          .016                   -.223                  -.110
                                       (.075)                  (.085)                 (.086)


Notes: See notes on Table 3. This table shows coefficients on average weekly work hours
during the first three years of the child's life. These are obtained from models controlling for the
same variables as specification (f) of Table 3. The second panel limits the analysis to first-born
children. The third divides the sample by whether the child’s father lives in the household on the
survey date of the fourth calendar year following the birth. The first row of the fourth panel is
restricted to children whose mothers have a spouse in the household at each of the survey dates
in the first three calendar years following birth. The second row refers to those whose mothers
do not have a spouse living in the household at any of the three survey dates. The fifth panel
stratifies the sample by the hourly wage (in $1996) of the mother in the fourth quarter prior to the
child’s birth; this analysis is restricted to women reporting wages.
       Table 6: Day Care Arrangements By Age of Child and Mother’s Work Hours
                                                              Time Period
                                              Year 1             Year 2              Year 3
Day Care Used                                 43.7 %              49.9 %              54.1 %
                                              (0.9)               (0.9)               (0.9)
Multiple Day Care Arrangements                  9.2                 8.8                8.4
                                               (0.5)               (0.5)              (0.5)
Day Care by Relative                           19.7                20.1               18.2
                                               (0.7)               (0.7)              (0.7)
Day Care by Nonrelative                        15.7                16.8               14.6
                                               (0.6)               (0.6)              (0.6)
Day Care in Mother’s Home                      11.0                11.1               10.9
                                               (0.5)               (0.5)              (0.5)
Day Care in Center or Preschool                 4.5                 9.5               15.1
                                               (0.4)               (0.5)              (0.6)

                                               Weekly Work Hours in Specified Period
                                                0                  1-29                ≥ 30
Day Care Used
   Year 1                                     13.0 %              50.3 %              87.6 %
                                              (0.9)               (1.4)               (1.2)
   Year 2                                      16.7                51.7               86.6
                                               (1.1)               (1.3)              (1.1)
   Year 3                                      20.2                57.2               85.9
                                               (1.2)               (1.5)              (1.1)
Day Care in Center or Preschool
   Year 1                                       0.8 %               4.9 %             10.3 %
                                               (0.2)               (0.6)              (1.1)
   Year 2                                       4.3                 9.1               16.1
                                               (0.6)               (0.8)              (1.2)
   Year 3                                       6.1                14.8               24.8
                                               (0.7)               (1.1)              (1.3)

Note: Table displays percentages of children in each category for the national representative
subsample of the NLSY. Standard errors are in parentheses. The top panel shows cell
percentages for all children in the specified age group. The bottom sample stratifies by average
weekly work hours of the mother in the year corresponding to that in which the child care is
received. The particular types of day care refer to the first arrangement in the specified year.
                   Table 7: Estimated Effect of Maternal Employment on
             Child Assessment Scores Under Different Child Care Arrangements
                                     PPVT                  PIAT-R                   PIAT-M
Regressor
                               (a)          (b)         (a)         (b)           (a)        (b)

Year 1
Work Hours                    -.092       -.096         -.111      -.122         -.070       -.076
                             (.074)      (.074)        (.077)     (.077)        (.079)      (.079)

Hours x Day Care              -.053                     .036                     .039
                             (.065)                    (.070)                   (.071)

Hours x Relative Care                     .005                     .066                      .106
                                         (.073)                   (.078)                    (.079)

Hours x Center Care                       -.126                    -.043                     -.127
                                         (.102)                   (.109)                    (.112)

Hours x Other Care                        -.097                    .043                      .011
                                         (.074)                   (.080)                    (.082)

Years 2 and 3
Work Hours                    .016        .020          -.144      -.139         -.175       -.172
                             (.084)      (.084)        (.085)     (.085)        (.086)      (.086)

Hours x Day Care              .057                      -.012                    .065
                             (.075)                    (.076)                   (.077)

Hours x Relative Care                     .047                     -.062                     .039
                                         (.080)                   (.081)                    (.082)

Hours x Center Care                       .130                     .095                      .131
                                         (.086)                   (.088)                    (.089)

Hours x Other Care                        .022                     -.015                     .054
                                         (.084)                   (.086)                    (.087)

Note: See note on Table 3. This table shows regression coefficients for interactions between
average weekly work hours (divided by 40) and the specified type of day care. Standard errors
are in parentheses. These estimates are obtained from models that otherwise correspond to
specification (f) of Table 3. Child care type indicates the first arrangement during the period.
Center care in years 2 and 3 refers to children whose first arrangement is in a center during one
of these years and who are not cared for by a relative (as the first arrangement) in either year.
     Table 8: Effects of Maternal and Paternal Employment During the First three years on Child Assessment Scores
                                                                                 Weeks Father Works In Years 1-3:
Parental                               Full Sample
                                                                                   ≥ 117                     ≥ 143
Employment
                          (a)         (b)         (c)          (d)         (e)              (f)       (g)             (h)

                                                        PPVT Score
Mother                    -.042       -.037      -.031        -.035        -.013            -.013    -.057            -.057
                         (.074)      (.074)     (.074)       (.074)       (.075)           (.075)   (.083)           (.083)
Father                                .182       .163         .054         -.016            -.022    -.019            -.029
                                     (.060)     (.067)       (.085)       (.088)           (.090)   (.100)           (.100)

                                                     PIAT-R Score
Mother                    -.170       -.168      -.149        -.152        -.192            -.195    -.229            -.229
                         (.084)      (.084)     (.084)       (.084)       (.089)           (.089)   (.098)           (.098)
Father                                .072       .030         -.166        -.086            -.188    -.158            -.171
                                     (.067)     (.076)       (.096)       (.103)           (.106)   (.117)           (.117)

                                                     PIAT-M Score
Mother                    -.145       -.143      -.129        -.127        -.139            -.139    -.142            -.141
                         (.083)      (.083)     (.083)       (.083)       (.089)           (.089)   (.098)           (.098)
Father                                .086       .085         .035         -.006            -.016    -.094            -.073
                                     (.066)     (.075)       (.096)       (.103)           (.105)   (.117)           (.117)
Paternal
                          No          No         Yes          Yes          Yes              Yes      Yes              Yes
Characteristics
Averaging of                         All         All         Weeks        All          Weeks         All         Weeks
Paternal Hours                      Weeks       Weeks        Worked      Weeks         Worked       Weeks        Worked
Notes: See note on Tables 3. The models control for the same regressors as specification (f) of that table, except that maternal
employment is averaged over the first three years. Columns (b) through (h) also hold constant the father’s average weekly work hours
(divided by 40) in the first three years. The sample is limited to children whose father resided in the mother’s household on the survey
date of the fourth calendar year following the birth and for whom information on paternal employment are available in all three years.
Columns (c) through (h) also control for the fathers age and number of years of schooling in the calendar year of the child’s birth, as
well as average hours of work in weeks of employment in year 4. Models (e) and (f) further restrict the sample to children whose
fathers worked at least 117 weeks during the three years; specifications (g) and (h) to those whose fathers were employed 143 or more
weeks. Fathers work hours during the first three years are averaged over all weeks in specifications (a) through (c), (e), and (g). They
are averaged over weeks of employment only in columns (d), (f), and (h). The latter “conditional” estimates, exclude children whose
fathers were never employed during the first three years. Sample sizes are 2324, 2462, and 2523 for PPVT, PIAT-R, and PIAT-M
scores for the full sample For the corresponding conditional estimates they are 2308, 2444, and 2505. Sizes of the subsample with
fathers working at least 117 weeks are 2044, 2150, and 2203, and for those with fathers employed 143 weeks or more they are 1752,
1840, and 1886.
