NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDICAID EXPANSIONS AND WELFARE CONTRACTIONS:
OFFSETTING EFFECTS ON PRENATAL CARE AND INFANT HEALTH?
Janet Currie
Jeffrey Grogger
Working Paper 7667
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7667
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

We would like to thank Aaron Yelowitz for helpful discussions about the administrative data. Bruce Meyer,
and seminar participants at the University of Chicago, Northwestern, UC San Diego, UC Davis, Texas A&M,
the NBER Summer Institute and RAND made valuable comments. Currie gratefully acknowledges support
from the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, and the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development under contract #R01-HD3101A2. The authors are solely responsible for any errors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Janet Currie and Jeffrey Grogger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions: Offsetting Effects
on Prenatal Care and Infant Health?
Janet Currie and Jeffrey Grogger
NBER Working Paper No. 7667
April 2000
JEL No. I18, I38

ABSTRACT

Evaluations of changes to the Medicaid program have focused on increases in the generosity
of income cutoffs for Medicaid eligibility. Previous research shows that despite dramatic increases
in the number of births paid for by the Medicaid program, women often enroll in Medicaid at the
point of birth rather than before. States have addressed this problem by adopting administrative
measures designed to simplify the Medicaid application process and encourage the use of prenatal
care.

At the same time, recent declines in welfare caseloads may effectively increasing

administrative barriers to obtaining care.
We examine the effects of these three types of policies (changes in income eligibility,
administrative reforms, and changes in welfare caseloads) on the use of prenatal care and infant
health using data from birth certificates covering all U.S. births between 1990 and 1996. We find
that increases in income cutoffs increased the use of prenatal care, while decreases in welfare
caseloads reduced the use of prenatal care, especially among blacks. The administrative reforms we
consider had little effect. The changes in the utilization of prenatal care that were induced by
increases in income eligibility cutoffs and decreases in welfare rates led to small but statistically
significant reductions in the incidence of very low birthweight among whites.
Janet Currie
Department of Economics, UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu

Jeffrey Grogger
Department of Policy Studies, UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
jgrogger@ucla.edu

