                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAX EXTERNALITIES OF EQUITY MUTUAL FUNDS


                                            Joel M. Dickson
                                            John B. Shoven
                                             Clemens Sialm


                                          Working Paper 7669
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7669

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 by Joel M. Dickson, John B. Shoven and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Tax Externalities of Equity Mutual Funds
Joel M. Dickson, John B. Shoven, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 7669
April 2000
JEL No. G23, H23



                                            ABSTRACT


       Investors holding mutual funds in taxable accounts face a classic externality. The after-tax
return of their investment depends on the behavior of others. In particular, redemptions may force
the mutual fund to sell some of its equity positions in order to pay off the liquidating investors. As
a result, it may be forced to distribute taxable capital gains to its shareholders. On the other hand,
new investors convey a positive externality upon existing investors by diluting the unrealized capital
gain position of the fund. This paper’s simulations show that these externalities are important
determinants of the after-tax performance of equity mutual funds.


John B. Shoven                 Joel Dickson                   Clemens Sialm
NBER                           The Vanguard Group             Stanford University
30 Alta Road                   PO Box 2600                    Dept of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305             Valley Forge, PA 19482         Stanford, Ca 94305-6072
Phone: 650-326-7160
Fax: 650-328-4163
shoven@leland.stanford.edu
Introduction



Mutual funds have played an increasingly important role in meeting the financial goals of U.S.

investors over the last several decades. As shown in Table 1, the growth of equity mutual fund

assets has been remarkable. According to the Investment Company Institute (ICI)—the mutual

fund trade association—total assets of equity mutual funds have increased from $40 billion at

year-end 1980 to $2,503 billion at year-end 19981, representing a compound annual growth rate

of 25.8% over the period. Overall, the mutual fund industry has benefited from a broader shift

away from households investing directly in equities to indirect ownership of equities. This trend

is documented in detail by Poterba and Samwick (1995).



Table 1 Equity Mutual Fund Assets
Year                        Equity Mutual Fund Assets ($ billions)
                    Total          Held Outside Employer       % Outside Employer Plans
                                        Plans, IRAs                   and IRAs
1980              $ 40.0                  $ 33.9                        84.8%
1985             $ 113.5                  $ 77.3                        68.1%
1990             $ 228.3                 $ 131.0                        57.4%
1995           $ 1,080.7                 $ 575.0                        53.2%
1998           $ 2,503.3               $ 1,339.5                        53.5%
Source: ICI calculations



The mutual fund industry benefited greatly from the introduction and growth of new retirement

accumulation vehicles (e.g., 401(k) plans, Individual Retirement Accounts). However, a majority

of mutual fund assets are still held outside tax-qualified vehicles. A lot of attention has recently

been devoted to the tax efficiency of mutual fund investments. Dickson and Shoven (1994, 1995)

argue that mutual funds have not generally considered the tax implication of their trading activity

and suggest ways in which portfolio managers could improve after-tax returns for their


                                                                                                       1
shareholders. More recently, Bergstresser and Poterba (1999) consider how different portfolio

characteristics affect after-tax returns and mutual fund cash flows. The topic of mutual fund tax

efficiency has also received attention from legislators, as evidenced by the introduction of H.R.

1089 (“The Mutual Fund Tax Awareness Act of 1999”), which would direct the Securities and

Exchange Commission to improve disclosure of after-tax returns for mutual funds.



While a lot of research has focused on the persistence of mutual fund performance (see, for

example Carhart (1997)), there has been somewhat less discussion about the mutual fund

structure as an investment vehicle. This paper considers how the tax situation of investors is

affected by the mutual fund structure through the actions of other shareholders. We also discuss

choices made by the mutual fund managers that can affect—positively or negatively—the after-

tax returns realized by their shareholders. The difference between the after-tax performance of

mutual funds and directly held investments center mainly on how mutual fund cash flows can

impact returns over time.



Although mutual funds were established as pass-through vehicles, there are tax differences

between funds and individually managed accounts. In particular, there are three significant

differences that could impact the relative attractiveness of a mutual fund investment. First,

Subchapter M of the Internal Revenue Code—originally enacted in 1936 to provide for the tax

treatment of pass-through entities, including mutual funds—does not include a provision to pass-

through the character of short-term capital gains for tax purposes.2 Thus, while mutual funds

report short-term capital gain distributions to their shareholders, these distributions are treated as

ordinary income dividends and not as short-term capital gains.3 This difference matters only if a




                                                                                                     2
taxpayer has realized losses that would not otherwise be offset by gains. In other words, the tax

liability of a mutual fund shareholder could be greater if short-term losses were offset by long-

term gains that could otherwise have been offset by short-term gains from the mutual fund.

Second, mutual funds can not distribute net realized losses. Instead, funds can use loss carry-

forwards for up to eight years following the year of the loss. The net effect of this treatment is to

accelerate the tax liability of mutual fund shareholders versus individually managed accounts,

where net losses can be declared in the year they occur and used to offset other gains or up to

$3,000 of taxable income.4



These two negatives are offset by a significant benefit for mutual fund shareholders: the pass-

through of the fund’s expenses. Mutual funds distribute net investment income to shareholders,

which is income received by the fund less charged expenses. Take for example, a mutual fund

whose underlying portfolio of securities generates a 2 percent gross dividend yield. If the fund’s

expense ratio—e.g., investment advisory, custody, distribution, shareholder servicing expenses—

is 1 percent, then the net income distribution to shareholders would be 1 percent. If the expense

ratio were 0.5 percent, then the dividend would be 1.5 percent. Effectively, fund expenses are

fully deductible for all taxpayers because they lower the taxable income received by

shareholders. Generally, investment fees assessed in a non-registered investment vehicle (e.g.,

individually managed and trust accounts) are an itemized deduction that can be used only to the

extent they exceed 2 percent of adjusted gross income.



Mutual fund shareholders are taxed through two different mechanisms. Each year, a fund passes-

through its income and capital gains realizations in the form of distributions made to the fund’s




                                                                                                        3
shareholders. These distributions result from the actions of the portfolio manager and affect all

shareholders in the fund because each shareholder receives their pro-rata share of the distribution

(as of the distribution’s record date). Although the portfolio manager’s trading activity leads to

the fund’s distributions, the trading activity could have been initiated by the portfolio manager or

imposed on the portfolio manager as a result of shareholder activity (net cash flow). It is this

latter case that distinguishes the mutual fund or other commingled vehicles from “separate”

accounts.5 As such, a mutual fund investment is subject to a classic externality because the

actions of other existing and potential investors can affect the taxable distributions to all

shareholders.



This paper explores the positive and negative externalities resulting from mutual fund cash flows

and how these externalities can be affected by the management and accounting practices of the

fund. Mutual fund redemptions are generally viewed as a negative relative to an individually

managed account because redemptions can force capital gains to be realized and distributed to

shareholders, accelerating their tax liability. Another argument is that negative cash flows can

make otherwise tax-efficient funds unstable (Warther 1996). An implicit assumption in these

arguments is that mutual funds use average cost accounting.6 In fact, mutual funds have

significant flexibility in choosing how they account for security sales, and we will show how the

choice of accounting technique can either exacerbate or reduce the magnitude of the mutual fund

tax externality.



We also consider the other side of the cash flow argument; namely, that positive cash flows

benefit mutual fund shareholders versus an investment vehicle with no ongoing cash flow (i.e., a




                                                                                                     4
separate account).7 The positive externality associated with mutual fund cash flows has not been

generally discussed and can represent a significant benefit to investors in mutual funds. Such

cash flow dilutes the unrealized capital gains position of the fund and generally makes tax-

sensitive accounting techniques more powerful in reducing the overall tax burden of the

investment. We will also show that these benefits can increase over time relative to a portfolio

without cash flows.



In addition to the tax imposed on mutual fund distributions, mutual fund shareholders also may

face an additional tax liability upon the sale of such assets to the extent the market value upon

sale is greater or less than their accumulated cost basis (which is the sum of the value of all

purchases, including reinvested distributions). Obviously, these two forms of shareholder

taxation are not mutually exclusive and represent a difference in the timing of tax payments.

Postponing the realization of capital gains decreases the present value of the tax liability and

allows individuals to take advantage of the lower long-run capital gains tax rates. Timing

differences (i.e., the deferral or acceleration of tax liabilities) resulting from different mutual

fund characteristics is an important focus of our analysis.



The rest of the paper is organized around investigating the externalities associated with mutual

fund investments. The next section briefly describes the positive and negative externalities

associated with mutual fund management and how management practices can affect these

relationships. The third section is the bulk of the paper and presents a simulation methodology

that allows us to investigate the magnitude of the externalities. This section looks at how certain

tax-management techniques can affect after-tax returns in both a separate account and a mutual




                                                                                                      5
fund environment. In addition, we consider the effects of accounting techniques and “closing”

funds on the after-tax returns for shareholders. The final section presents a brief conclusion and

issues for policymakers to consider in helping investors understand alternative investment

vehicles.




Mutual Fund Tax Externality



The differences between mutual funds and separately managed accounts and the effect of tax

externalities can be illustrated with a simple example. Assume that a mutual fund currently has

three taxable shareholders whose initial purchases were completed at different times and were

used to buy the same equity security (XYZ Company).10 There are no other transactions in the

fund. Table 2 gives the investment position of the fund and each of its shareholders:



                            Table 2 Illustration of Tax-Externality

Time        Shareholder Action                 Fund Action                 Total Fund Position

1      Investor A purchases $100       Fund buys $100 of XYZ           1 share of XYZ stock;
       of fund shares                  stock at $100/share             Market value = $100;
                                                                       Cost basis = $100


2      Investor B purchases $125       Fund buys $125 of XYZ           2 shares of XYZ stock;
       of fund shares                  stock at $125/share             Market value = $250;
                                                                       Cost basis = $225


3      Investor C purchases $150       Fund buys $150 of XYZ           3 shares of XYZ stock;
       of fund shares                  stock at $150/share             Market value = $450;
                                                                       Cost basis = $375



                                                                                                     6
Now assume that investor A redeems her entire investment in the next period, with XYZ stock

trading at $140 per share. If another shareholder invests at the same time, then investor A can be

paid with the cash received from the new shareholders without requiring any securities

transactions at the fund level. However, if the redemption is the only shareholder transaction,

then the fund must sell some of its holdings to raise the cash to pay the redeeming shareholder.

However, the gain or loss realized (and then distributed to the remaining shareholders) would

depend on the accounting treatment used. For example, selling the XYZ shares purchased with

investor A’s initial investment—which would also correspond to FIFO accounting—would result

in a $40 gain that must be distributed to the remaining shareholders.11 However, the existence of

other shareholders has presented a way to mitigate this potential externality. In particular, if the

fund sells the shares purchased at $150 that resulted from investor C’s investment, then the fund

would realize a $10 loss that would result in no current taxable capital gain distribution to the

remaining shareholders and could be used to offset future capital gain realizations. It is important

to stress that these differences affect the timing of the remaining shareholders’ tax liabilities as

opposed to the elimination of any tax liability. When investors B and C ultimately sell their

shares, they will owe taxes based on the capital gains realized upon redemption.12 No matter

which tax treatment is used by the fund, investor A still pays tax based on the difference between

the market value of the redemption ($140) and her cost basis ($100).



Construction of Mutual Funds

More generally, consider a portfolio of (equity) securities. Its market value (MV) and cost basis

(CB) can be represented by the following relationships:




                                                                                                       7
                  n           n     t
        MVt = ∑ p it Sit = ∑ p it ∑ s ij                                                               (1)
                 i =1        i =1   j=1


                  n     t
        CB t = ∑∑ p ij s ij                                                                            (2)
                 i =1 j=1




where pij is the price of security i at time j, and Sit is the total number of shares of security i held

at time t. Sit equals the sum of the holdings of the shares sij, which were initially purchased at

time j. (Note the relationships are a portfolio snapshot at time t. Net security positions, sij, may

differ at times t and t+1 to the extent there are sales or purchases of the fund’s securities.) Also,

the difference between the portfolio’s value and its cost basis—or the net unrealized gain (UG)—

is:



                   n    t
        UG t = ∑∑ (p it − p ij )s ij                                                             (3)
                  i =1 j=1




The net unrealized gain of the portfolio is a combination of positions at a loss and those at a gain

(both across securities and within an individual security’s tax lots). It is important to recognize

that the amount of gain or loss recognized from a partial sale of the portfolio’s assets can not be

determined without further assumptions. Instead, the UGt relationship represents the net amount

of gain or loss recognized if the portfolio were to be completely liquidated at time t.



Equation (3) demonstrates that the dispersion in unrealized gain liabilities and, hence, in capital

gain realizations is an important determinate in the ability to control the capital gain realizations



                                                                                                           8
through accounting procedures. In particular, the larger the standard deviation of (pit – pij)

conditional on sij >0, the more ability the manager has to minimize or maximize tax realizations.

In this context, a separate account with minimal cash flow will have very little ability to control

gain realizations. On the other hand, a mutual fund with positive cash flow over time and that

tends to buy small amounts of each security at different points in time will tend to have much

more flexibility.



The fund has four sources of cash flows. First, the stocks held in the mutual fund pay dividends

dt at time t. Second, the fund pays expenses of xt to its fund managers. Third, the fund is

required to distribute annually the received dividends net of expenses and the realized capital

gains to its shareholders, if they are positive. Realized capital losses are carried forward and

subtracted from future realized capital gains. The total fund distributions are denoted by fdt.

The investors in the fund must pay taxes on those distributions. Dividends and short-term capital

gains (i.e., gains of assets held for one year or less) are taxed at the marginal income tax rate on

ordinary income and long-term capital gains (i.e., gains of assets held for more than one year) are

taxed at the lower capital gains tax rate. Fourth, investors buy or redeem shares of the mutual

fund. Those exogenous cash flows are denoted by ct. Additional flows result from the re-

investments of distributions by the fund’s shareholders. The proportion α of the dividend

distributions and the proportion β of the capital gains distributions are automatically re-invested.

Total cash flows must be absorbed by net asset sales. The total cash flows at time t are given by:



                 (
cf t = d t − x t − fd Dt + fd SCG
                              t        t ) (
                                  + fd LCG                   (
                                           + c t + αfd Dt + β fd SCG
                                                                 t   + fd LCG
                                                                          t     ))                 (4)




                                                                                                       9
The rest of the paper investigates how portfolio management decisions, accounting procedures,

and shareholder cash flow can affect the recognition of capital gains or losses in the fund.



No Cash Flows

A separate account of directly held securities may have little or no ongoing cash flows after the

initial investment in the portfolio. Although dividends—to the extent they are reinvested—may

provide some positive cash flow, the new positions resulting from reinvested dividends would

likely be relatively small compared with the initial investments. These portfolios would not be

subject to the tax externality described in the introduction because the account owners decide

when to sell the assets, and the associated tax liability does not depend on the activity of any

other shareholders (though discretionary portfolio management decisions could impact the

account owners).



There is a tradeoff for control over the portfolio’s tax liability, however. With no new cash

flows, the portfolio’s net unrealized gain will increase if security prices rise over time. This has

the potential to accelerate the tax liability for a shareholder in certain cases. For example, if

positions are sold to maintain the portfolio’s security weightings over time (e.g., to maintain

diversification of the portfolio’s assets), then gains may be realized instead of being able to direct

cash flow to rebalance the portfolio. Also, if a forced realization of capital gains occurs (e.g.,

merger and acquisition activity among the portfolio’s holdings), the portfolio may have a higher

ratio of market value to cost basis than a mutual fund that has had positive cash flows.




                                                                                                       10
Net Cash Flows

A mutual fund or other commingled investment vehicle is subject to the cash flow patterns of

both existing and new shareholders. Cash flows affect security transaction activity within the

fund. As such, actions of other shareholders can cause positive or negative effects for all other

shareholders.



First, consider the case of positive cash flow. Assuming the fund is in a net unrealized gain

position, the existence of positive cash flow dilutes the overall capital gain position of the fund

because the market value and cost basis of any new investment are equal, whereas the portfolio’s

market value exceeds its basis. An equivalent way of stating this relationship is that the new

securities come in, in aggregate, at a cost higher than the average cost basis of the portfolio. This

dilution is positive for the existing shareholders from a number of perspectives. First, it spreads

any capital gain realizations across a larger shareholder base (i.e., the per-share value of any

distribution is reduced). Second, it provides a means to offset negative cash flows that might

otherwise require a liquidation of some equity positions. Finally, and most importantly, the

addition of new cost lots at different prices through security purchases increases the power of the

fund’s accounting techniques to mitigate any future redemption activity by allowing for greater

choice among tax lots. Overall, cash flows can represent a positive externality.



What about negative net cash flows? Unambiguously, if securities are sold at their average cost,

then the portfolio will realize capital gains to the extent the portfolio’s basis is less than its

market value. However, the portfolio does not have to realize gains or losses at their average

costs. The decisions of the fund’s adviser—specifically, the accounting technique chosen—can




                                                                                                      11
mitigate the potential tax externality. That said, continuous redemptions can cause an accelerated

tax liability over time even in a tax-efficient portfolio if share prices generally rise and the fund’s

accounting techniques eliminate much of the gross unrealized loss in the portfolio.



A number of studies have investigated the relationships affecting net cash flows (Barclay,

Pearson, and Weisbach, 1998; Sirri and Tufano, 1998; Bergstresser and Poterba, 1999).

However, many of these relationships have been performance-based, which can often be fleeting.

On the other hand, to the extent cash flows are positively correlated with equity market

movements, it could imply that the tax-efficient accounting techniques described below are even

more powerful because the portfolio would be buying when prices are rising and selling when

prices are falling (and possibly realizing losses).



The academic studies suggest that unrealized capital gains may be a factor in future net cash flow

patterns and that managers might consciously control the “tax overhang” in order to remain

attractive for future shareholders (Barclay, Pearson, and Weisbach, 1998). However, a tax

efficient investor would probably prefer a buy-and-hold portfolio with a lower level of net cash

flows than one in which that tax liability were accelerated in order to supposedly attract a high

level of new cash. In other words, such a strategy significantly reduces the benefit of a positive

cash flow. Another approach would be to advertise the fund, if this were successful in generating

new cash flow over time. Most directly, the cash flow relationship can be affected by a decision

to limit new cash to the fund—e.g., closing the fund to new investors. Closing a fund is often

done for investment reasons in order to maintain the fund’s character and investment process.

However, there is a potentially significant negative to such an approach: it makes negative cash




                                                                                                     12
flows and their associated externalities more likely. We investigate closing a fund in our

simulations in the following section.



Accounting Techniques

Mutual funds are subject to the same rules as other owners of equity securities when accounting

for security sales; namely, specific identification of the tax lots sold.13 Currently, mutual funds

are not required to disclose how they account for security sales in any prospectus or shareholder

report. As demonstrated in the next section, this information could be useful to shareholders

because different accounting techniques can have a material impact on the after-tax performance

of mutual fund investments.



It is also interesting to note that tax-efficient accounting techniques benefit all current fund

investors. That is, accounting for security sales in different ways does not affect the fund’s pre-

tax return—the objective of a fund’s tax-deferred shareholders—but can improve the fund’s

after-tax return—the objective of those shareholders holding the fund outside of a tax-qualified

vehicle. Within this context, certain regulatory practices could affect the ability to use accounting

techniques to affect the after-tax return for shareholders. In particular, a proposal in President

Clinton’s fiscal year 1998 budget proposal would have required all security sales to use average

cost accounting. Although this proposal was not included in the final budget for that year, the

simulations in the next section suggest that such a move could accelerate the tax liability for

shareholders in funds that currently use more tax-friendly accounting.




                                                                                                      13
Although a survey of accounting techniques among mutual funds is not available, we will

consider a range of potential accounting techniques: first-in first-out (FIFO), last-in first-out

(LIFO), average cost, and tax-sensitive accounting. Average cost identifies for sale the security

position that is closest to the average cost of the overall position in the security, or equivalently

sells a fixed fraction of all the lots purchased at different points in time. First-in, first-out is

simply identifying for sale the oldest lot for each position. FIFO is usually a tax-inefficient

strategy to the extent security prices rise over time. Last-in, first-out is selling the most recently

purchased lot of each position. The last technique we consider is tax-sensitive accounting, which

is often referred to as highest-in, first-out (HIFO) accounting. HIFO accounting identifies the

highest cost lot in each security for sale.14 These techniques and their ability to affect relative

after-tax performance are investigated in the next section.



The ability to use accounting techniques to affect after-tax performance depends on the

management and structure of the investment vehicle. In particular, accounting techniques are

more powerful when there is a greater dispersion of cost lots for each security. Accounting

procedures can mitigate the potential negative effects of redeeming investors on the other

shareholders. On the other hand, a separate account with a large initial investment relative to its

overall portfolio does not have as much ability to leverage accounting techniques because the

fund’s holdings would be much more concentrated at specific points in time (i.e., HIFO, LIFO,

FIFO, and average cost are close to equivalent because there is minimal dispersion of cost lots).

Similarly, active management techniques—where securities may be bought or sold in short time

frames—may be less able to use accounting techniques than passively managed vehicles—where

small slices of many securities tend to be transacted. However, for those portfolios with more




                                                                                                         14
concentrated buying and selling, the ability to effect trading strategies (e.g., harvesting losses)

can have a relatively greater impact on after-tax returns. We investigate these inter-dependent

relationships in the next section.




Simulations of Mutual Funds



In order to look at how tax-management policies can affect after-tax returns and the importance

of externalities between shareholders, we constructed a simulator to isolate different factors that

can affect after-tax returns, some of which (like the choice of accounting technique) are under

the control of investment managers. These simulations attempt to quantify the magnitude of the

effects discussed in the previous sections and how choices by mutual fund managers can mitigate

or exacerbate the externalities between shareholders.



We report results for simulated portfolios that invest in the fifty largest companies (in terms of

market capitalization) in 1983 and track the returns of these portfolios over the next 15 years.15

We calculate returns using the actual monthly returns of the component stocks minus an expense

charge of five basis points per month. We assume that ninety percent of the fund distributions of

dividends and capital-gains are automatically reinvested in the mutual fund.16 The after-tax

returns are computed for an investor facing a 39.6 percent marginal income tax rate on dividends

and realized short-term capital gain distributions and a 20.0 percent marginal tax rate on realized

long-term capital gain distributions. These are the current rates for someone in the top federal




                                                                                                      15
income tax bracket. We apply these rates to the entire 1984-98 period.17 Further, we ignore

state and local income taxes. A detailed description of the data set is contained in the Appendix.

First, we evaluate four different accounting policies: (1) always using the average cost basis for

determining capital gains and losses, (2) using FIFO (using the cost basis of the oldest lots of a

particular stock), (3) using LIFO (using the cost of the most recently acquired lots)19, and (4)

using HIFO (using the cost of the most expensive lots). The cost basis of the remaining shares

of a particular security also depends on the choice of accounting technique. If HIFO is used, for

instance, the cost basis of the remaining shares will be lower (i.e., the unrealized capital gain

position of the fund will be greater) than if one of the other techniques is chosen. By choosing

accounting technique, the fund determines the timing of taxes of its shareholders.



Second, we evaluate portfolios that follow active and passive investment strategies. In our

simulations, passively managed funds track either an equally- or a value-weighted index of the

fifty companies in our dataset. Our actively managed funds are assumed to hold thirty of the fifty

securities at all points in time. The thirty stocks are held in value-weighted proportions. Each

month, the actively managed funds completely divest themselves of two of their thirty positions

and bring in two randomly selected companies from the twenty that have been outside the fund.20

The portfolio is rebalanced so that the new holdings are proportional to the market capitalizations

of the members. The fact that the new entrants are randomly chosen probably reflects our bias

towards the efficient market hypothesis.



We examine three alternative rules for choosing which two securities to kick out of the mutual

fund each month. One rule is to drop the two firms that have the largest gains relative to their




                                                                                                     16
cost bases. A second rule is exactly the opposite – to sell the two firms that have the lowest price

relative to cost basis. This is a relatively tax efficient strategy, although it is not the tax

minimizing strategy which would keep track of the difference between short and long-term gains

and losses and which would make the number of stocks liquidated dependent on the cost basis.

The third rule chooses the two stocks to be deleted each month randomly. Under this regime, the

actively managed funds are true noise traders, exchanging randomly chosen positions for equally

randomly chosen replacements.



It is important to note that the three different security selection processes of our active fund

simulations will result in different portfolios and, hence, different pre-tax returns. A portfolio

that sells two stocks with the greatest appreciation will obviously sell different stocks in a given

month than an otherwise similar portfolio that sells the two stocks with the least amount of

appreciation. Hence, the constituents and portfolio weights of the portfolios will differ over time,

This is different from our index-fund simulations, where the differences among the portfolios—

accounting technique and cash-flow patterns—do not affect pre-tax returns among the simulated

portfolios.



Third, we also consider the impact of net mutual fund sales on the after tax returns that the fund

offers its long-term shareholders. The first net sales regime applies to a fund that has a trend of

net sales equal to one percent of assets per month. The second regime, roughly corresponding to

a fund that is closed to new purchases (or at least to some classes of potential buyers), is for a

fund with a trend rate of net sales of minus one percent of assets per month. That is, on average

it experiences net redemptions.




                                                                                                      17
Passive Management



Equally-Weighted Fund

The results in Table 3 detail the simulation of an equally-weighted index fund that holds all fifty

stocks. That is, two percent of the fund’s assets are invested in each of the fifty securities. The

maintenance of the two-percent weights implies a monthly rebalancing of the portfolio—selling

stocks whose relative price has risen and buying additional shares in those whose relative price

has fallen. Table 3 displays the before and after-tax average monthly returns for the entire period

1984-98 for an equally-weighted index fund experiencing deterministic net sales. It is important

to note that the after-tax returns in Table 3 represent buy-and-hold returns that tend to overstate

the actual differences for investors that will ultimately sell their holdings because of the timing

differences of gains realizations among the different simulations considered. We show results for

investors who liquidate their investment at the end of the horizon later in the discussion.




                                                                                                      18
           Table 3 Average Monthly Returns for Passively Managed Funds with Equal
                           Weights and Deterministic Sales, 1984-98

                           A. Average Before-Tax Monthly Returns
Net Sales/Assets      Average Cost         FIFO              LIFO                      HIFO
      -1%               1.5000            1.5000            1.5000                     1.5000
       0                1.5000            1.5000            1.5000                     1.5000
     +1%                1.5000            1.5000            1.5000                     1.5000

                            B. Average After-Tax Monthly Returns
Net Sales/Assets      Average Cost          FIFO              LIFO                     HIFO
      -1%               1.2347             1.2220            1.2630                    1.2821
       0                1.2894             1.2731            1.3183                    1.3503
     +1%                1.3296             1.3137            1.3475                    1.3830




Panel A simply reminds us that the before-tax return is exactly the same for the different

accounting techniques and different patterns of net sales of the fund because portfolio

constituents and their weights are unaffected by the choice of accounting technique or cash flow.

This means that an investor holding the fund in a tax-qualified pension account (such as an IRA

or 401(k) account) would be indifferent to the arguments of this sub-section.



On the other hand, Panel B confirms our intuition and previous discussion. Namely, that

accounting techniques and net cash flow can have important affects on after-tax returns. In other

words, a taxable investor who was in one of these funds for the entire period 1984-98 would care

a lot about which cell in the panel his fund has chosen for him. Our separate account simulation

where there is no ongoing cash flow (other than dividends received and the assumed ten percent

of dividend and capital gains distributions that are not reinvested) shows a difference of 7.72

basis points per month in after-tax returns between a fund that uses HIFO accounting and one

that uses FIFO. Perhaps more realistically, the difference between HIFO and average cost



                                                                                                  19
accounting is 6.09 basis points per month or 73 basis points per year. Over long holding periods,

such as ten or fifteen years, an annual 73 basis points differential can be very significant.



The externality effects of cash flows are demonstrated in the relative returns of a growing fund

versus a shrinking fund. The individual buy-and-hold investor in the fund with 1 percent net

sales per month experiences a much higher after-tax return—10.09 basis points per month when

the funds use HIFO accounting—than the investor in the shrinking fund. This is a difference of

slightly more than 121 basis points per year—an enormous amount considering that the two

funds hold exactly the same securities with the same weights and use the same accounting

techniques. This difference is due to the externality between existing shareholders and new

shareholders that we discussed in the previous section of the paper. The fund with a steady

supply of new shareholders is continuously buying new lots of the fifty securities and can

accomplish the monthly rebalancing (to retain the two-percent weights) with far less tax

consequence than the fund experiencing steady net redemptions. The interaction between these

effects shows even greater dispersions in after-tax returns. For example, the difference between

owning a tax-sensitive HIFO index fund experiencing net new sales every month and an average-

cost basis index fund experiencing net redemptions is 14.83 basis points per month or more than

1.78 percent per year.



Table 4 looks at whether the magnitude of these externalities may change as the portfolios age.

Our simulated passively managed funds begin in 1984 with newly acquired positions in all fifty

stocks. Initially, there is not much advantage to one accounting technique over the other because

all of the original lots carry the same cost basis. The advantage of HIFO and LIFO over FIFO




                                                                                                   20
and average cost accounting grows as the number of lots of purchases to choose amongst for

partial liquidations grows. To examine this effect, we calculate the difference accounting

choices and net sales makes for the years 1994-98 for our funds begun in 1984. The average

monthly before-tax return for the sample of fifty equally weighted stocks was 1.7981 percent for

the 1994-98 period. This is certainly a much better than average period of time for large

capitalization stocks such as those in our sample. The average after-tax returns for 1994-98 are

shown in Table 4.



         Table 4 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns for Passively Managed Funds with
                       Equal Weights and Deterministic Sales, 1994-98

          Net Sales/Assets       Average Cost             FIFO                HIFO
                -1%                1.5158                1.4949               1.5641
                 0                 1.5846                1.5564               1.6583
               +1%                 1.6335                1.6052               1.6958




The gain from the relatively tax efficient HIFO policy is larger than before. For example, with

zero exogenous net sales, the difference between HIFO and FIFO is 10.19 basis points per month

and the difference between HIFO and average cost accounting is 7.37 basis points per month.

The difference between the after-tax performance of growing and shrinking funds is also wider

for the five years 1994-98 than it is for the entire time period 1984-98. Now, comparing the

HIFO results for one percent net sales with the HIFO results with minus one percent net sales,

the growing fund offers its high-tax shareholders a 13.17 basis points a month advantage. This is

more than thirty percent greater than the difference over the entire fifteen-year period, a

difference that we already thought was enormous. For the five years 1994-98, the difference in

after-tax return for a HIFO index fund experiencing one percent per month net sales and an


                                                                                                   21
average cost index fund experiencing one percent net redemptions is 18.00 basis points per

month or 2.16 percent per year.



These results—and the results of the other simulations reported below—must be tempered

somewhat by the fact that equity returns were very strong over the period of our simulations. In a

generally rising equity market, accounting differences have the potential to add more value on an

after-tax basis because HIFO accounting would tend to realize a small gain or loss on a relatively

recent security purchase (to the extent cash flow allowed for security purchases). FIFO

accounting, on the other hand, would realize old securities at a much larger gain (on average). In

a declining equity market, accounting and net cash flow differences would likely have a

somewhat smaller effect because there would be more losses to realize throughout the portfolio,

resulting in a generally lower tax liability.



Value-Weighted Fund

The assumption that the passive funds hold their positions with equal weights causes them to

realize gains and losses in the process of monthly rebalancing. If the fund held positions with

value or market capitalization weights, rebalancing would be greatly reduced. With value

weights, rebalancing is necessary only if the companies in the index issue or repurchase shares or

if the composition of the largest fifty companies changes due to mergers and acquisitions.

Besides, it could be argued that market capitalization weights are more consistent with the

indexing philosophy. We have examined the effect of the same accounting and net sales

assumptions for the case with value weights. The results are shown in Table 5. For the record,




                                                                                                  22
the average monthly before-tax return on value-weighted portfolios is 1.4972 percent for 1984-

98 and 2.0275 percent for 1994-98.



         Table 5 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns for Passively Managed Funds with
                      Market Capitalization Weights and Deterministic Sales
                                          A. 1984-1998
          Net Sales/Assets   Average Cost           FIFO             HIFO
                -1%            1.3122              1.3070           1.3190
                 0             1.3895              1.3863           1.4015
               +1%             1.4044              1.4017           1.4091

                                              B. 1994-1998
          Net Sales/Assets       Average Cost           FIFO                  HIFO
                -1%                1.8390              1.8313                 1.8424
                 0                 1.9487              1.9432                 1.9655
               +1%                 1.9666              1.9618                 1.9729


The results confirm our intuition: the accounting technique is much less important with value

weights because much less rebalancing is necessary.21 The choice of accounting technique is

most important when a portion of a position is being sold. Here that happens to a much smaller

extent than with equal weights because value weights automatically adjust to market movements.

Hence, portfolio sales are largely dictated by changes to the index being tracked (which are

minimal in our data set) and negative cash flow. This explains the convergence of the results in

Table 5 when cash flow is non-negative. In these cases, there is very little selling of the index’s

underlying securities; hence, their after-tax returns are nearly identical. However, it is important

to note that the externality imposed by the presence or absence of new investors is still present

and is essentially undiminished. The difference between HIFO accounting with 1 percent new

sales and 1 percent new redemptions is 9.01 basis points per month over the entire 1984-98

period and is 13.05 percent per month for the 1994-98 period.




                                                                                                      23
Liquidation Tax

The calculations in Tables 3, 4, and 5 are for funds operating on an ongoing basis. Individual

investors who joined the fund at inception could have experienced the returns shown in these

tables. If they do not sell their mutual fund holdings until they pass through an estate, the gains

from tax deferral could translate into permanent gains. The estate or heir could sell the mutual

fund shares at net asset value and owe no taxes on the difference between NAV and the cost

basis of the mutual fund shares (or the cost basis of the underlying shares in the fund for that

matter). However, it is true that the funds using HIFO accounting are carrying their portfolio

positions at significantly lower cost bases than funds using average cost accounting or FIFO.



By looking at cases where the investment is liquidated at the end of the time period, we can get a

better sense of the value of the timing differences. Table 6 shows after-tax return figures for

investors in the funds from the beginning in 1984 whose investment was liquidated at the end of

1998. The average before-tax return is still 1.5000 percent per month, just as it was in Table 3.



           Table 6 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns (1984-98) for Passively Managed
             Funds with Equal Weights, Deterministic Sales, and Liquidation in 1998

          Net Sales/Assets       Average Cost             FIFO                HIFO
                -1%                1.1884                1.1883               1.2012
                 0                 1.2478                1.2416               1.2815
               +1%                 1.2922                1.2842               1.3283


Although the magnitude of the differences are somewhat reduced relative to the results reported

in Table 3, the advantage of tax-efficient accounting (i.e., HIFO) instead of average cost

accounting remain substantial. For instance, with zero exogenous net sales, the difference

between HIFO and average cost accounting is 3.37 basis points per month over the fifteen year


                                                                                                      24
period. Even ignoring compounding, that means that after fifteen years the HIFO fund will leave

its holders with more than six percent more after-tax wealth than the average cost accounting

fund. More strikingly, the externality between early shareholders and new shareholders is still

present in undiminished form. Even if a fund is going to be liquidated at the end of fifteen years,

taxable holders are far better off being in a fund that grows until the end rather than one that

steadily loses shareholders. Of course, the value of tax deferral increases with time, and the

fifteen-year horizon analyzed in these simulations is probably much longer than the typical

investor’s holding period. Thus, the cash flow and accounting differences discussed here would

be much less important to an investor who plans to buy and sell their investments relatively

frequently.



Randomness of Fund Sales

Funds don’t experience the steady exogenous supply of new buyers that we have been

examining. The next question we look at is the cost of random ebbs and flows that funds

actually experience. To do this, we examine the after-tax average returns of both equally

weighted and market capitalization-weighted index funds experiencing fluctuating net sales. We

superimpose a standard deviation of 4.5 percent per month on the underlying trend of net sales

and a serial autocorrelation of 0.25. These values correspond with the data on observed monthly

net sales for a sample of roughly 800 equity mutual funds over the period 1992-99. This

simulation is repeated 100 times and the following tables report the average after-tax returns.

The results for both fluctuating net sales and deterministic net sales are shown in Table 7.




                                                                                                   25
As we saw before, the value-weighted index fund needs to do very little rebalancing in our

simulations, so the gains from tax-efficient accounting techniques are minimal with deterministic

cash flows. However, Panel B indicates that fluctuating cash flows make the choice of

accounting technique very important. The reason is that “ebbs” force the funds to sell off some

of their positions and this is just the circumstance where accounting techniques matter. When an

index fund sells positions, it sells small slices of each of its holdings. Because our simulated

funds would then engage in 50 partial redemptions, the choice of accounting technique makes a

significant difference in the amount of taxable gains realized.




          Table 7 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns (1984-98) for Passively Managed
                          Funds; Deterministic vs. Fluctuating Net Sales
                              A. Equally Weighted Portfolios
           Net Sales/Assets   Average Cost          FIFO              HIFO
          +1% Deterministic      1.3296            1.3137             1.3830
           +1%, 4.5% SD          1.3075            1.2918             1.3688
             Difference           .0221             .0219              .0142

                         B. Market Capitalization Weighted Portfolios
           Net Sales/Assets    Average Cost           FIFO                    HIFO
          +1% Deterministic       1.4044             1.4017                   1.4091
           +1%, 4.5% SD           1.3499             1.3272                   1.3997
             Difference            .0545              .0745                    .0094


Panel B indicates that mere fluctuations in net redemptions alone reduce the average monthly

after-tax rate of return by 5.45 basis points a month if the value-weighted fund uses average cost

accounting. On the other hand, HIFO accounting reduces the impact of net sales fluctuations by

more than eighty percent. The HIFO fund with fluctuating net sales has an average after-tax

return that is less than one-half basis point per month below the average cost accounting firm

without fluctuating sales. Perhaps more importantly, the HIFO fund has a five basis points a


                                                                                                   26
month advantage over the average cost fund in an environment of fluctuating net sales. These

same patterns are apparent for the equally weighted index funds of Panel A, although the

magnitudes differ.



The basic lesson that we take from Table 7 is that the externality of fluctuating sales on existing

shareholders can be significantly and in some cases greatly reduced by mutual fund managers if

they adopt the appropriate accounting policies. Under HIFO the ebbs and flows of other

shareholders has only a very slight impact on the buy and hold fund participants. The same

cannot be said for average cost or FIFO accounting.



Active Management



We now turn to our stylized versions of actively managed funds.22 Table 8 shows after-tax

returns for the three different strategies of choosing which two of the 30 stocks to eliminate from

the portfolio each month. Panel A is for a fund experiencing a trend rate of net sales of 1

percent (with a standard deviation of 4.5 percent per month and a coefficient of serial correlation

of 0.25). Panel B is for a fund with no net sales (e.g., an individually managed account). Panel C

shows the same asset strategies for funds that are experiencing trend net redemptions of one

percent per month.




                                                                                                  27
           Table 8 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns (1984-98) for Actively Managed
                             Funds with Market Capitalization Weights
                                A. One Percent Trend Growth
           Investment Policy   Average Cost          FIFO             HIFO
             Sell Winners         1.1391            1.1540           1.1585
             Random Sells         1.2480            1.2446           1.2621
              Sell Losers         1.3470            1.3343           1.4268

                           B. Separate Account (zero percent growth)
           Investment Policy    Average Cost           FIFO                    HIFO
             Sell Winners          1.1248             1.1272                   1.1302
             Random Sells          1.2269             1.2246                   1.2380
              Sell Losers          1.3458             1.3196                   1.4353

                               C. Negative One Percent Trend Growth
           Investment Policy       Average Cost          FIFO                  HIFO
             Sell Winners            1.0961             1.1000                 1.1103
             Random Sells            1.1837             1.1824                 1.1923
              Sell Losers            1.2486             1.2317                 1.3282




The choice of accounting technique continues to play a significant role, with the difference

between HIFO and average cost accounting varying between two and eight basis points per

month. The difference in investment policy is even larger. For instance, in Panel A, the

difference in average after tax return of discarding losers and discarding winners is almost 27

basis points per month.23 This is despite the fact that the before-tax return is slightly (three basis

points) higher for the discarding winners strategy than the discarding losers one.24 The overall

difference between choosing a growing fund which is discarding losers and using HIFO and an

alternative actively managed fund that sells winners, uses average cost accounting and is

experiencing trend net redemptions is 33.07 basis points per month or 4.0 percent per year. This

is an enormous difference for two funds experiencing the same market returns and choosing from




                                                                                                    28
the same universe (large cap stocks) of securities. Almost all of the advantage of one fund over

the other is due in some way to the management of the fund.



It is interesting that the mutual fund that uses HIFO and a policy of discarding losers in Panel A.

of Table 8 has a higher after-tax return than the HIFO value-weighted index fund in Panel B of

Table 7. To make the cases comparable, one wants to look at the case of fluctuating net sales.

This certainly indicates that a tax-sensitive actively managed fund can outperform a tax-sensitive

index fund, although a number of our assumptions affect this result. There are no bid-ask

spreads in our model and we charge the same expenses to both index and actively managed

funds. On the other hand, we have a particularly rigid actively managed strategy. A real-world

tax-sensitive actively managed fund would not mechanically replace two positions each month.

They would opportunistically replace positions with large losses as they occur.



Liquidation Tax

For completeness, we also examine the cases where actively managed funds are liquidated at the

end of our fifteen-year period in order to quantify the timing element of capital gains deferral and

ultimate realization. The results are shown in Table 9.




                                                                                                  29
           Table 9 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns (1984-98) for Actively Managed
                  Funds with Market Capitalization Weights; Liquidated in 1998

                                  A. One Percent Trend Growth
           Investment Policy      Average Cost         FIFO                   HIFO
             Sell Winners           1.1260            1.1403                  1.1433
             Random Sells           1.2162            1.2141                  1.2275
              Sell Losers           1.2968            1.2920                  1.3595

                               B. Negative One Percent Trend Growth
           Investment Policy       Average Cost          FIFO                 HIFO
             Sell Winners            1.0838             1.0881                1.0960
             Random Sells            1.1380             1.1382                1.1436
              Sell Losers            1.2015             1.2054                1.2402




While the advantage of the investment strategy of selling the biggest losing positions in the fund

each month is reduced by between three and eight basis points a month, it still is the strategy

with the highest after-tax monthly return. In fact, the differences across investment strategy are

still extremely large and the differences across accounting policies are significant. The fund with

the best combination of policies (HIFO, selling losers, and a positive trend of net sales) beats the

fund with the worst combination (average cost accounting, selling winners, and a negative trend

of net sales) by an after-tax margin of 27.57 basis points per month. Considering that all of these

funds are choosing from the same fifty stocks over the same time frame and they all are being

liquidated at the end of the period, this difference in monthly after-tax returns has to be

considered enormous.



Closing the Fund

The next issue we examine is the impact on long-term holders of closing an actively managed

fund to new investors or to certain classes of new investors. Mutual funds, particularly large



                                                                                                     30
mutual funds such as Vanguard Windsor and Fidelity Magellan, have taken this action. The

stated reason is usually that the managers of the fund cannot find productive investments in

which to place additional funds. The fund may also be concerned about establishing such large

positions as to lose liquidity.25 The question that we are concerned with is the externality effect

on the long-term holders.



Are the long-term holders harmed by the absence of new buyers of the fund? We assess this

issue by reexamining the performance of our actively managed simulated funds. We compare

the funds in two different scenarios. In the first scenario, the fund is left open to new buyers for

the entire fifteen years of our model. The net sales are random with a positive trend of one-

percent of assets per month and the same 4.5 percent per month standard deviation previously

assumed. Under the second scenario, the fund is open for the first ten years with the same sales

experience, but it is then closed over 1994-98. The closed fund has negative net sales. These are

generated from a trend of negative one-percent of assets per month and a standard deviation of

4.5 percent a month. The resulting net sales distributions are truncated so that net sales are

always nonpositive when the fund is closed to new investors.26 The average redemptions are

approximately two percent per month under these assumptions.



Table 10 demonstrates that closing the fund to new investors likely has a large negative impact

on the taxable holders of the fund. In all cases, the impact is significant, but it is the largest for

funds that otherwise were following tax efficient practices. The funds that systematically divest

themselves of their largest losers cost their taxable shareholders between 18 and 25 basis points

per month in after-tax return by closing the fund. The relatively tax-efficient investment policy




                                                                                                         31
of selling losers still offers the highest after-tax rates of return, but its effectiveness is greatly

diminished by the closure of the fund to new investors. The most tax efficient strategy of all

remains the combination HIFO and selling losers. The fact that its after-tax return in Table 3.14

is slightly below that of the FIFO fund with the same investment policy is a result that the before

tax returns are not identical across the cells of these tables. While it is still true that HIFO is the

best of the accounting policies, its advantage is also significantly diminished by closure of the

fund.




           Table 10 Average After-Tax Monthly Returns (1994-98) for Actively Managed
                                Funds with Market Cap Weights;

                     A. One Percent Trend Growth; Open to New Investors
           Investment Policy   Average Cost         FIFO               HIFO
             Sell Winners         1.6875           1.6664             1.6706
             Random Sells         1.7384           1.7334             1.7547
              Sell Losers         1.8901           1.9146             1.9635


                 B. Minus One Percent Trend Growth; Closed to New Investors
           Investment Policy   Average Cost         FIFO              HIFO
             Sell Winners         1.6050           1.5687             1.5542
             Random Sells         1.6017           1.5998             1.6049
              Sell Losers         1.6695           1.7332             1.7179




Conclusions



Our overall conclusion is that the tax-induced externalities between mutual fund shareholders are

extremely large and important and that they can be influenced by management policies. The

costs of random fluctuations in net sales on the after-tax performance of the fund are greatly


                                                                                                         32
diminished by choosing HIFO, for instance. The advantage of a fund with positive net sales

relative to one with net redemptions is also extremely large. Net sales are presumably somewhat

under the control of management. The extreme action of management closing the fund to new

buyers is found to have a devastating impact on the ability to pursue tax efficient strategies.

Finally, the active investment policy of selling losing positions relative to selling off winners

offers much better after tax returns.



We find that there is nothing inherently inconsistent with tax-efficient actively managed

portfolios. Active management techniques (e.g. selling losers vs. selling winners) appear to have

a greater impact on after-tax returns than the choice of accounting technique. Both are very

important, however. In other words, large-capitalization index funds can generally generate

good tax efficiency by simply choosing a tax-efficient accounting technique, whereas the tax

efficiency of actively managed funds requires both a tax-motivated investment strategy (such as

selling losing positions) and the appropriate tax-efficient accounting policy. With an aggressive

combination of tax-efficient policies, the actively managed funds we simulated could have

provided greater tax efficiency than similarly constructed indexed funds that only use tax-

sensitive accounting.



Given the sensitivity of after-tax returns to the accounting policies implemented by mutual fund

managers, it appears that fund investors could benefit from better information about how their

funds account for security sales. Today, no disclosure is required to detail how security positions

are accounted for upon sale. Certainly our simulations indicate that this information would be of




                                                                                                    33
value to taxable mutual fund investors and can impact after-tax returns by as much as eight basis

points per month among otherwise identical funds based on our simulations.



One significant area for future research would include a practical look at policies that mutual

funds can implement to reduce the externalities identified in this paper. Many tax-managed funds

currently assess asset-based redemption fees that are paid to the fund to compensate shareholders

for the actions of short-term investors whose redemptions could force capital gain realizations on

other shareholders. Although redemption fees may be a good way to internalize the externality,

the optimal structure of these fees would be an interesting extension. Another approach to these

issues might be the use of cash reserves as an “insurance policy” against having to sell stocks

and realize gains when faced with negative cash flow. Of course, there is a potential trade-off in

holding cash in generally rising equity markets (i.e., lowers the pre-tax return), and borrowing

cash (i.e., leverage) faces many regulatory hurdles within the mutual fund context.



We find that the tax externalities facing mutual fund investors are important considerations in

choosing between mutual funds and direct investments. We have demonstrated that the existence

of positive net cash flow can provide a significant benefit to existing mutual fund shareholders,

and that any negative externalities resulting from mutual fund redemptions can be mitigated by

the management practices of the fund. Although separate accounts arguably provide greater

direct control over an individual’s own tax situation, we have shown that a tax-sensitive mutual

fund can meet or exceed the after-tax returns of an individually managed account. Further

research into the mutual fund versus separate account debate may be useful because it seems that




                                                                                                    34
this subject has not received the attention that it deserves in both the academic and popular

literature on portfolio choice.




                                                                                                35
Appendix: Data

Our source of the return and distribution data of the stocks used in the mutual fund simulations is

the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). CRSP maintains a comprehensive collection

of standard and derived security data available for the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq Stock Market.

The mutual fund simulations use the returns, the distributions, and the market capitalizations of

the fifty largest companies in December 1983 in terms of market capitalization. We used the

CRSP data set to identify those fifty companies. The returns and dividends were derived using

CRSP's holding period returns with and without dividends over the period from January 1984 to

December 1998.



Table A lists some summary statistics of the companies in our dataset. Seven of the 50

companies were delisted from the three stock exchanges. If a company was merged into another

company, we followed the stock of the acquirer after the merger. If a company was bought out

for cash, we replaced it with the largest market capitalization company that is not already in the

dataset after taking into account taxable cash-distributions. Standard Oil of Ohio merged with

BP in June 1987 after paying a small cash-distribution to its shareholders. Shell, Marubeni,

Getty Oil, Gulf Oil, Reynolds R J Industries, Texas Oil an Gas, and Superior Oil were all bought

out for cash and were replaced by TDK Corp., Westinghouse Electric, Halliburton, Smithkline

Beckman, Xerox, Intel, and American International Group, respectively. Superior Oil never

enters our dataset because it was already bought out in October 1984. The monthly return of an

equally-weighted index of the 50 companies had a mean of 1.50 percent and a standard deviation

of 4.12 percent. The corresponding summary statistics for a value-weighted index were 1.50



                                                                                                     36
percent and 4.11 percent. The means and standard deviations of the two indices correspond

closely to the performance of the Standard & Poor's 500 Index. Of the 43 companies that were

in our dataset for 15 years, Pfizer had the highest monthly return of 2.37 percent and Tenneco

had the lowest return of 0.63 percent. Motorola's returns had the highest monthly standard

deviation of 9.75 percent, whereas Exxon's returns had a standard deviation of only 4.42 percent.




                                   Table 11: Companies in Dataset



Rank Company Name (in Dec. 1983)              Ticker   In Dataset      Mkt.Cap.     Mean        Std. Dev.

                                                                       in Mio.      Return      per Month

                                                                        28-Dec-83 per Month

    1 INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHS COR        IBM      Jan-84-Dec-98       74,508       1.16%        7.67%

    2 AMERICAN TELEPHONE & TELEG CO           T        Jan-84-Dec-98       59,392       1.60%        6.90%

    3 EXXON CORP                              XON      Jan-84-Dec-98       31,623       1.65%        4.42%

    4 GENERAL ELECTRIC CO                     GE       Jan-84-Dec-98       26,653       1.90%        6.15%

    5 GENERAL MOTORS CORP                     GM       Jan-84-Dec-98       23,419       1.11%        7.58%

    6 STANDARD OIL CO IND                     SN       Jan-84-Dec-98       14,829       1.35%        4.91%

    7 SCHLUMBERGER LTD                        SLB      Jan-84-Dec-98       14,481       0.85%        7.79%

    8 CANON INC                               CANNY Jan-84-Dec-98          13,746       1.16%        7.94%

    9 SEARS ROEBUCK & CO                      S        Jan-84-Dec-98       13,163       1.26%        7.93%

   10 EASTMAN KODAK CO                        EK       Jan-84-Dec-98       12,614       1.07%        6.45%

   11 DU PONT E I DE NEMOURS & CO             DD       Jan-84-Dec-98       12,421       1.54%        6.61%

   12 SHELL OIL CO                            SUO      Jan-84-May-85       12,365       2.99%        9.28%

   13 ROYAL DUTCH PETROLEUM CO                RD       Jan-84-Dec-98       12,062       1.77%        5.64%

   14 STANDARD OIL CO CALIFONIA               CHV      Jan-84-Dec-98       11,846       1.43%        5.83%

   15 MOBIL CORP                              MOB      Jan-84-Dec-98       11,696       1.57%        5.50%

   16 HEWLETT PACKARD CO                      HWP      Jan-84-Dec-98       10,802       1.56%        9.45%




                                                                                                            37
17 ATLANTIC RICHFIELD CO         ARC     Jan-84-Dec-98   10,802   1.24%    6.42%

18 MINNESOTA MINING & MFG CO     MMM     Jan-84-Dec-98    9,672   1.15%    5.62%

19 PROCTER & GAMBLE CO           PG      Jan-84-Dec-98    9,469   1.84%    6.14%

20 MARUBENI CORP                 MARTY Jan-84-Apr-84      9,422   9.97%    17.35%

21 TEXACO INC                    TX      Jan-84-Dec-98    9,292   1.30%    5.95%

22 SHELL TRANSPORT & TRADING     SC      Jan-84-Dec-98    9,046   1.70%    6.30%

23 PHILIP MORRIS INC             MO      Jan-84-Dec-98    8,968   2.22%    7.31%

24 G T E CORP                    GTE     Jan-84-Dec-98    8,341   1.43%    5.16%

25 JOHNSON & JOHNSON             JNJ     Jan-84-Dec-98    7,821    1.96%    6.67%

26 GETTY OIL CO                  GET     Jan-84-Jan-84    7,765   24.59%

27 AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CO     AHP     Jan-84-Dec-98    7,735    1.73%    5.92%

28 COCA COLA CO                  KO      Jan-84-Dec-98    7,295   2.29%    6.22%

29 GULF OIL CORP                 GO      Jan-84-May-84    7,130   14.12%   13.21%

30 FORD MOTOR CO                 F       Jan-84-Dec-98    7,127   2.11%    7.82%

31 AMERICAN EXPRESS CO           AXP     Jan-84-Dec-98    6,961   1.69%    8.27%

32 REYNOLDS R J INDUSTRIES INC   RJR     Jan-84-Apr-89    6,881    3.16%   10.04%

33 MERCK & CO INC                MRK     Jan-84-Dec-98    6,683   2.31%    6.61%

34 DOW CHEMICAL CO               DOW     Jan-84-Dec-98    6,536   1.38%    6.97%

35 HONDA MOTOR LTD               HMC     Jan-84-Dec-98    6,287    1.48%   8.50%

36 I TT CORP                     ITT     Jan-84-Dec-98    6,160   1.33%    6.64%

37 UNION PACIFIC CORP            UNP     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,824   1.01%    6.68%

38 BELL CANADA ENTERPRISES       BCE     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,806   1.19%    5.25%

39 BRISTOL MYERS CO              BMY     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,760   1.87%    5.66%

40 TENNECO INC                   TEN     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,714   0.63%    6.85%

41 PFIZER INC                    PFE     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,705   2.37%    7.56%

42 UNOCAL CORP                   UCL     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,493    1.12%    8.00%

43 ABBOTT LABS                   ABT     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,480   1.97%    6.21%

44 WAL MART STORES INC           WMT     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,439   2.30%    7.63%

45 STANDARD OIL CO OF OH         SOH     Jan-84-May-87    5,396   1.93%    6.84%

46 MOTOROLA INC                  MOT     Jan-84-Dec-98    5,366   1.51%    9.75%

47 PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO         P       Jan-84-Dec-98    5,286   1.08%    7.75%




                                                                                38
48 ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL CORP        ROK    Jan-84-Dec-98   5,098   1.18%    7.11%

49 SUN INC                            SUN    Jan-84-Dec-98   5,081   0.91%    7.22%

50 TEXAS OIL & GAS CORP               TXO    Jan-84-Jan-86   5,010   -1.75%   7.83%

51 T D K CORP                         TDK    Feb-84-Dec-98   4,955   1.17%    9.25%

52 WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP         WX     May-84-Dec-98   4,792   1.23%     8.72%

53 HALLIBURTON COMPANY                HAL    Jun-84-Dec-98   4,778   1.00%    9.47%

54 SMITHKLINE BECKMAN CORP            SKB    Jun-85-Jun-89   4,706   1.69%    8.20%

55 XEROX CORP                         XRX    Jun-86-Dec-98   4,698   1.82%    8.09%

56 INTEL CORP                         INTC   May-89-Dec-98   4,691   3.62%    10.68%

57 SUPERIOR OIL CO                    SOC                    4,676

58 AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC   AIGR   Jul-89-Dec-98   4,665   2.02%    6.40%

  BRITISH PETROLEUM PLC               BP     Jun-87-Dec-98    637    1.32%    6.42%



  Equally-Weighted Fund                      Jan-84-Dec-98           1.50%    4.12%

  Value-Weighted Fund                        Jan-84-Dec-98           1.50%    4.11%

  Standard & Poor's 500 Index                Jan 84-Dec-98           1.48%    4.33%




                                                                                   39
                                          References



Barclay Michael J., Neil D. Pearson, and Michael S. Weisbach . “Open-end Mutual Funds and

Capital-Gains Taxes,” Journal of Financial Economics (1998) 49:1, 4-43.



Berstresser, Daniel and Poterba, James. “Do After-Tax Returns Affect Mutual Fund Inflows?”

Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mimeo, 1999.



Carhart, Mark M.. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance 52 (1997):

57-82.



Dickson, Joel M.. “Mutual Fund Economics and Performance: The Effects of Shareholder-Level

Taxation.” Stanford University. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, 1994.



Dickson, Joel M. and John B. Shoven. “A Stock Index Mutual Fund Without Net Capital Gains

Realizations”, NBER Working Paper No. 4717. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic

Research, 1994.



Dickson, Joel M. and John B. Shoven . “Taxation and Mutual Funds: An Investor Perspective.”

In Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 9, edited by James M. Poterba. Cambridge, MA: The

M.I.T. Press, 1995.




                                                                                              40
Poterba, James and Andrew Samwick . “Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market Fluctuations,

and Consumption,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (1995):295-372.



Sirri, Erik and Peter Tufano. “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” Journal of Finance 53

(1998): 1589-1622.



Warther, Vincent A. “Are Tax-Minimizing Mutual Funds Stable? Mutual Fund Flows and

Capital Gains Overhangs.” University of Michigan Business School. Mimeo, 1996.




                                                                                             41
Endnotes

*
    The authors would like to thank Olivia Lau of Stanford for superb assistance with this research. We also have

benefited from discussions, information and ideas from Harold Evensky, Fred Grauer, Keith Lawson, Davide

Lombardo, Jim Poterba, John Rea, Douglas Shackelford, an anonymous referee and conference participants at the

NBER’s “The Economic Effects of Taxation.” Research support from the Smith-Richardson Foundation and the

NBER are gratefully acknowledged. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not

necessarily reflect the views of The Vanguard Group Inc., its affiliates, or its Board of Directors.


1
    The figures exclude equities held in variable annuities, which would add about $475 billion to the total as of year-

end 1998.
2
    Legislation permitting the pass through treatment of long-term capital gains through a mutual fund was enacted in

1942. The legislative history provides no indication as to why short-term gains also were not provided with this pass

through treatment. This omission appears to have been more of an oversight than a conscious effort to treat short-

term gains differently for mutual funds.
3
    Although short-term gains are combined with ordinary dividends for tax purposes, short-term gains do not qualify

for the dividends-received deduction available to corporate investors.
4
    This argument assumes that capital gain tax rates remain constant. If capital gains taxes were to increase

significantly, this relationship could reverse because losses could be used to offset a higher potential future tax

liability.
5
    This paper will use the terms “separate account” or “individually managed account” interchangeably to refer to a

portfolio of securities managed for one investor. These accounts are not subject to the tax rules of Subchapter M of

the Internal Revenue Code and are exempt from registration under the Investment Company Act of 1940.
6
    Although mutual funds cannot explicitly use the “average cost” basis methods that are available to mutual fund

shareholders in determining realized gain or loss, a fund could mimic average cost accounting by identifying upon

sale those tax lots closest to the security’s average cost.
7
    Our discussion and simulations consider a separate account to have an initial investment but no ongoing cash flow

(except dividends from the underlying investments). This is, of course, quite stylized because separate accounts will




                                                                                                                       42
generally have some cash flow—positive or negative—over the investment horizon. However, we do not consider

these situations because it does not represent an externality as in the mutual fund context.
8
    Although mutual funds cannot explicitly use the “average cost” basis methods that are available to mutual fund

shareholders in determining realized gain or loss, a fund could mimic average cost accounting by identifying upon

sale those tax lots closest to the security’s average cost.
9
    Our discussion and simulations consider a separate account to have an initial investment but no ongoing cash flow

(except dividends from the underlying investments). This is, of course, quite stylized because separate accounts will

generally have some cash flow—positive or negative—over the investment horizon. However, we do not consider

these situations because it does not represent an externality as in the mutual fund context.
10
     Technically, a mutual fund that owned just one security would fail certain diversification tests that must be met in

order to qualify as a mutual fund. The example given is obviously for illustration only.
11
     The distribution of the realized gains (to the extent they are not reinvested in additional fund shares) would also be

a negative cash flow event that could force further realizations. This is described in more detail in Dickson (1994)

and Warther (1996).
12
     Any deferred tax liability could be eliminated to the extent such shares pass through an estate (i.e., stepped-up

basis) or used for certain charitable contributions.
13
     As mentioned in footnote 6, mutual fund shareholders—but not mutual funds themselves—are allowed to use

“average cost basis” methods, which are not forms of specific identification. For both mutual funds and their

shareholders, FIFO is the default method for determining gain or loss.
14
     Tax-efficient accounting is more general than HIFO accounting. For example, it might be preferable to realize a

larger dollar amount of long-term gains than a smaller amount of short-term gains because of their differences in

marginal tax rates. Also, a fund with capital loss carry-forwards that will soon expire might want to switch

accounting techniques to realize a lot of gain.
15
     We used the CRSP data set to determine the identity of these fifty companies and to track their monthly returns

and distributions from 1984 through 1998. If a company was merged into another company, we followed the stock

of the acquirer. If a company was bought out for cash, we replaced it with the largest market capitalization company

(in December 1983) that was not already in the data set.




                                                                                                                         43
16
     The expense ratio and reinvestment percentage assumptions are made to approximately real-life portfolios.

However, the results reported in this section are not sensitive to these assumptions.
17
     We computed as well the returns with actual tax-rates over the period between 1984 and 1998 for high- and

medium-income individuals. We did not summarize the results with actual tax rates because they are very similar to

the results reported in this section.
18
     We computed as well the returns with actual tax-rates over the period between 1984 and 1998 for high- and

medium-income individuals. We did not summarize the results with actual tax rates because they are very similar to

the results reported in this section.
19
     We present the results for LIFO in just the first simulations. Generally, the results are similar—but slightly less

tax efficient—to the HIFO case in the generally rising equity market over the simulation period. Also, LIFO is not a

widely used method among mutual funds because of the significant wash-sale restrictions that are encountered in a

daily cash flow environment.
20
     This corresponds to an annual turnover rate of approximately 80%.
21
     It should be noted, however, that our “index” funds have even less turnover than most index funds tied to a

particular market benchmark (e.g., S&P 500). As shown in the data appendix, there was very little change to the

portfolio’s underlying holdings over the time period examined. As the rate of change in an index fund’s constituents

changes, accounting techniques would become more important.
22
     As in the simulations of index funds with fluctuating net cash flow, we report the average results of 100

simulations.
23
     In the “selling winners” scenario, the portfolio manager sells the two positions with the highest ratios of market

value to cost basis. Similarly, the “selling losers” case looks at selling the two positions with the lowest ratios of

market value to cost basis (which may or may not result in realized losses).
24
     As discussed above in the description of these simulations, the security selection process (i.e., selling “winners”,

selling “losers”, or random sales) results in different portfolios because the securities sold from the portfolio differ

under the three scenarios. Unlike the simulations of index funds where all of the portfolios hold the same stocks in

the same weights, our actively managed funds simulated here will have different pre-tax returns.
25
     One suggestion that is often made is to split a fund into two without closing it. However, that approach does not

work if the fund faces liquidity constraints. While smaller funds have greater liquidity, one must consider liquidity



                                                                                                                            44
issues across all funds that a manager advises. As such, a fund that is split still represents one large pool of assets

managed by the adviser and does not enhance liquidity.
26
     This is a very extreme and somewhat unrealistic form of a fund closing. Usually, a fund is closed to new investors

and remains open for existing investors (sometimes with annual purchase limits). The example shown, though, is

consistent with the goal of closing the fund; namely, to ensure that positive cash flow is significantly reduced or

reversed, so that it does not alter the fund’s investment approach or flexibility.




                                                                                                                          45
