NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TIMING OF PURCHASES AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS
John V. Leahy
Joseph Zeira
Working Paper 7672
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7672
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

We would like to thank John Campbell, John Hassler, David Laibson, David Lindbeck, Greg Mankiw,
Torsten Persson, Yona Rubinstein, Oren Sussman, and Harald Uhlig for helpful discussions. Leahy thanks
the NSF and the Sloan Foundation for financial support, and Zeira thanks Brandeis University and HIID for
their hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by John V. Leahy and Joseph Zeira. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Timing of Purchases and Aggregate Fluctuations
John V. Leahy and Joseph Zeira
NBER Working Paper No. 7672
April 2000
JEL No. E21, E32
ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how the decision of when to buy a durable good affects both non-durable
consumption and business cycle dynamics. At the individual level, we show that the timing of
durable goods purchases plays an important role in smoothing consumption over time. In the
benchmark case, the time at which the agent purchases the durable good is the only variable that
reacts to changes in wealth, while other variables, such as the consumption of non-durables or the
amount of the durable that the individual purchases, remain unchanged. At the aggregate level, we
show that timing decisions can serve as a mechanism for the amplification and propagation of
aggregate shocks. A decline in wealth causes individuals to delay their durable goods purchases
which reduces demand dramatically for some time.

John V. Leahy
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02115
NBER and University of Chicago
jleahy@bu.edu

Joseph Zeira
Department of Economics
The Hebrew University
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem, 91905
Israel

