                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DEMAND SIDE CONSIDERATIONS AND THE
                              TRADE AND WAGES DEBATE


                                             Lisandro Abrego
                                              John Whalley


                                          Working Paper 7674
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7674

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




This paper forms part of a project on Globalisation and Social Exclusion supported by the Targeted Socio
Economic Research programme of the European Union. We are grateful to Paul Brenton, Huw Edwards,
Matthias Luecke, Carlo Perroni, and Ted To for discussions and comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Lisandro Abrego and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Demand Side Considerations and the Trade and Wages Debate
Lisandro Abrego and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 7674
April 2000
JEL No. F1, D58, J31, O30

                                              ABSTRACT


        Recent trade and wages literature focuses on whether trade or technology has been the major
source of increases in wage inequality in OECD countries since the 1980s. In this literature, no
attention has been paid to demand side considerations. Using a simple heterogeneous goods trade
model of the Armington type, and UK data, we show how trade shocks affecting the price of
unskilled-intensive goods can be absorbed on the demand side, with little or no impact on relative
wage rates. No wage impact occurs if the elasticity of substitution in preferences between imports
and import substitutes is one. As this elasticity increases, trade plays an ever larger role in explaining
wage inequality changes, and as the elasticity goes below one the sign of the effect changes. We
suggest that since many import demand elasticity estimates are in the neighbourhood of one, there
is a prima facie case that demand side considerations further lower the significance of trade as an
explanation of recent trends in OECD wage inequality −beyond that reported in recent literature.

Lisandro Abrego                                                  John Whalley
Centre for the Study of Globalisation and Regionalisation        Department of Economics
University of Warwick                                            University of Western Ontario
Coventry CV4 7AL                                                 London, Ontario
UK                                                               Canada N6A 5C2
Tel.: +44 2476 524462 Fax.: +44 2476572548                       and NBER
lisandro.abrego@warwick.ac.uk                                    Tel.: 519 661 3509 Fax.: 519 661 3064
                                                                 jwhalley@julian.uwo.ca
I         Introduction and background

          The debate on trade and wages is driven by the sharp increase in wage inequality that

occurred between the 1980s and the early 1990s in some OECD countries. 2 Two major

factors have been identified in the literature as primarily responsible for this: elevated trade

volumes (imports) in low-skill-intensive products (and particularly from low-wage

developing countries) and technological change biased against unskilled labor. The issue in

the debate is the relative importance of these two factors. Most existing literature concludes

that technological change is a more important factor than trade. The outcome is important

because of the pressures for protection which arise if trade is deemed to be the main source of

new wage inequality.

          The framework used in much of recent literature discussing these issues is that of a

homogeneous goods trade model in which changes in world prices are fully transmitted to

domestic prices, and from there (via zero profit conditions) to factor prices. Our contribution

is to present a model with heterogeneous goods across countriesfor which the

homogeneous goods model is a special caseand show that, in this model, there may be no

or little transmission of international price shocks onto relative wages, depending upon


2
    Increases in wage inequality have been documented for a number of OECD countries, most notably the US

and the United Kingdom (e.g., Davis, 1992; Kosters, 1994; OECD, 1997; Gottschalk and Smeeding, 1997). This

pattern has been observed across different types of workers (low vs. high skill), education levels (college vs.

non-college graduates), and experience.    Even among “observably similar workers” wage inequality has

increased (e.g. Davis, 1992). There has also been documentation of a rise in unemployment in some European

countries without major increases in wage inequality (Kosters, 1994; OECD, 1997; Dewatripont et al., 1998)—

as well as of a decline in wage inequality in some key developing countries (Korea, Venezuela, Colombia and

Brazil) (Davis, 1992; UNCTAD, 1997; Wood, 1997).



                                                                                                             1
substitution elasticities in preferences. We then cite empirical estimates of trade elasticities to

argue that the effects of trade shocks on relative wage inequality may be even smaller than

currently believed.

        Early papers in this area have analyzed how increased trade changes labor demand via

the factor content of trade (e.g. Borjas et al., 1991; Murphy and Welch 1991, and Katz and

Murphy, 1992). Their conclusion that trade was a secondary factor based on factor content

calculations was later criticized by Wood (1994). Subsequent papers related relative product

price changes to relative wage changes (Lawrence and Slaughter, 1993; Baldwin and Cain,

1997; Leamer, 1998; Haskel and Slaughter, 1999; Harrigan and Balaban, 1999). Many of

these used estimating equations derived from general equilibrium models of a Heckscher-

Ohlin type. Other recent work relates relative factor shares to outsourcing and other factors

(Feenstra and Hanson, 1996; Anderton and Brenton, 1998; Autor et al., 1998), concluding

that trade may be more important than earlier analyzes show. Demand side considerations do

not appear in this literature.



II      Trade and wages in a differentiated goods model

        To analyze the relative importance of trade and technology for relative wage changes

in the OECD, we use a trade model with differentiated goods, similar to that set out in de

Melo and Robinson (1989), and more recently discussed in Bhattarai et al. (1999). In this

model, imports and domestically produced goods are imperfect rather than perfect substitutes.

The model has two traded and two produced goods, but embodies three goods in aggregate

when the consumption side is included, since imports are not produced domestically and one

of the domestically produced goods is not traded. Imports, the (non-exportable) domestic

good and the exportable enter consumption. On the production side, the model has a
                                                                                                 2
domestically produced goodwhich is an imperfect substitute for importsand an

exportable. Each of the produced goods uses two factor inputs: low skill and high skill labor.

Imports and exports are traded at fixed world prices.

           In this structure, as imports and the domestically produced import substitute become

perfect substitutes in preferences, the model will approach the conventional homogeneous

goods form, with only two traded and produced goods. The model, therefore, is a

generalization of the conventional homogeneous goods trade model, which stands as a special

case when the elasticity of substitution in preferences between imports and the domestically

produced import substitute is infinity. For finite elasticities, demand side effects from world

commodity price changes will occur from substitution in consumption between these two

goods.

           More formally, denoting imports by M, the exportable by E, and other domestically

produced goods by D, preferences are defined as

           U (M C , E )                                                                                        (1)

where M C is a composite function of M and D; i. e.

           M C = C( M , D )                                                                                    (2)

           We use Cobb-Douglas and CES functions for U and C, respectively, in later empirical

implementation of the model using UK data. 3

           With D and E being the two produced goods, and H and L (high and low skilled labor)

the two factor inputs, technology is represented by

3
    Cobb-Douglas and CES are the most widely used functional forms in the numerical simulation literature, and

we follow that tradition here. Flexible functional forms, such as translog or generalized Leontief, do not satisfy

global concavity conditions and can lead to numerical problems in computation of equilibria, and so are not

used here.
                                                                                                                     3
               S
        D S = D ( LD , H D )                                                              (3)

        E s = E S ( LE , H E ) ,                                                          (4)

where DS and ES represent production of the (imperfect) import substitute domestic good and

the exportable, respectively; LD, LE, HD and HE, denote the use of high and low skilled labor

in domestic good and export production. In later empirical implementation of the model,

technology is modelled by means of CES production functions.

       We assume, for simplicity, that the economy is a taker of prices for exports and

imports, P E , PM , but that the price of the domestic good, P D , is endogenously determined.

Thus, unlike in a simple homogeneous goods trade model, a product price can vary and adjust

to clear the domestic market even in the small country case.

       Given the above, the per unit cost functions for the production of E and D, consistent

with zero profits, are given by

                     H  L
        P D = g D ( W ,W )                                                                (5)

                     H  L
        P E = g E ( W ,W )                                                                (6)

where WH and WL are the wage rates of high and low skilled labor, and g D and g E are per

unit costs functions for D and E.

       Full employment conditions for factors yield

        f H D .DS + f H E .E S = H                                                        (7)

        f L D . DS + f L E . ES = L                                                       (8)

where f HD , f HE, f LD, f LE are per unit cost minimizing factor demands for H and L in the

production of the domestic import substitute and the exportable.

       To generate demands, the representative household in this economy maximizes the

utility function (1) subject to the budget constraint
                                                                                            4
        P D D + P M M + P E E D = W L L +W H H                                            (9)

where ED denotes domestic consumption of the exportable.

       In equilibrium, the price of the domestically produced good, P*D , is determined such

that market clearing occurs in D, i.e.

        D = DS                                                                            (10)

No market clearing in either E or M is required in this model since these are internationally

traded at fixed prices. Walras Law, which automatically holds for economies with demand

functions generated from utility maximization subject to a budget constraint, also implies that

trade balance will hold in equilibrium, i.e.

        PM M = PE E                                                                       (11)




where E represents exports.

       The feature of this structure that is relevant to the trade and wages debate is that

changes in world prices of imports can be partially, or even fully, accommodated by changes

in import volumes without necessarily impacting the rest of the economy. Hence, if changes

in P M occur but yield offsetting changes in M consistent with the other equilibrium

conditions of the model, trade balance will still hold but these price changes will have no

impact on domestic production. The domestic output of each product will remain the same, as

will the use of factors by sector and relative factor prices, and no impacts on the wages of

skilled and unskilled labor will occur from a trade shock. More generally, imperfect pass

through of world price changes onto domestic product prices in a heterogeneous goods trade

model will tend to lessen the impact of trade on wage inequality.

                                                                                             5
           An outcome in which trade shocks have no impact whatsoever on wage inequality

will occur if the elasticity of substitution between M and D in preferences (equation (2)) is

unity, since demand-side substitution effects will fully accommodate to the world price

change. If this substitution elasticity is close to one, world price changes affecting low skill

intensive goods will still largely be accommodated by the demand side of the model,

weakening the role of trade in explaining increased wage inequality compared to the

conventional homogeneous goods model.

           Empirical studies on Armington and import demand elasticities (e.g., Reinert and

Roland-Holst, 1992; Shiells and Reinert, 1993; Marquez, 1994) consistently produce

estimates in the neighbourhood of one. 4 The implication is that the role of trade in explaining

recent increases in OECD wage inequality will be weakened once demand side

considerations are added to conventional trade models and these elasticity estimates are taken

into account.



III        Some Calculations on the Role of Trade in UK Wage Inequality

           We have used the heterogeneous goods model set out above to make trade and wages

decomposition calculations using UK data to quantitatively investigate the role of demand-

side effects. 5 We use data on production, consumption, and trade for 1990 to represent an


4
    Demand functions generated by maximizing a CES utility function subject to a budget constraint imply that

the own price elasticity of demand approaches the negative of the substitution elasticity as the relevant share

parameter approaches zero, and so import demand elasticities and substitution elasticities in preferences are

interrelated in this way.


5
    The data we use here draws on Abrego and Whalley (2000), where the application of Heckscher-Ohlin-type

models in similar decomposition calculations is discussed.
                                                                                                             6
equilibrium after the increase in wage inequality in the 1980s, and data for 1976 to represent

pre-trade and technology change equilibrium. We calibrate the model to these two data sets,

and compute counterfactuals for cases where only one of the two shocks (trade or

technology) we consider occurs.

       The UK data we use show a fall in the relative price of internationally traded

unskilled-intensive to skilled-intensive goods of 7.9% over the period 1976-90 (based on

information from Neven and Wyplozs (1999), and data on UK imports by country of origin),

and a fall in the wage rates of low relative to high skilled workers of 15% over the same

period (from UK Office for National Statistics’ Employment Gazette). Technological change

over the period is calculated residually in the decomposition experiments; i.e. determined via

calibration such that in combination with the given product price change of -7.9% it produces

a decline of 15% in WL / WH.

       Unlike in the conventional homogeneous model (see, e.g. Leamer, 1998; Krugman

2000), factor-biased technological change can be accommodated by the heterogeneous goods

structure used here since the price of the domestic import substitute is endogenously

determined. In making our residual calculation, we assume that technological change is

biased against unskilled labor.

       We consider alternative values for the elasticity of substitution in preferences between

the domestic good and imports in the model set out in Section 2 which lie in the interval 0.2

to 20. We initially set the value for the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled

labor in production of both goods equal to 1.25. We conduct decomposition experiments by

first calibrating the model in the presence of the joint trade and technology shock. We then

compute counterfactual equilibria first with only the trade shock present, and subsequently in

the presence of the technology shock only. These allow for an assessment of the separate role
                                                                                                7
of trade and technology in contributing to observed changes in wage inequality over the

period. The experiments are repeated with different values of the substitution elasticity in

preferences, so that in repeated calibrations of the model to the same data, share parameters

change as elasticities vary.

       In other decomposition experiments, we vary production-side elasticities between 0.5

and 5, and hold the consumption-side elasticity at 1.25. In all these experiments,

technological change is obtained residually through calibration, and as parameter values

change its size changes. For each model specification we conduct the same experiments of

removing the trade and technology shocks between 1976 and 1990 from the model and

computing the implied equilibrium wage change.

       Results of these computations are presented in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1 presents results

for a range of values for the elasticity of substitution in preferences (σ), and a given

production-side elasticity (η).    For those cases where the elasticity of substitution in

preferences is close to unity (consistent with available empirical estimates), the contribution

of trade to wage inequality is small. For values of σ equal to one, trade shocks have no

impact on wage inequality. For values which are large (20), the impact of trade dominates

that of technology.

       These effects occur in this model because imports and their domestic counterparts are

imperfect substitutes, and changes in relative commodity prices can (depending on σ) be

accommodated wholly or partially through changes in consumption rather than production.

Indeed, for the contribution of trade to increased inequality to exceed that of technology, high

values (of around 17) are needed for the elasticity of substitution in preferences. These are

considerably in excess of empirical estimates for import demand elasticities reported in the


                                                                                              8
literature. These results thus suggest that the role of trade in driving increased OECD wage

inequality may be even smaller than currently thought. 6



                                             Table 1
                   UK Technology-Trade Decompositions for Alternative Values
                      of the Elasticity of Substitution in Preferences (σ)*

                                                                               σ
                                              0.2     0.5      1.0      2.0        5.0    10       15       20
Percentage of change in WL / WH
due to technology                            102.5 101.5 100.0 97.4                87     70.3     53.9    38.9

Percentage of change in WL / WH
due to trade                                  -2.5    -1.5       0.0     2.6       12.9   29.7     46.1    61.1


* Production-side elasticities are held constant across these cases, and set equal to 1.25.


          Table 1 also emphasizes that the contribution of trade to wage inequality changes sign

as the elasticity of substitution in preferences moves below one. With an elasticity of

substitution in preferences of less than one, when the world price of imports falls the resulting

increase in the volume of imports is insufficient to offset the price fall. In this case, if trade is

to remain balanced, exportsand the production of Emust fall. This implies that the

production of the import-competing good, D, will increase, and since D is intensive in L, WL /

WH increases. In contrast, with a consumption elasticity above one, the trade shock causes the

production of D to decrease, and WL / WH falls.

6
    Studies using models based on a homogeneous goods structure and reporting a relatively small trade

contribution to increased wage inequality include Feenstra and Hanson (1999), and Baldwin and Cain (1997)

(both for the US). The former provides an estimate of 15% (base specification), while the latter reports a 19%

figure for the contribution of trade. These stand in contrast to estimates in Table 1 of around 2% for preference

substitution elasticities between 1 and 2.
                                                                                                                 9
        Less sensitivity occurs in these decompositions as other model parameters change.

Table 2 reports results for a second set of decomposition experiments in which we vary

production-side elasticities, keeping the demand side elasticity unchanged at 1.25. These

results suggest, for a given σ, that the role of trade in accounting for wage inequality grows as

the elasticity of substitution between high and low skill labor inputs decreases. The effects

are, however, small, but, not surprisingly, confirm that the impact of introducing demand side

considerations into trade and wage decompositions will also vary with non-demand side

parameter values.

                                                Table 2
                UK Technology-Trade Decompositions for Alternative Values
         of the Elasticity of Substitution in Production (η) and a given value of σ*

                                                                             η
                                                  0.5             1.25           2.5        5.0
Percentage of change in WL / WH
due to technology                                 98.1             99.2          99.6       99.8

Percentage of change in WL / WH
due to trade                                      1.9                0.8         0.4        0.2

* The consumption-side elasticity is held constant, and set equal to 1.25.


IV      Conclusions

        This paper highlights the absence of demand side considerations in recent literature on

the role of trade in explaining recent increases in OECD wage inequality. We emphasize how

in a single country heterogeneous goods trade model, demand side substitution effects can

wholly or partially absorb trade shocks and insulate the production side of economies, and

hence wage rates of high and low skill labor can remain little changed

        We present a simple heterogeneous model in which we are able to vary the elasticity

of substitution between imports and domestically produced import substitutes. As this
                                                                                  10
elasticity approaches infinity a homogeneous goods trade model is approached. Using this

model and UK data, we conduct trade-technology decomposition experiments isolating the

separate influences of trade and technology on inequality. Our results show little role for

trade when elasticities are in the neighbourhood of one, and a more prominent role under

larger elasticities. Given literature estimates of trade elasticities in the neighbourhood of one,

we conclude that demand side considerations will tend to further dampen the perceived role

of trade in explaining recent increases in OECD wage inequality relative to current literature.



References

Abrego, L. and J. Whalley (2000), “The Choice of Structural Model in Trade-Wages
      Decompositions.” Review of International Economics, forthcoming.

Anderton, B. and P. Brenton (1998), “The Dollar, Trade, Technology and Wage Inequality in
       the USA,” CEPS, Brussels, mimeo.

Autor, D., L. Katz and A. Krueger (1998), “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed
       the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1169-1213.

Baldwin, R.E. and G.G. Cain (1997), “Shifts in US Relative Wages: The Role of Trade,
      Technology and Factor Endowments,” NBER Working Paper No. 5934.

Bhattarai, K., M. Ghosh and J. Whalley (1999), “On Some Properties of a Trade Closure
       Widely Used in Numerical Modelling. Economics Letters 62:13-21.

Borjas, G., R. Freeman and L. Katz (1991), “On the Labor Market Effects of Immigration
       and Trade,” in Borjas, G. and R. Freeman (eds.), Immigration and the Work Force.
       Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Davis, S. (1992), “Cross-Country Patterns of Changes in Relative Wages,” NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual: 239-91.

Dewatripont, M., A. Sapir and K. Sekkat (1998), “Labor Market Effects of Trade with
      LDCs in Europe." In M. Dewatripont, A. Sapir and K. Sekkat (eds.) Trade and Jobs
      in Europe: Much Ado about Nothing. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Feenstra, R. and G. Hanson (1996), “Globalization, Outsourcing and Wage Inequality,”
       American Economic Review, May, 240-45.

                                                                                               11
Feenstra, R. and G. Hanson (1999), “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology
       Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-90,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 113: 907-40.

Gottschalk, P. and T. Smeeding (1997), “Cross National Comparisons of Earnings and
       Income Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature 35: 633-87.

Harrigan, J. and R. Balaban (1999), “US Wages in General Equilibrium: The Effects of
       Prices, Technology, and Factor Supplies, 1963-1991,” NBER Working Paper No.
       6981.

Haskel, J. and M. Slaughter (1999), “Trade, Technology and U.K. Wage Inequality,” NBER
       Working Paper No. 6978.

Katz, L. and K. Murphy (1992), “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
       Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 35-78.

Kosters, M. (1994), “An Overview of Changing Wage Patterns in the Labor Market,” in
       Bhagwati, J. and M. Kosters (eds.), Trade and Wages: Levelling Wages Down?.
       Washington: AEI Press.

Lawrence, R. and M. Slaughter (1993), “International Trade and American Wages: Giant
      Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup,” Brookings Papers of Economic Activity 161:226.

Leamer, E. (1998), “In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Linkages between International Trade
      and Lower Wages.” In S. M. Collins (ed.) Imports, Exports, and the American
      Worker. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Krugman, P. (2000), “Technology, Trade and Factor Prices” Journal of International
     Economics, forthcoming.

Marquez, J. (1994), “The Econometrics of Elasticities or the Elasticity of Econometrics: An
      Empirical Analysis of the Behavior of U.S. Imports.” Review of Economics and
      Statistics: 471-81.

de Melo, J. and S. Robinson (1989), “Product Differentiation and the Treatment of Foreign
      Trade in Computable General Equilibrium Models of Small Economies.” Journal of
      International Economics 27: 47-67.

Murphy, K. and F. Welch (1991), “The Role of International Trade in Wage Differentials,” in
      Koster, M. (ed.), Workers and Their Wages: Changing Patterns in the United States:
      Washington: AEI Press.

Neven, D. and C. Wyplosz (1999), “Relative Prices, Trade and Restructuring in European
      Industry.” In Dewatripont, M., A. Sapir and K. Sekkat, Trade and Jobs in Europe.
      Much Ado about Nothing?. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chapt 3, pp. 60-78.

                                                                                           12
OECD (1997), “Trade, Earning and Employment: Assessing the Impact of Trade with
     Emerging Economies on OECD Labor Markets,” Employment Outlook, OECD.

Office for National Statistics (various years), Employment Gazette. London: Office for
        National Statistics.

Reinert, K. and D. Roland-Holst (1992) “Armington Elasticities for United States
       Manufacturing Sectors.” Journal of Policy Modelling 14: 631-39.

Shiells, C. and K. Reinert (1993), “Armington Models and Terms of Trade Effects: Some
        Econometric Evidence for North America.” Canadian Journal of Economics 26: 299-
        316.

UNCTAD (1997), Trade and Development Report. Geneva: UNCTAD.

Wood, A. (1994), North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Wood, A. (1997), “Openness and Wage Inequality in Developing Countries: the Latin
      American Challenge to East Asian Conventional Wisdom,” World Bank Economic
      Review 11: 33-57.




                                                                                         13
