NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THEORETICAL ANALYSIS REGARDING A ZERO LOWER
BOUND ON NOMINAL INTEREST RATES

Bennett T. McCallum

Working Paper 7677
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7677
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

This paper was prepared for the October 18-20, 1999, conference “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation
Environment,” hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The author is indebted to Miguel Casares,
Larry Christiano, Marvin Goodfriend, Dale Henderson, Allan Meltzer, Edward Nelson, Athanasios
Orphanides, Neil Wallace, Alex Wolman, and Michael Woodford for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 7677
April 2000
JEL No. E40, E50, F41
ABSTRACT

This paper explores several issues concerning a possible zero lower bound (ZLB) including
its theoretical rationale; the magnitude of effects of low sustained inflation on real interest rates; the
validity of analyzing monetary policy in models with no monetary variables; and the dynamic
stabilizing properties of Taylor rules in a ZLB context. The most important argument, however, is
that if the short nominal rate is immobilized at zero, there nevertheless exists a route for monetary
stabilization policy to be effective--- via the foreign exchange market. Its quantitative importance
is examined in a calibrated, optimizing, open-economy model.

Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Tel. (412) 268-2347 Fax (412) 268-7357
and NBER, and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu

1.

Introduction
The object of this paper is to explore theoretical issues relating to the idea that

there exists a zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and to the possibility that such a
bound might interfere with the conduct of monetary policy in an environment of low
inflation. The possibility of such an impediment has been mentioned over the years by
Vickrey (1954), Phelps (1972), Okun (1981), and Summers (1991); recently it has been
analyzed quantitatively by Fuhrer and Madigan (1997), Rotemberg and Woodford
(1997), Orphanides and Wieland (1998), Wolman (1998), Reifschneider and Williams
(1999), and possibly others. There has been little explicit theoretical analysis, however,
the main exception that I am aware of being some work in progress by Woodford (1999).
Interest in the subject of a zero lower bound—which will be abbreviated below as
ZLB—has been greatly enhanced in recent years by the success that central banks have
had in reducing average inflation rates to the range of 1-3 percent (per annum), and by
the failure of Japanese stabilization policy to prevent a prolonged macroeconomic slump
in which short-term nominal interest rates1 have fallen to figures approximating zero.
Many writers have suggested, especially in the journalistic literature, that such a situation
leaves a central bank helpless to provide macroeconomic stimulus. This point of view
has been contested by Goodfriend (1997), Krugman (1999), Meltzer (1999), and others.
The discussion below takes up a number of distinct issues and utilizes a variety of
analytical models. It begins in Section 2 with a simple but explicit analysis of the source
of a possible ZLB on interest rates. Next, Section 3 introduces an argument to the effect

1

Henceforth, the term “interest rate” should be understood to mean nominal interest, unless the modifier
“real” is included or very obviously implied.

1

that most formal analysis has overstated the restrictiveness of the ZLB by failing to
recognize forces that tend to raise steady-state real rates of interest when maintained (i.e.,
policy target) inflation rates are lowered. Section 4 returns to models with inflationinvariant steady-state real rates and reconsiders the popular practice of analyzing
monetary policy in models with no monetary variables. It is argued that neglect of
monetary variables is theoretically inappropriate, but probably not quantitatively
important. The main analysis, concerning the effectiveness of monetary policy in a ZLB
situation, is put forth in Sections 5 and 6. The first of these argues that if the one-period
nominal interest rate is for some reason fixed at zero (or some other value), there is
nevertheless a route for monetary stabilization policy operating via the foreign exchange
market. Then in Section 6 the quantitative importance of this stabilization approach is
investigated by means of a structural macroeconomic model developed and utilized
previously. Section 7 takes up a somewhat esoteric topic concerning dynamic stability
analysis and expresses disagreement with some alarming views recently put forth.
Finally, Section 8 provides a concluding overview. Because of the variety of topics
considered, different models are used from section to section. Unfortunately, some
accompanying changes in notation are needed, to which the reader should be alert.

2.

The Source of a Zero Lower Bound
Let us begin with an elementary but explicit analysis of the theoretical basis for

the common-sense belief that nominal interest rates cannot be negative. For this purpose
it will be useful to consider an extremely simple general equilibrium model that abstracts
from uncertainty and sticky prices, both of which will be introduced later in the paper.
Thus we imagine an economy populated by a large number of identical (but

2

independently acting) households, a typical one of which seeks at time 1 to maximize the
objective function
u(c1) + βu(c2) + β2u(c3) + …
subject to a sequence of constraints for t = 1,2,….
(1)

f (nt,kt) – txt = ct + kt+1 – (1-δ) kt + (1+πt)mt+1 – mt +
(1+πt) (1+Rt)-1 bt+1 - bt + wt (nt–1) + ψ(ct,mt).

Here ct denotes consumption2 during period t while yt = f(nt, kt) is the output produced by
the household from inputs of labor (nt) and the services of capital (kt), in accordance with
the well-behaved production function f(nt, kt). The economy should be thought of as one
in which there are many distinct goods; households specialize in production but choose
consumption bundles ct that include many differentiated goods. As has become wellknown, the formulation shown can then be justified by assuming that ct is a CES index of
the various goods while Pt indexes the money price of one consumption bundle and is
appropriately related to the prices of the distinct goods.3 In (1), txt reflects lump-sum
taxes net of transfers from the government, πt = (Pt+1–Pt)/Pt; mt is real money balances
held by the household at the start of t; and bt+1 is the number of bonds purchased in t,
each for the price (1 + Rt)-1, and redeemed in t + 1 for one unit of money
The final term in (1), ψ(ct,mt), reflects the transaction-facilitating properties of
money, i.e., the economy’s medium of exchange (MOE). Over a range corresponding to
normal conditions the function ψ has partial derivatives satisfying ψ1(ct, mt) > 0 and
ψ2(ct,mt) < 0, but at very low inflation rates the latter inequality may not hold, as will be

2

More specifically, ct is the number of many-commodity bundles consumed during t, as discussed below.
See, for example, the treatments in Rotemberg and Woodford (1997, pp. 308-310), Blanchard and Fischer
(1989, pp. 376-381), or Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, pp. 236-8, 661-5).

3

3

discussed shortly. Thus the assumption is that the act of acquiring the many-good
bundles consumed during t requires an expenditure of resources on transaction services,
in addition to the purchase price of the goods. The magnitude of this expenditure
increases with ct, but is decreased—at least up to a point—by larger holdings of real
money balances, which make it less likely that their holder will have to resort to barter or
hastily-negotiated credit arrangements to effect desired purchases.4 There are, of course,
other analytical devices for representing this transaction-facilitating property of the MOE.
Quite common are cash-in-advance and money-in-utility-function specifications, and I
have often promoted the “shopping time” approach that expresses transaction
requirements in terms of time rather than tangible resources. By and large, the messages
conveyed by most of these devices are the same.5 But the resource transaction-cost
variant represented in (1) is somewhat cleaner analytically and so will be utilized
throughout most of the present paper.
Assuming that f(

), u(

), and ψ(

) are such that interior solutions are

obtained, the household’s first-order conditions for optimality in the problem stated
above include, for t = 1,2…:
(2)

u′(ct) - λt[1+ψ1(ct,mt)] = 0

(3)

f1(nt,kt) – wt = 0

(4)

-λt + βλt+1 [f2(nt+1, kt+1) + 1-δ] = 0

(5)

-λt(1+πt) + βλt+1[1 - ψ2(ct+1,mt+1)] = 0

4

There has been a sizeable volume of theoretical work in recent years that seeks to provide a firm microtheoretic basis for the MOE role of money; leading examples are Kiyotaki and Wright (1989), Lacker and
Schreft (1996), and Wallace (1997). The specification of ψ( ) used here is intended to serve as a reducedform shorthand for these analyses, one that is suitable for macroeconomic (but not microeconomic) issues.
The model does not explain which asset society has somehow selected as the MOE, but the discussion
presumes that it is paper money issued by a governmentally sponsored central bank.

4

(6)

-λt(1+πt)(1+Rt)-1 + λt+1 β = 0

Here λt is the Lagrange multiplier attached to constraint (1). There are also transversality
conditions (TCs) pertaining to the household’s choice problem. Presuming them to hold,
equations (1) – (6) determine optimal time paths for ct, mt+1, kt+1, nt, bt+1, and λt in
response to market- or policy-determined values of wt, πt, txt, and Rt.
For general equilibrium, we have, in addition to relations (1) – (6), the following:
(7)

nt = 1

(8)

mt = Mt/Pt

(9)

gt – txt = (1+πt) mt+1 – mt + (1+πt) (1+Rt)-1bt+1 - bt

(10)

πt = (Pt+1-Pt)/Pt

Here (7) and (8) are market-clearing conditions, (9) is the identity that reflects the
government’s budget constraint, and (10) is the inflation definition mentioned above—all
expressed in per-household terms where relevant. We assume that the government—a
combination of a central bank that issues high-powered money Mt and a fiscal
authority—exogenously determines time paths for the variables gt, bt, and Mt. Then the
model’s 10 equations (plus TCs) determine time paths for ct, mt, kt, nt, λt, txt, wt, Rt, Pt,
and πt.
If we were to append the Fisher identity
(11)

1 + rt ≡ (1+Rt) (1+πt)-1,

then equations (4) and (6) would imply
(12)

5

1 + rt = f2(nt+1,kt+1) - δ + 1,

An exception is that the cash-in-advance setup implies an interest-inelastic money demand function.

5

i.e., that the real rates of return on bonds and capital are equalized. If the model featured
uncertainty regarding tastes or technology, then the differing risk characteristics of bonds
and capital would introduce a stochastic differential in these returns.
We now ask, is there anything in the equations governing market equilibrium in
the system at hand that is suggestive of a ZLB on the value of Rt? For an answer, we
combine (5) and (6) to obtain
(13)

1 + Rt = 1 - ψ2(ct+1,mt+1),

which says that the interest rate Rt equals –1 times the partial derivative of transaction
costs with respect to real money balances. The latter may be described as the marginal
service yield from holding money balances; thus our condition (13) can also be written as
(14)

Rt = −Pt+1

∂ψ (c t +1 , m t +1 )
.
∂M t +1

This equality is similar to (24) on p. 32 of Friedman (1969), under the assumption that
bonds provide no non-pecuniary services to their holders.
From the foregoing it is apparent that any bounds pertaining to Rt are going to be
decisively influenced by limits on ψ2(ct, mt). If ψ2 <0 strictly, then we would have the
implication Rt>0. But it seems rather implausible that such would be the case. One
would expect to have ψ22>0 over an extended range, so that the marginal service yield on
mt decreases as the quantity of money held grows larger. But at some point, say m*(ct),
real money holdings would be so large in relation to spending—e.g., ten times as large as
annual spending flows!—that additional money holdings would not provide any extra
services. Then -ψ2 would fall to zero at m = m*(c). Suppose then, that ψ(ct, mt) is such
that the relationship between -ψ2 and mt is (for given ct) as depicted in Figure 1A. Then

6

with ψ2(ct,mt) ≤ 0, condition (13) implies Rt ≥0. In this way we obtain, via formal
analysis, a ZLB on the one-period interest rate.
Continuing this line of thought, however, it seems apparent that ψ(ct,mt) in (1)
should be regarded as reflecting transaction services together with any storage costs
associated with money. If the economy’s MOE were metallic coins or uncoined bullion,
then storage costs would clearly be relevant. But even with paper money, which we are
presuming to be relevant for the analysis at hand, one can imagine that stocks of money
balances could be so large that storage costs at the margin would become non-negligible.6
In that case Figure 1B would be relevant, and a ZLB on Rt would not be implied. To the
author, this case seems most relevant.7 It is, nevertheless, rather difficult to imagine that
such storage costs could permit Rt to be negative by more than a few basis points in any
currently-conceivable circumstances.
The main point of the foregoing discussion is that the presence or absence of a
ZLB on (short term) nominal interest rates depends upon the properties of the function or
constraint of the model that represents the transaction-facilitating properties of the
economy’s MOE, together with any storage costs necessitated by stocks of the MOE.
Strictly speaking, then, it seems to be logically unsatisfactory to discuss the topic of a
ZLB in the context of a model that takes no explicit position concerning the properties of
ψ(ct, mt) or some analogous function that depicts the transaction and storage cost
properties of the MOE.

6

With paper money, pure storage costs would depend upon nominal rather than real money balances. But
one can construct a relationship such as that of Figure 1B nevertheless, contingent upon some assumption
regarding the composition of bills by denomination. For “storage” costs that reflect insurance or guard
services, the relationship would pertain to real balances in any case.
7
For some supportive argumentation, see Thornton (1999).

7

Before proceeding, it will be useful to prepare some background for the next topic
by noting one of the steady-state properties of the system at hand. With no population
growth and no technical progress, a steady state equilibrium must have constant values of
ct, yt, kt, rt, and mt so the rates of growth of Pt and Mt must be equal: the inflation rate
must equal the rate of growth of the money stock. But furthermore (4) implies that
(15)

λ = βλ[f2(n,k) + 1-δ]

holds in a steady state, so that
(16)

1/β = 1 +ρ = 1 + f2(n,k) - δ,

i.e., that r = f2(n,k) - δ = ρ. Of course the latter implies via (11) that
(17)

1 + R = (1+ρ) (1+π).

If then the rate of money growth µ and inflation were negative and greater in absolute
value than ρ, a negative value of R would be implied. Suppose, then, that the central
bank were to destroy money at a constant rate −µ larger than ρ and that the nature of
ψ(

) is such that ψ2( ) ≤ 0 so that there is a ZLB on R. It would then appear to be the

case that no steady-state equilibrium is possible, when -µ>ρ.
The property just derived should be regarded, in my judgment, as a defect of the
model at hand—a defect due to the model’s assumption that the steady-state equilibrium
value of r is totally independent of the ongoing inflation rate. This superneutrality
property is a useful approximation for thinking about macro-monetary issues, but is a
rather special property of models with time-separable, infinite-horizon utility functions
for the household agents. Not all well-known models possess this property, however, as
we shall review in the next section.

8

3.

Real-Rate Effects of Inflation
The present section considers the possibility that a permanent reduction in the

central bank’s inflation target—a fall in the long-run average inflation rate—may not
sharply reduce the “policy buffer” between the average level of Rt and the ZLB because
of an increase in the steady-state real rate, r.8 The reason is that a decreased pecuniary
yield differential between capital and money may induce wealth-holders to allocate a
larger fraction of their wealth to money and less to capital. As this occurs, the marginal
product of capital will tend to rise, carrying the real yield on paper assets along with it.
We need to consider whether such effects can be of quantitative importance.
Effects of this type cannot obtain in the Sidrauski-Brock model of Section 2, of
course, but can in models in which individuals have finite lifetimes. For our formal
analysis, let us for simplicity adopt an overlapping generations (OG) setup in which
agents live for only two periods, keeping in mind that such periods must be thought of as
(say) 25 years in duration.
Notation for our model is similar, but not identical, to that of McCallum (1987).
Thus ct denotes consumption when young, and xt+1 consumption when old, of an
individual born in period t. Such an individual’s utility function when young is u(ct, xt+1),
which we specialize to the separable form
(18)

u(ct,xt+1) = v(ct) + βv(xt+1).

Here the discount factor must be recognized to pertain to a period of 25 years. Thus for
an annual rate of time preference of 0.025, we would have β = (1.025)-25 = 0.5394.

8

The policy buffer term is taken from Clouse et.al. (1999).

9

When young, individuals supply one unit of labor inelastically and earn a real
wage of wt. Old individuals cannot work, but can and do operate production processes
using capital goods (obtained from their savings when young) and hired labor of youths.
Let yt = f(nt, kt) denote output in t of an old producer who has kt units of capital to use
and hires nt young workers.
Young individuals can hold their savings wt – ct in the form of capital, bonds, or
money. Let kt+1, bt+1, and ξt denote capital, bond, and real-money holdings at the end of t.
Then the young person’s budget constraint is
wt = ct + kt+1 + bt+1 (1+rt)-1 + ξt,

(19)

and when old in t+1 this person will be constrained by
xt+1 = f(nt+1,kt+1) + (1-δ)kt+1 – wt+1 nt+1 + bt+1 + ξt Pt/Pt+1 + trt+1 - ψ(xt+1,mt+1).

(20)

Here trt+1 = -txt+1 denotes lump-sum transfers to an old person in t + 1, while money
holdings are
(21)

mt+1 = ξt Pt/Pt+1 + trt+1

and ψ(xt+1, mt+1) represents transaction costs of consuming in old age. The function ψ
has the same general interpretation as in Section 2, although it is more strained by the
extreme length of a period in the present setting.9
Maximization of (18) subject to (19), (20), and (21) yields the following firstorder optimality conditions for a young individual:
(22)

v′(ct) = βv′(xt+1) [f2(nt+1,kt+1) + 1-δ]/[1+ψ1(xt+1,mt+1)]

(23)

f1(nt+1, kt+1) = wt+1

9

It is natural to ask why no such shopping considerations apply to young consumers. For simplicity we
assume that they must obtain their goods by barter since they have no assets when born. The cost of

10

(24)

v′(ct) = βv′(xt+1) (Pt/Pt+1)[1 - ψ2(xt+1, mt+1)]/[1+ψ1(xt+1,mt+1)]

(25)

rt = f2(nt+1, kt+1) - δ.

These plus (19), (20), and (21) determine the individual’s choices of ct, xt+1, kt+1, nt+1,
bt+1, mt+1, and ξt given exogenous (to the individual) values of wt, wt+1, trt, Pt/Pt+1, and rt.
We assume that population growth proceeds at the rate ν, so that 1 + ν is the
number of young persons per old person in each period. Then for general equilibrium,
we must have for each t = 1,2,…
(26)

nt = 1 +ν,

(27)

Mt/Pt = (1+ν) ξt,

where Mt = money supply per old person in t, after transfers, and the government budget
identity
Pt(gt + trt) = (1+ν)Mt – Mt-1 + (1+ν)Ptbt+1(1+rt)-1 − Ptbt.

(28)

Assuming that the government sets time paths for gt (government purchases), Mt, and bt,
the ten listed equations determine equilibrium paths for the variables ct, xt, kt+1, nt, mt, ξt,
Pt, trt, wt, and rt (t = 1,2,…).10
In a steady-state equilibrium, we have constant values for c, x, m, ξ, k, w, r, b, π =
(Pt+1/Pt)-1, tr, and n = 1+ν. In this context, r = f2(1+ν, k)−δ and w = f1(1+ν,k). But
determination of the value of k is not independent of m and Pt/Pt+1. For simplicity, let us
eliminate g and b from the model. Then the relevant set of conditions determining k, c, x,
and m is

conducting barter exchanges should then be included also, but has been omitted for simplicity. It would
appear that this omission should not have major misleading effects on the analysis that follows.

11

(29)

v′(c) = βv′(x)[f2(1+ν,k) + 1-δ] / [1+ψ1(x,m)]

(30)

v′(c) = βv′(x)[1-ψ2(x,m)] / [1+ψ1(x,m)](1+π)

(31)

f(1+ν,k) + (1-δ)k = x + (1+ν)c + (1+ν)k + ψ(x,m)

(32)

f1(1+ν,k) = c + k + m/(1+ν)

Here equations (29), (31), and (32) include the four endogenous variables c, x, k, and m.
Therefore their values cannot be determined without use of (30), where the inflation rate
π appears. If we treat π as exogenous—determined by the average growth rate of M—
then the monetary authority’s choice of π will typically affect the steady-state value of k
and therefore r.
Our objective now is to see whether the effect of π on r is quantitatively large
enough to be of policy significance. Thus we need to calibrate the model at hand. For
the production function we take y = A n.64 k.36 and choose A to yield a realistic value of
k/y. In annual terms the latter would be about 3 so, in our setup with 25-year periods, we
need k/y in the range of about 0.1-0.2. In equilibrium, n = 1+ν so if we take population
growth to be one percent per year we obtain n = (1.01)25 = 1.2824. We also want the real
rate of interest to be around 2.0 – 4.0 percent per year. It turns out that together these
requirements suggest a value of A = 20. For the 25-year depreciation rate, we use δ =
0.90, which implies that about 10 percent of gross output goes to depreciation. For our
utility function, an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 0.25 seems appropriate,11 so
we specify u(c) = (1−θ)-1c1−θ with θ = 4, which implies u′(c) = c-4.

10

In this setup, mt = Mt/Pt is not assumed but can be shown to be implied by the equilibrium conditions.
Also implied is the overall resource constraint f(nt, kt) + (1-δ)kt = xt+1 + (1+ν)ct + (1+ν)kt+1 + gt + ψ(xt,mt).
11
Virtually identical results were obtained with an elasticity of 0.4, i.e., θ = 2.5.

12

Turning now to the transaction cost function ψ(x,m), let us suppose that the cost
per unit of purchases declines with m/x, according to
(33)

ψ(x,m)/x = a1(x/m)a2

a1, a2 > 0.

From a relation analogous to (13) we have that the elasticity of money demand with
respect to the nominal interest rate equals –1/(1+a2). To yield a conservatively small
value of 0.2, we then set a2 = 4. Finally, to keep the ratio of m to k (or m to y)
realistically small, we specify a1 = 0.1 × 10-8.
With these values, we consider annualized inflation rates of 10, 5, 2, 1, 0, -2, -5,
and -10 percent. In terms of our 25-year periods, these imply values of π as shown in
Table 1. Steady state values of c, x, k, and m are also reported in Table 1 for these
alternative inflation rates. It will be observed that real money balances rise and the
capital stock falls as inflation rates are reduced toward zero, and then on into the negative
range. The real rate of interest—the marginal product of capital net of depreciation—is
shown in the final column in annualized percentage terms. It rises quite slowly with
reduced inflation, but climbs more significantly as deflation ranges are encountered.
Indeed, in the model at hand, it seems to rise enough to keep the nominal interest rate
positive in all cases, even with substantial deflation. That finding accords with the type
of effect that this section was designed to investigate.
In quantitative terms, however, Table 1 results are unlikely to provide much
reassurance to policymakers concerned with the issue raised by Summers, Okun, and
others, which has to do with cyclical stabilization, not the potential infeasibility of
sizeable steady-state deflation rates. In that regard, our quantitative results suggest that
the increase in the steady-state real interest rate associated with a reduction in inflation

13

from 2 percent to 0 percent (per year) would be negligible. Accordingly, we henceforth
ignore the effects of inflation on the average real rate of interest, and return to models of
the Sidrauski-Brock type in which the steady-state real rate r is invariant to alternative
maintained inflation rates.

4.

The Role of Monetary Variables in Policy Analysis
At this point we resume the main line of argument. Much practical monetary

policy analysis during recent years has been conducted, as is well known, in models that
include no monetary variables whatsoever. Instead, they consist of the three following
components: (i) an IS-type relation (or set of relations) that specifies how interest rate
movements affect aggregate demand and output; (ii) a price adjustment equation (or set
of equations) that specifies how inflation behaves in response to the output gap and to
expectations regarding future inflation; and (iii) a monetary policy rule that specifies each
period’s settings of an interest-rate instrument. These settings are typically made in
response to recent or predicted values of the economy’s inflation rate and its output
gap—as, e.g., in the case of a Taylor rule. Examples of such analytical work, stemming
from conferences held by NBER and the Sveriges Riksbank (in collaboration with IIES
of Stockholm University), are presented in Taylor (1999) and in the June 1999 issue of
the Journal of Monetary Economics (vol. 43, no. 3). This practice of conducting
monetary policy analysis in models with no monetary variables is of particular interest in
situations in which interest rates are close to a ZLB. But before turning to that case, it
will be useful to consider the absence of monetary variables from a more general
perspective.

14

As a point of reference, let us write out a simple specification of the IS-AS-MP
type under discussion.12 Symbols are basically the same as in Section 2, but in addition
we let y t be the natural-rate value of yt, i.e., the value that would prevail in the absence
of any price stickiness in the economy, and define p t as the associated price level. Also,
let vt and et represent shocks to spending and monetary policy behavior. We suppose that
y t is generated exogenously, influenced perhaps by the shock vt. Then the schematic
model is given by the following three equations:
(34)

log yt = b0 + b1(Rt - Et∆log pt+1) + b2(log gt – Et log gt+1) + Etyt+1 + vt

(35)

log pt – log pt-1 = (1-α)(log p t −1 - log pt-1) + Et-1(log p t - log p t −1 )

(36)

Rt = Et-1∆log pt+1 + µ0 + µ1(Et-1∆log pt+1 - π*) + µ2(log yt – log y t ) + et .

Here (36) is a Taylor-style (1993a) policy rule, with a forward-looking flavor, and (35) is
a particular price adjustment specification that will be discussed below in Section 5. For
present purposes, our concern is with the IS-type relationship (34) about which we ask:
can it be given an adequate theoretical foundation?
In fact, a reasonably satisfactory justification has become quite well-known from
a number of papers, including Kerr and King (1996), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997),
McCallum and Nelson (1999c), and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999), among others. It
can be outlined briefly as follows. Consider the optimizing model presented in Section 2
and note that equations (4) and (12) can be combined to yield
(37)

λt = βλt+1(1+rt),

where λt is the shadow value (in utility units) of a unit of output in t while rt is the real
rate of interest. Suppose then that the transaction-cost function ψ(ct,mt) is separable, so
12

Here AS and MP stand for aggregate supply and monetary policy, respectively.

15

that its first partial derivative with respect to ct can be written as ψ1(ct). Then using (2)
for λt we can substitute into (37) and obtain
(38)

u′(ct)/[1+ψ1(ct)] = βu′(ct+1)(1+rt)/[1+ψ1(ct+1)].

Now the latter is a relationship that determines a household’s choice of ct in response to rt
and its expectations regarding ct+1. Taking a log-linear approximation, then, we can
obtain13
(39)

log ct = b0’ + Etlog ct+1 + b1’ rt

where b1’ < 0. In the literature, derivations such as the foregoing have usually been
presented in models in which the transaction-facilitating property of money is expressed
by including mt as an argument of the utility function, rather than in the manner involving
our transaction-cost approach. But the basic idea is the same. And in either case, a
disturbance term will appear on the right-hand side of (39) if there is a serially-correlated
preference shock appearing appropriately in the utility function.
Next, armed with (39) we make use of the economy’s overall resource constraint.
A log-linear approximation is written as
(40)

log yt = ω1log ct + ω2log it + ω3log gt

where it denotes investment in period t. The weights ωj sum to 1.0 and reflect average
shares of the three components. We substitute (39) into (40) for ct and solve out Etct+1
using (40), thereby obtaining
(41)

log yt = b0 + b1rt + b2(it – Etit+1) + b3(gt – Etgt+1 ) + Etyt+1 + vt.

The latter is the “expectational IS function” that we set out to justify. It might be
mentioned that applications have often ignored the investment and government spending

13

For a summary of useful approximation formulae, see Uhlig (1997).

16

terms. In the case of investment, that practice is rationalized by treating capital as a fixed
constant (e.g., Rotemberg and Woodford (1997)) or by treating log investment as an
exogenous random walk (McCallum and Nelson (1999c)).14 If assumed exogenous,
government spending can be included easily. Thus we end up with a relation basically
equivalent to (34).
At this point let us return our attention to the system (34), (35), (36). If gt is
excluded, or assumed exogenous, then the system is complete in the sense that yt, pt, and
Rt are the only endogenous variables. To append a money demand function, which could
be derived in the model of Section 2 by solving (13) for mt+1, would be redundant. The
only role of such a function would be to describe the path of the nominal money stock Mt
that would be necessary to support the Rt policy rule (36). Including this relation in the
model would therefore have no effect on time paths of the variables yt, pt, and Rt.
But of course it should be clear that this conclusion depends upon the absence of
any term involving real money balances in the expectational IS function (34). And that
absence depends upon the assumption, inserted provisionally three paragraphs ago, that
the transaction-cost function ψ(ct,mt) is separable in ct and mt. An obvious task, then, is
to reconsider that crucial assumption. But my own position has already been introduced
in Section 3, where it is suggested that a plausible specification for ψ( ) would be of the
form
(42)

ψ(ct,mt) = cta1(ct/mt)a2

14

A formulation with endogenous investment, together with an analysis of the constant-capital assumption,
is developed by Casares and McCallum (1999).

17

with a1, a2 > 0. This function is clearly not separable so the issue becomes one involving
quantitative magnitudes. Is the role of real money balances in the IS function likely to be
quantitatively important?15
To approach that question, let us see how the IS function would be specified
under the assumption that (42) is the relevant specification for transaction costs. Then
equation (2) can be written (assuming that u′(ct) = ct−θ) as
(43)

λt = ct-θ /[1 + (1+a2)a1(ct/mt)a2]

and a log-linear approximation would be
(44)

log λt = −θ log ct − φ(log ct – log mt),

provided that φ/a2 is small relative to 1.0, where φ = a1(1+a2)a2(c/m)a2.16 Substitution of
(44) into the log of (37) followed by rearrangement yields
(45)

log ct = Etlog ct + (θ+φ)-1[φ(log mt – Etlog mt+1) – rt – log β] + disturbance.

Clearly, then, combination of the latter with (40) would result in an IS function like (41)
but including an additional term, equal to
(46)

[(c/y)φ/(φ+θ)](log mt – Et log mt+1).

In sum, we have found that non-separability of ψ(c,m) implies that a term involving real
money balances appears in the expectational IS function based on optimizing analysis,
and if the form of ψ(c,m) is as given in (42) then the additional term can be approximated
by expression (46). It is clearly of interest, then, to obtain an idea of the magnitude of the
attached coefficient, i.e., the term in brackets in (46).
To do so we again draw on the implication that the money demand equation in the
model under discussion would be of the form (13), which we now write as
15

This is apparently the way that Woodford (1999) views the issue.

18

(47)

R = a1 a2 (ct/mt)1+a2.

Then an assumed money demand elasticity with respect to Rt of –0.2 would again suggest
a value of a2 = 4. To calibrate a1, let us express R and c/m in units pertaining to annual
time periods. Then for R a value of 0.05 would be reasonably appropriate and for c/m a
value of 5.17 These choices yield a1 = 0.05/4(5)5 = 4 × 10-6. Also let θ = 2.5. Thus we
have φ = 20(4 × 10-6)(5)4 = 0.05 and φ/(φ+θ) = 0.05/(0.05 + 2.5) = 0.0199. Consequently,
the coefficient attached to log mt – Et log mt+1 in the IS function is estimated by our
calibration exercise to be smaller than 0.02. Of course there are numerous uncertainties
and approximations involved, but the figure obtained seems to be too small to justify any
confidence that the effect of real money terms in the IS function would be economically
sizeable, contingent upon our basic model specification.
Woodford (1999, Sect. 3.1) suggests a considerably larger number (approximately
0.1) for the comparable slope coefficient, primarily because he assumes a much larger
value for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption.18 Nevertheless, he
concludes that there is no prospect from this source for escape from a liquidity trap
situation—one with Rt at a ZLB—because approximations such as those used above
break down in the vicinity of satiation with monetary transaction services. Woodford’s
reasoning seems to be correct, but we will consider the liquidity trap issue more generally
in the next section.
First, however, it should be noted that some analysts—most notably Meltzer
(1999)—argue that monetary variables cannot legitimately be ignored in policy analysis

16

Here (c/m) is interpreted as a steady-state value. Similar usages appear below, e.g., in (46).
For the latter, we use recent U.S. ratios of consumption to M1.
18
That Woodford uses a money-in-the-utility-function formulation, rather than (42), seems an inessential
difference.
17

19

because they are related to market outcomes in a manner that does not work through a
real-money-balance term in an IS function. Instead, Meltzer argues that the relevant
transmission process involves adjustment in the relative prices of assets that are not
recognized in simple models such as the ones used here (and by Woodford (1999)). Of
course Meltzer is correct to say that it is a gross simplification of reality to pretend that
economies include only two assets.19 Whether monetary policy can be used to
systematically influence the relevant relative asset prices is, however, an open question.20
Also, modelling of the relevant transmission process is both necessary and difficult. For
one such relative price it does seem clear, however, that there are systematic effects of
monetary policy that are both relevant and comprehensible. That argument will be
spelled out in the following section.

5.

Stabilizing Monetary Policy in a Liquidity Trap
Probably the most contentious and important topic under consideration is the idea

that the potential stabilizing powers of monetary policy can be nullified by the occurrence
of a “liquidity trap,” i.e., a situation in which the central bank’s usual policy instrument
Rt cannot be lowered past a prevailing ZLB (or possibly some negative lower bound as
suggested in Figure 1B). The purpose of the present section is to argue, by means of an
expository model, that even in a liquidity trap there is scope for monetary stabilization

19

That is the case for the model of this section because (abstracting from uncertainty) capital and bonds are
perfect substitutes.
20
In Casares and McCallum (1999) the model includes bonds and capital goods that are not perfect
substitutes, because of capital adjustment costs. But their relative prices are not influenced by the
systematic component of monetary policy.

20

policy provided that the economy is internationally open—as all actual economies are.21
Then the argument will be evaluated quantitatively in an optimizing model in Section 6.
We begin by specifying a schematic model designed for illustrative purposes.
The macroeconomic structure will consist of an open-economy IS sector, with no realmoney terms included, a price adjustment relation, and a monetary policy rule. For the IS
sector we have
(48)

yt = Etyt+1 + b0 + b1(R − Et∆pt+1) + b2(xt – Etxt+1) + vt

(49)

xt = c1(st-1 – pt-1) + c2yt-1.

Here (48) is an expectational IS function of the type described above, in which now yt
denotes the log of output, pt the log of the price level, and xt the log of net exports.22
(Please note the change in notation relative to Sections 2 and 4!) The disturbance term vt,
taken for simplicity to be white noise, reflects taste shocks. As suggested by optimizing
analysis, b1<0 and b2>0. In the real interest rate term, R has been written without a
subscript so as to reflect the hypothesized liquidity trap situation, i.e., that the one-period
nominal interest rate Rt is held fixed over time by some force not explicitly modeled but
presumed to reflect a ZLB or some such constraint. Relation (49) represents effects of
relative prices and incomes on net exports. We treat foreign prices and income as
constant, so st – pt represents the modeled economy’s (log) real exchange rate, st being
the log of the domestic price of foreign exchange. We presume, as is quite standard, that
c1>0 and c2<0.23 A one-period lag is assumed for simplicity, but distributed-lag effects
would not fundamentally alter the model. It is necessary, in the present simplified setup,
21

I am deeply indebted to Edward Nelson for encouraging me to pursue the approach developed in this
section and the one to follow.
22
More precisely, xt is the log of exports minus the log of imports.

21

that the effect of st – pt on xt not be entirely contemporaneous, for reasons discussed
below in footnote 25. (No such assumption will be used, however, in the more complete
model of Section 6.)
Next, regarding price adjustment behavior we posit that
(50)

pt – pt-1 = (1-α) ( p t-1 – pt-1) + Et-1( p t - p t-1),

where p t represents the price that would be market-clearing in the absence of nominal
stickiness. With 0<α<1 price level stickiness is implied, however. McCallum and
Nelson (1999a) show that (50) is equivalent to the Barro-Grossman-Mussa-McCallum
“P-bar” model, which is one of the few sticky-price formulations that implies satisfaction
of the natural rate hypothesis of Lucas (1972). They also show that (50) is equivalent
(assuming demand function log-linearity) to the condition
Et-1 ~y t = α ~y t-1,

(50′)

where ~y t = yt - y t with y t representing the (log) natural-rate value of output, i.e., the
value that would prevail with fully flexible prices. Relation (50′) can be used instead of
(50) in a model, analytical or numerical, to significantly facilitate the analysis.
For simplicity suppose that y t = y . Then equations (48)-(50) contain the
endogenous variables yt, xt, st, and pt. We close the system with the following monetary
policy rule:
(51)

st – st-1 = µ0 - µ1(∆pt - π*) - µ2Et-1 ~y t + et

where µ1, µ2>0. Thus when inflation is low and/or expected output is below its naturalrate value, the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate ∆st is increased. This is

23

In the next section, a model is presented in which the import component of (49) is modeled in an
optimizing fashion.

22

accomplished via central bank purchases of foreign exchange at a pace more rapid than is
normal. Such an action reflects expansionary monetary policy, conducted in accordance
with the rule (51), designed to stabilize ∆pt toward its target value π* and ~y t toward zero
(yt toward y t). In (51), et represents the unsystematic “shock” component of monetary
policy, which we take to be white noise. The constant term µ0 is set equal to the average
real rate of interest, which is –b0/b1.
The MSV rational expectations solution to the system (48)-(51) can be obtained
as follows.24 Write (49) in first difference form ∆xt = c1(∆st-1 - ∆pt-1) + c2(yt-1 – yt-2), and
substitute into (48) in place of Et∆xt+1. That step yields25
(52)

yt = Etyt+1 + b1(R − Et∆pt+1) – b2Et[c1(∆st − ∆pt) + c2(yt – yt-1)] + vt.

Then (50), (51), and (52) comprise a system for which the MSV solution is of the form
(53)

yt = φ10 + φ11yt-1 + φ12vt + φ13et

(54)

∆pt = φ20 + φ21yt-1 + φ22vt + φ23et

(55)

∆st = φ30 + φ31yt-1 + φ32vt + φ33et.

Thus we have Eyt+1 = φ10 + φ11yt, Et∆pt+1 = φ20 + φ21yt, and Et∆st+1 = φ30 + φ31yt with yt
given by (53). Substitution into (50)-(52) and application of the undetermined
coefficients procedure indicates that the solution values (ignoring constants) are as
follows, where Φ ≡ 1-α + b1φ21 + b2c2:

24

Here MSV stands for “minimum state variable.” For a recent discussion that characterizes the MSV
solution as the solution that excludes “bubble” components, together with the exposition of an algorithm
that yields the unique MSV solution in a very broad class of linear models, see McCallum (1999b).
25
Here it can be seen why a purely contemporaneous version of (49) is unsatisfactory in the present setup:
it would introduce Et∆pt+1 rather than ∆pt into (52), and then ∆pt would appear nowhere in the system.

23

(56)

φ11 = α
φ21 =

b 2 c 2 (1 − α) − b 2 c1αµ 2 − α(1 − α)
b1 − c1 b 2 (1 − µ1 )

φ31 = αµ2 + µ1φ21

φ12 = 1/Φ

φ13 = -b2c1/Φ

φ22 = 0

φ23 = 0

φ32 = 0

φ33 = 1

Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine the sign of φ21 or therefore Φ on the
basis of the qualitative specification given above. Nevertheless, it can be seen from (56)
that as µ1 → ∞, i.e., as the strength of policy response to ∆pt - π* increases without
bound, φ21 → 0 and therefore the variance of ∆pt − π* goes to zero. Also, as µ2→ ∞,
φ21→ ±∞, so 1/Φ → 0 causing the variability of yt relative to Et-1yt = αyt-1 to approach
zero. So the exchange-rate-based stabilization rule (51) possesses policy effectiveness.
The extent to which this is quantitatively significant will be explored, in a somewhat
larger model that is realistically calibrated, in the following section.
Before turning to that exploration it will be appropriate to provide some additional
discussion concerning the nature of policy rule (51). First, is such a rule feasible? Is it
possible, that is, for a central bank to control an economy’s nominal exchange rate under
liquidity trap conditions, with (domestic) agents satiated with the transaction-facilitating
services of money and a short-term nominal interest rate equal to zero? In that regard it
must be noted that, in a model of the type under discussion, the left-hand-side variable in
the policy rule is not literally an instrument but rather an indicator variable. Assuming
that the model applies to quarterly or monthly time periods, that is, the value of ∆st on the
left-hand-side of (51) can be viewed as an intermediate “operating target” to be obtained

24

by day-to-day or hour-by-hour manipulation of other tools (e.g., open-market purchases)
serving literally as the central bank’s instrument. The issue, then, is whether a central
bank can, based on virtually continuous observation of its exchange rate st, push it in the
desired direction? There are limits to how far a central bank can reduce st, i.e., appreciate
its currency, since it will always hold at most a finite stock of foreign exchange reserves.
But depreciation, i.e., upward movement of st, is the crucial requirement in the situation
under discussion. And it seems clear that there would be no economic limit to the
upward movement of st that could be engineered by central bank purchases (with high
powered money) of foreign exchange.26
The idea that st can be used as an instrument variable (in the relevant sense) is not
a new one. For a number of years, for example, economists associated with the Reserve
Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) used st as the instrument variable in analytical
descriptions of RBNZ policy; see, e.g., Grimes and Wong (1994) or Hansen and
Margaritis (1993). Alternatively, Ball (1999), Gerlack and Smets (1996), and others have
described the use by several countries of a “monetary conditions index” as an instrument
variable. There are various definitions of a monetary conditions index (MCI), but those
that I have seen all feature measures that in some fashion combine a short-term interest
rate and an exchange rate. One plausible, dimensionally coherent definition would be
(57)

mcit = ωRt − (1-ω)∆st.

Clearly, in a ZLB situation this mcit measure would reduce to use of a ∆st instrument, as
specified in (51). Thus there seems to be significant practical evidence of two types, as

26

Of course there might be political limits, but that is a different matter altogether, outside the scope of the
present paper.

25

well as a priori reasoning, to support the hypothesis that use of a ∆st instrument is
feasible. Nevertheless, more discussion will be provided, immediately.
In the model presented above, there are two non-standard features. The first is
that Rt is held fixed at Rt = 0; that feature is imposed so as to address the issues
concerned with monetary policy in a ZLB situation. The second feature is that the model
apparently does not include a relationship reflecting uncovered interest parity (UIP). In
that regard, most analysts (including myself) would normally include UIP as one
component of an open-economy macroeconomic model—despite the existence of
mountains of empirical evidence that are, at least on the surface, strongly inconsistent
with UIP on a quarter-to-quarter basis.27 So how is UIP avoided here? The answer is as
follows.
It is well known that to be consistent with the data, UIP relations must include a
discrepancy term, typically referred to as a risk premium. Thus UIP in empirical models
is typically expressed as
(58)

Rt – Rt* = Et ∆st+1 + ξt,

where the risk premium ξt has a large variance relative to shock terms and furthermore is
serially correlated.28 Recently it has been standard practice to treat ξt as generated
exogenously, but there are theoretical reasons for believing that it would be related to the
relative amounts of outside domestic and foreign nominal liabilities outstanding. For
example, a hypothesis widely entertained during the 1970s might be expressed as

27

A standard reference is Lewis (1995). For data averaged over long time periods, see Flood and Taylor
(1997).
28
In McCallum and Nelson (1999a), the variance is by far the largest of any exogenous disturbance and the
process is an AR(1) with coefficient 0.5. These values were taken from evidence in Taylor (1993b).

26

(59)

ξt = λ[Bt – (Bt* + st)] + ζt

where Bt and Bt* are logs of domestic and foreign government debt (including base
money) and ζt is an exogenous stochastic shock term. Substituting and recognizing that
lags could be involved, we then write
(60)

Rt – Rt* = (Etst+1 – st) + λ (L)[Bt – Bt* − st] + ζt,

which is similar to equations prominent in several older writings of Dornbusch (e.g.,
1980, p. 169, and 1987, p.7). This “portfolio balance” hypothesis has receded from its
earlier prominence because empirical studies by Frankel (1982, 1984), Dooley and Isard
(1983), and others failed to find empirical support. But it is, I suggest, not unreasonable
to believe that some such relation obtains in fact, probably with weak or transitory effects
of the Bt – Bt* variable. And if such is the case, then our procedure above is fully
justified. For (60) indicates that even with Rt = R, st can be affected by purchases of
foreign exchange since they alter the value of Bt – Bt*. Yet the precise specification of
relation (60) need not be known, and the relation need not be included in the model, for
exactly the same reason that money demand functions are not needed in analyses that
presume use of an interest rate instrument. Thus appending (60) to the model (48)-(51)
would have no effect on the implied behavior of ∆pt, xt, yt, or ∆st; it would merely specify
the magnitude of open-market purchases of foreign exchange needed to implement the
∆st policy rule (51).
Still another way of expressing the argument is as follows. Suppose that policy
rule (51) is relevant but the economy is not in a liquidity trap. Then let strict UIP be
included as part of the model and note that Rt is determined endogenously. In that
determination of Rt, the UIP relation plays a major role—one might say that UIP is the

27

“proximate determinant” of Rt. Next suppose that the economy in question has a fixed
nominal exchange rate. Then Et∆st+1 = 0 in all periods so the UIP condition implies that
the home-foreign interest rate differential is constant over time; in that case the home
country’s central bank has no influence on Rt, not even temporarily. Most practical
analysts would not, however, accept that conclusion. Instead they would view this lack
of influence over Rt as a medium-term tendency, and would contend that on a month-tomonth or quarter-to-quarter basis the central bank can influence Rt, keeping it temporarily
high or low relative to the relevant foreign rate. But that contention implies that strict
UIP does not hold on a period-to-period basis. Instead the home-foreign interest
differential can be temporarily influenced by policy actions of the central bank as
suggested by formulation (60).29 Some evidence supportive of this position has been
provided by Stockman (1992).

6.

Quantitative Application
Our objective now is to provide quantitative support for the position developed in

the previous section, viz., that a policy feedback rule with an exchange rate instrument
can provide macroeconomic stabilization in a situation in which interest rate
manipulation is infeasible because of a ZLB. The basic research strategy is to adopt a
quantitative open-economy macroeconomic model, alter the policy rule so as to use ∆st
rather than Rt as the left-hand-side instrument or indicator variable, and impose the
constraint that Rt ≡ 0. The latter step requires that some relationship in the model be
ignored to avoid over-determination of the endogenous variables; the relationship that we
ignore is UIP.
29

In this regard, see the evidence of Flood and Rose (1996) for members of the European Exchange Rate

28

The model to be used here as a starting point is the small-scale, open economy,
quarterly model based on explicit optimizing analysis that is developed by McCallum and
Nelson (1999b). It has been utilized subsequently—together with an additional variant—
by McCallum (1999a); the next three paragraphs constitute an adaptation of descriptive
material taken from the last-mentioned paper.
Basing one’s analysis on the assumption of explicit optimizing behavior by the
modeled individuals in a general equilibrium setting is obviously not sufficient—and
perhaps not necessary—for the creation of a structural model that is specified with
reasonable accuracy relative to economic reality. The optimizing general equilibrium
approach can be very helpful in this respect, however, since it eliminates potential
internal logical inconsistencies that are possible when this source of intellectual discipline
is absent. The model at hand, henceforth termed the M-N model, has a simple basic
structure since it depicts an economy in which all individuals are infinite-lived and alike.
As with many recent models designed for policy analysis, it assumes that goods prices
are “sticky,” i.e., adjust only slowly in response to changes in conditions. It differs from
many previous efforts in this genre, however, in three ways. First, the gradual priceadjustment specification satisfies the strict version of the natural-rate hypothesis. Second,
the modeled economy is open to international trade of goods and securities. And, third,
individuals’ utility functions do not feature time-separability, but instead depart in a
manner that reflects habit formation.
This last feature is specified as follows. A typical agent desires at t to maximize
Et(Ut + βUt+1 + …), where the within-period measure Ut is specified as

Mechanism.

29

(61)

Ut = exp(vt)(σ /(σ -1))[Ct/Ct-1h](σ-1)/σ + (1-γ)-1[Mt/Pt]1-γ.

Here Ct is a CES consumption index, Mt/Pt is real domestic money balances, vt is a
stochastic preference shock, and h is a parameter satisfying 0≤h<1. With h = 0,
preferences feature intertemporal separability, but with h>0 there exists “habit formation”
that makes consumption demand less volatile.
The open-economy aspect of the model is one in which produced goods may be
consumed in the home economy or sold abroad. Imports are exclusively raw materials,
used as inputs in a production process that combines these materials and labor according
to a CES production function. Capital accumulation is not modeled endogenously, but
securities are traded internationally. The relative price of imports in terms of domestic
goods, i.e., the real exchange rate, affects the demand for exports and imports, the latter
in a explicit maximizing fashion. Nominal exchange rates and the home country oneperiod nominal interest rate are related in the M-N model by a version of uncovered
interest parity that realistically includes a stochastic and highly variable “risk premium”
term (as in Taylor (1993b) and many multi-country econometric models). That
relationship is eliminated, however, in the present application.
Price adjustments conform to the P-bar model, mentioned above, but with
capacity output y t now treated as a variable that depends upon raw material inputs and
the state of technology, the latter driven by an exogenous stochastic shock that enters
production in a labor-augmenting fashion.30 As mentioned above, price adjustment
behavior implies Et-1 ~y t = α ~y t-1, so application of the unconditional expectation operator
yields E ~y t = αE ~y t and with α ≠ 0 this implies E ~y t = 0 regardless of the monetary policy

30

As mentioned above, we treat capital as exogenously determined.

30

rule employed. This strict natural-rate property is not a feature of the Calvo-Rotemberg
or Fuhrer-Moore models of price adjustment. Indeed, there are very few sticky-price
models that have the natural rate property, the only other one that I know of being GrayFischer style nominal contracts that imply limited persistence of ~y t magnitudes.
The foregoing paragraphs should provide the reader with a broad qualitative
overview of the basic M-N model. Quantitatively, the model is calibrated by reference to
empirical relationships estimated in various studies with U.S. data.31 In terms of
openness, a crucial consideration in the present context, the U.S. economy is of course
quite similar to Japan or to Euroland (i.e., the members of the European monetary union).
For a complete description of the model, the reader may consult McCallum and Nelson
(1996b), with an additional price-adjustment variant described in McCallum (1999a).32
Our objective now is to combine the M-N model with policy rule (51),33 generate
rational expectations solutions, and then characterize the effects of monetary policy on
the behavior of inflation and the output gap ~y t. In considering policy effects, we shall
devote some attention to the unsystematic (shock) component et, but will place more
emphasis on the systematic part of policy behavior since in practice it accounts for most
of the variability of policy instruments.34 In this analysis use will be made of impulse
response functions and also stochastic simulations. In these simulations, all constant
terms are set to equal zero—a standard practice in work of this type—so the standard
deviation of ∆pt can be interpreted as the root-mean-square-error (RMSE) value of
31

Notably, the value of 0.8 for h in (61) was estimated by Fuhrer (1998).
One small change effected in the latter reference and utilized here is to use 0.95 rather than 1.00 for the
autoregressive coefficient in AR(1) processes generating technology and foreign income shocks.
33
For the standard deviation of the policy shock term et, I have used 0.01. This is much larger than is
estimated for actual policy rules with an Rt instrument, but is only one-fourth as large as standard
deviations of ∆st for major economies under current policy regimes.
32

31

∆pt - π* and the standard deviation of ~y t as the RMSE value of yt - y t. In all cases, the
reported magnitudes are mean values (of standard deviations) averaged over 100
replications, with each run pertaining to a sample period of 200 quarters (after 53 start-up
periods are discarded). Calculation of the RE solutions are conducted using the algorithm
of Paul Klein (1997).
A first set of results is presented in Table 2. There for each µ1, µ2 combination,
the three reported values are standard deviations of ∆pt, ~y t, and ∆st, respectively. Going
down each column we see that increases in the feedback policy coefficient µ1 serve to
decrease the variability of inflation around its (implicit) target value. Similarly, in each
row we see that increases in µ2 typically decrease the variability of ~y t, although not
strongly in the region 0 < µ2 < 1. Simultaneously, increases in µ2 serve to increase the
variability of inflation over most of the range considered. Thus it is clear that the
systematic component of monetary policy is relevant for inflation and output gap
stabilization in the ZLB situation under analysis, much as is the case with more familiar
policy rule studies.
A more graphic way to represent the stabilizing effects of the policy rule is by
means of impulse response functions. Several figures presented below plot responses of
yt (not ~y t), pt, ∆pt, qt, st, and Rt to a unit realization of various shocks appearing in the
system.35 In Figure 2A, responses to a unit realization of the vt taste shock (see equation
(61)) are reported for policy rule parameter values of µ1 = 1 and µ2 = 1. In Figure 2B the
experiment is the same except that µ1 is increased to 10, reflecting a much stronger

34
35

For an argument to this effect—but presuming an interest rate instrument—see McCallum (1999a).
Here and below qt denotes the log of the real exchange rate.

32

monetary policy reaction to departures of inflation from its target level. A comparison of
the lower left-hand panels of these two figures shows that the response of inflation to the
shock is greatly muted by the stronger policy reaction represented in the second case.
Also, the middle right-hand panels reveal clearly the stronger reaction of the ∆st
instrument in this case.
Some readers may be surprised by the negative response of pt to a positive
realization of vt. There is no clear-cut reason to believe that anything is logically amiss in
the model, for the behavior of pt to a real shock in any dynamic optimizing framework
depends in subtle ways on details of the specification.36 There are, however, some
aspects of the model at hand that are not fully consistent with the time series properties of
important macroeconomic variables. Most prominent of the failures, perhaps, is the
rather small amount of inflation persistence in the basic M-N model.37 In McCallum
(1999a), this problem is attacked by replacing the P-bar price adjustment relation (53)
with the following:
(62)

∆pt = 0.5 Et ∆pt+1 + 0.5 ∆pt-1 + α1 ~y t + ut.

The latter, which is similar but not identical to the specification of Fuhrer and Moore
(1995), 38 imparts a good bit of persistence to the inflation process as can be seen readily
from the lower left-hand panels in parts A and B of Figure 3.
Table 3 and Figures 3A and 3B report results analogous to those presented
previously for the M-N model with the P-bar price adjustment relation. In the version
with (62) replacing (53) the qualitative conclusions are much the same: the variability of
In the present model, the response of ∆pt to vt > 0 would be positive if vt were an AR(1) process with
autocorrelation coefficient of 0.5.
37
There is some persistence of ∆pt shown in Figure 2, which is not the case for several prominent models
with sticky price levels (see Nelson (1998)), but not much.
36

33

πt and ~y t is smaller with larger values of µ1 and µ2, respectively. The figures in Table 3
suggest that inflation variability is quite weakly responsive to µ1, but the main reason for
this finding is that a sizeable fraction of the inflation variability is directly due to the
presence of the ut shock term in the price adjustment rule (62). That component of the
variance of ∆pt is only slightly affected by policy. The standard deviation of the output
gap, by contrast, appears slightly more responsive to µ2 in Table 3 than in Table 2.
Figures 3A and 3B present impulse response functions for cases analogous to
those in Figures 2A and 2B, i.e., cases with µ1 = 1 and µ1 = 10, respectively (µ2 = 1.0 in
both cases). The lower left-hand panels show that the muting of ∆pt responses to this
particular taste shock is quite slight, although definitely perceptible. The exchange rate
(instrument) reactions are, of course, much larger in the part B panels. Of most interest
in these figures, probably, are the inflation responses—for two reasons. First, inflation
now rises in response to a positive vt realization, in contrast with Figure 2. Second, the
shape of the impulse response function suggests that there is considerable persistence of
inflation in the model at hand—which in fact there is.
To conclude this section, let us turn to the unsystematic component of monetary
policy—i.e., et shocks. The results are shown in Figures 4 and 5, the former pertaining to
the basic M-N model and the latter to the variant with price-adjustment equation (62).
Part A of each figure has µ1 = 1.0, µ2 = 1.0 and part B has µ1 = 10.0, µ2 = 1.0. In these
figures we see that the strength of policy reaction to ∆pt - π* has a major effect on the
responses of both inflation and also the output gap, with larger values of µ1 reducing ∆pt
responses sharply and yt responses considerably. Again, incidentally, inflation
38

The present implementation follows McCallum (1999a) in setting α1 = 0.0032 and σu = 0.02.

34

persistence shows up as a property of the model with (62). All in all, our quantitative
results support the proposition that monetary policy can be effectively stabilizing even
with Rt frozen in a liquidity trap.

7.

Issues Regarding Dynamic Analysis
In this section the object is to consider some slightly esoteric issues concerning

dynamic analysis. This discussion is included because several writers—e.g., Benhabib,
Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (1998), Krugman (1999), and Reifschneider and Williams
(1999)—have suggested that recognition of the existence of a ZLB has drastic effects on
the dynamic properties of models that include interest-rate policy rules such as the Taylor
rule. It is my own belief that these particular effects represent theoretical curiosa that are
not relevant for practical policy analysis, even granting the possibility of a ZLB-induced
liquidity trap.39
The argument here will be conducted in the context of a simple example. To
maintain some continuity in the face of the various topics considered in this paper, let us
adopt the model of Section 4, but simplified by elimination of government purchases and
stochastic shocks.40 Also, we now use notation such that yt and pt represent logs of
output and the price level. Finally, and merely for simplicity, we let µ2 = 0 in the Taylor
rule, making it one of the inflation-targeting variety. With those amendments, the model
(34)-(36) can be written as
(63)

yt = Etyt+1 + b0 + b1 (Rt - Et∆pt+1)

(64)

∆pt = (1-α) ( p t-1 – pt-1) + Et-1( p t - p t-1)

39

It should be unnecessary to mention that many accomplished theorists are likely to disagree with my
views on this particular issue.
40
This streamlining is irrelevant for the issues at hand.

35

(65)

Rt = −b0/b1 − µ1π* + (1+µ1)∆pt.

Thus we have, as in Section 4, an expectational IS function consistent with optimizing
behavior, a price adjustment relation that features some inflation persistence yet satisfies
the natural-rate hypothesis, and a policy rule that is designed to stabilize inflation around
the target value π*.
Before seeking a rational expectations solution, we again express (64) as
(53")

Et-1yt = αyt-1

and combine (63) with (65) as follows:
(66)

yt = Etyt+1 + b1[(1+µ1)∆pt - µ1π* - Et∆pt+1].

In this system (53″),(66) there is only one relevant state variable, yt-1, so the unique
“bubble-free” or “fundamentals” MSV solution will be of the form
(67)

yt = φ10 + φ11yt-1

(68)

∆pt = φ20 + φ21yt-1

and it is clear from (53") that φ10 = 0 with φ11 = α.41 Substitution of Etyt+1 = α(αyt-1) and
Et∆pt+1 = φ20 + φ21(αyt-1) into (66), followed by application of the undetermined
coefficients (UC) logic, yields the following solution for inflation:
(69)

∆pt = π* + [α(1-α)/b1(1+µ1-α)] yt-1.

Thus ∆pt equals π* on average and would fluctuate around that value if stochastic shocks
were included in the system.
Suppose, however, that in obtaining a solution the analyst specified that ∆pt-1 is a
relevant state variable, even though it appears nowhere in the system (63), (53″), (65).
Then instead of (68) we would have

36

(70)

∆pt = φ20 + φ21yt-1 + φ22∆pt-1.

Again (53") would imply that yt = αyt-1, but application of the UC procedure would now
imply that the solution value for φ22 is either 0 or 1 +µ1. Thus for ∆pt we would obtain
either the same solution as before, equation (69), or else
(71)

∆pt = − µ1π* − [(1-α)/b1] yt-1 + (1+µ1)∆pt-1.

The latter gives π* as the steady-state value of inflation (when yt = 0 and ∆pt = ∆p), but
with µ1 > 0 as suggested by Taylor the dynamic behavior of ∆pt would be explosive. If
the system “begins” with ∆pt-1 > π*, inflation will increase explosively; if the initial value
is less than π* then it will approach −∞, according to (71).42
In the absence of a ZLB, ∆pt → −∞ would be ruled out as a solution path in a
complete version of the model because it would violate a transversality condition
necessary for optimizing behavior. But with recognition of a ZLB, it becomes apparent
that inflation cannot behave as specified by (71) when the ZLB is encountered. Instead,
the outcome is that ∆pt approaches the negative value b0/b1 = − r , which corresponds to
Rt → 0. Thus the Taylor rule has, in this case, failed to stabilize inflation around its
target value.43 For a graphical representation, see Figure 6, which is—so as to permit a
two-dimensional diagram—drawn for the special case with complete price flexibility
(i.e., yt = 0). If the system begins with an initial inflation rate below π*, it will approach
− r in an oscillatory fashion. In the absence of the ZLB, by contrast, inflation would

41

It should be emphasized that yt would not be policy-invariant if the system included stochastic shocks.
Here the word “begins” is put in quote marks because the MSV approach suggests that any beginning or
initial value is irrelevant.
43
Related problems are emphasized, in a limited-participated model, by Christiano and Gust (1999).
42

37

approach −∞ according to (71) so a transversality condition that ruled out such a path
would lead the analyst back to (69).
My own conclusion is quite different. It is that the last ZLB solution is not
economically relevant.44 It is a bubble solution that results from designating ∆pt-1 as a
relevant state variable even though it does not appear in the system (i.e., is in my
terminology a redundant state variable). It is my belief that emphasis on such bubble or
non-fundamental solutions constitutes a perversion of the original objectives of rational
expectations analysis.45 But in any event it can be noted that the MSV solution (69),
which clearly is a RE solution to the model at hand, is entirely well behaved so long as π*
> b0/b = - r . In Figure 6 this solution implies that ∆pt is determined at point A in each
period. With yt = 0, there are no dynamic adjustments—which is natural since there are
no shocks and no relevant state variables other than yt-1 (which equals zero in Figure 6,
though not in the more general case considered algebraically).
Furthermore, it should also be noted that the non-MSV solution (71) implies that
inflation explodes toward +∞ if the system “begins” with a value above π*, since fullydeveloped models typically include no transversality condition that would preclude such
behavior. (Again see Figure 6.) Thus if one is inclined to doubt the stabilizing property
of Taylor rules, or interest-instrument rules for inflation targeting, then this doubt should
logically exist without any regard to ZLB considerations!
The foregoing analysis is not specific to the model utilized, but applies rather
generally (I believe) to models with optimizing IS functions and either flexible prices or
44

Woodford (1999, Sect. 3) also argues that the solution of the previous paragraph is unlikely to prevail in
actual economies, but his reasoning is different and will often lead to conclusions that do not agree with
mine.

38

forward-looking price adjustment specifications.46 In particular, it would apply to price
adjustment relations of the Calvo-Rotemberg type or the more general form (62). I have
not used either of these in the foregoing example for expositional convenience: the
former gives a MSV solution with no relevant state variables—a case that is
expositionally confusing as well as dull—while the latter leads to a cubic expression for
the counterpart of the coefficient φ22 in (70) and is therefore difficult to work with
analytically (although the analysis is quite manageable in numerical systems such as
those of Section 6).

8.

Conclusion
We conclude with a brief overview. The present paper has explored a number of

distinct theoretical issues that are relevant to recent discussions regarding the possibility
of a zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates and the implications of such a
bound for monetary policy in regimes with low inflation. First, the paper seeks to spell
out an explicit theoretical rationale for the idea that a ZLB may exist and indicates that its
validity depends upon the assumption that it is costless at the margin to store money (the
economy’s medium of exchange). It is argued that the foregoing assumption is probably
not correct, strictly speaking, so that negative interest rates are possible. But the
quantitative extent of the phenomenon is almost certainly very small. Second, an
investigation is conducted of the extent to which the absence of superneutrality will lead
to an increase in the steady-state real rate of interest as steady-state inflation is reduced

45

The second objective, in addition to ruling out the possibility of persistently-maintained expectational
errors, was to provide an objective list—dictated by the model—of relevant determinants of expectations.
46
The specification used on pp. 7-10 of Reifschneider and Williams (1999) includes IS and priceadjustment relations that are entirely backward looking.

39

(and turned negative) by sustained policy. The conclusion based on a quantitative
overlapping generations model is that this effect is unlikely to be of much importance in
the context of stabilization issues, although it is of considerable theoretical relevance as it
suggests that real rates would rise sufficiently to keep an economy’s steady-state nominal
rate positive even with sizeable rates of deflation. Next, the analysis returns to models
with the property of real-interest invariance to maintained inflation and explores the
suitability of the common practice of conducting monetary policy analysis in models with
no monetary variables. It is argued that this practice is almost certainly unjustified in a
strict sense, but again the quantitative magnitude of the omitted effects is estimated to be
very small.
The most important analysis, from the perspective of current policy issues, is that
of Sections 5 and 6. In the former it is shown analytically that even if short run nominal
interest rates are fixed at zero, there nevertheless exits a route for monetary policy actions
to exert stabilizing effects on inflation and output (relative to capacity). This route,
available in any economy that is open to foreign trade of goods and securities, works by a
policy rule that adjusts the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate, acting in the role of
an instrument variable, so as to meet stabilization objectives. The analysis presumes that
strict uncovered interest parity does not prevail on a period by period basis, a
presumption for which there is much empirical justification. Then in Section 6 the
quantitative magnitude of this stabilization strategy is investigated by means of
simulations with a small but complete macroeconomic model, one that is designed to be
consistent with optimizing analysis and calibrated to U.S. quarterly data. The results

40

suggest that the extent of stabilization that can be obtained by this exchange-rate
approach is substantial.
Finally, recent warnings concerning some alarming theoretical results, obtained
with Taylor-style policy rules in optimizing models that recognize the existence of a
ZLB, are reconsidered. It is argued that these anomalous and undesirable effects obtain
only when non-fundamental “bubble” solutions are considered despite the existence of
fundamental solutions. Consequently, it is suggested—but not established
conclusively—that the empirical relevance of such effects is highly dubious.
Furthermore, if bubble solutions are considered then undesirable outcomes occur even if
there is no ZLB.

41

Table 1

Effects of Inflation on Steady-State Real Interest Rate

π

Infl.,% pa

c

x

k

m

r, % pa

10

9.835

16.39

16.47

6.781

0.178

3.86

5

2.386

16.33

17.21

6.719

0.239

3.89

2

0.641

16.28

17.44

6.672

0.288

3.90

1

0.283

16.26

17.49

6.648

0.308

3.91

0

0.000

16.23

17.53

6.617

0.333

3.93

-2

-0.397

16.14

17.57

6.510

0.408

3.97

-5

- .723

13.72

16.19

3.947

1.958

5.26

-10

- .928

5.86

9.70

0.462

3.261

11.11

42

Table 2

Simulation Results with Basic Model
Standard Deviations of ∆pt, ~y t, and ∆st
Value of µ2
Value of µ1

0.0

0.5

1.0

5.0

10.0

0.0

2.19
1.53
3.98

2.00
1.48
4.05

2.55
1.42
4.16

8.36
0.97
5.91

12.25
0.68
7.31

0.5

1.46
1.59
4.06

1.26
1.52
4.14

1.53
1.44
4.17

5.57
1.09
5.15

8.64
0.81
6.20

1.0

1.12
1.53
4.18

0.93
1.53
4.17

1.04
1.45
4.25

4.00
1.14
5.07

6.63
0.92
6.21

5.0

0.47
1.59
4.67

0.38
1.53
4.61

0.33
1.53
4.61

1.09
1.36
4.85

2.16
1.24
5.81

10.0

0.29
1.54
4.92

0.24
1.53
4.91

0.21
1.54
4.86

0.53
1.43
4.84

1.14
1.37
5.30

43

Table 3
Simulation Results in Model with Equation (62)
Standard Deviations of ∆pt, ~y t, and ∆st
Value of µ2
Value of µ1

0.0

0.5

1.0

5.0

10.0

0.0

3.56
2.83
4.00

3.68
2.32
4.16

3.78
1.96
4.42

4.55
1.48
8.13

5.16
1.58
15.26

0.5

3.52
2.90
4.29

3.48
2.37
4.38

3.66
2.13
4.66

4.37
1.46
8.35

4.83
1.44
14.59

1.0

3.42
2.88
4.99

3.45
2.51
5.09

3.39
2.14
5.27

4.20
1.49
8.88

4.60
1.39
14.57

5.0

3.13
3.37
13.72

3.10
3.24
13.56

3.10
3.04
13.42

3.39
2.14
14.34

3.78
1.64
16.81

10.0

2.82
3.80
23.41

2.92
3.87
23.87

2.85
3.60
23.15

3.02
2.85
21.93

3.30
2.24
22.19

44

References

Ball, Laurence. 1999. “Policy Rules for Open Economics.” In Taylor (1999).
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe, and Martin Uribe. 1998. “The Perils of Taylor
Rules.” Working Paper.
Blanchard, Oliver J., and Stanley Fischer. 1989. Lectures on Macroeconomics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Casares, Miguel. 1999. “Dynamic Analysis in an Optimizing Monetary Model with
Transaction Costs and Endogenous Investment.” Working Paper,
Casares, Miguel, and Bennett T. McCallum. 1999. “An Optimizing IS-LM Framework
with Endogenous Investment.” Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Christiano, Lawrence J., and Christopher J. Gust. 1999. “Comment,” in Taylor (1999).
Clouse, James, Dale Henderson, Athanasios Orphanides, David Small, and Peter Tinsley.
1999. “Monetary Policy when the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate is Zero.” Working
Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Dooley, Michael P., and Peter Isard. 1983. “The Portfolio-Balance Model of Exchange
Rates and Some Structural Estimates of the Risk Premium,” International Monetary Fund
Staff Papers 30 (December), pp. 683-702.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1980. “Exchange-Rate Economics: Where do we Stand?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 3), pp. 537-584.
________________. 1987. “Exchange-Rate Economics: 1986.” Economic Journal 97
(March), pp. 1-18.
Flood, Robert P., and Andrew K. Rose. 1996. “Fixes: Of the Forward Discount Puzzle.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (November), pp. 748-752.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 1982. “A Test of Perfect Substitutality in the Foreign Exchange
Market.” Southern Economic Journal 49 (October), pp. 406-416.
_______________. 1984. “Tests of Monetary and Portfolio Balance Models of
Exchange Rate Determination,” In John F.O.Bilson and Richard C. Marston, eds.,
Exchange Rate Theory and Practice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.239-260.

45

Friedman, Milton. 1969. The optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago:
Aldine Publishing Co.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey. 1998. “An Optimization-Based Model for Monetary Policy Analysis:
Can Habit Formation Help?” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, and George C. Moore. 1995. “Inflation Persistence.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109 (March), pp. 127-159.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, and Brian Madigan. 1997. “Monetary Policy when Interest Rates are
Bounded at Zero.” Review of Economics and Statistics 79 (November), pp. 573-585.
Gerlach, Stephan, and Frank Smets. 1999. “MCIs and Monetary Policy.” Working Paper,
BIS.
Goodfriend, Marvin. 1999. “Comments.” In Iwao Kuroda, ed., Towards More Effective
Monetary Policy. New York; St. Martin’s Press.
Grimes, Arthur, and Jason Wong. 1994. “The Role of the Exchange Rate in New Zealand
Monetary Policy.” In Ruben Glick and Michael M. Hutchinson, eds., Exchange Rate
Policy and Interdependence. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Hansen, Eric, and Dimitri Margaritis. 1993. “Financial Liberalization and Monetary
Policy in New Zealand.” Australian Economic Review (4th Quarter), pp. 28-36.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and Randall Wright. 1989. “On Money as a Medium of Exchange.”
Journal of Political Economy 97 (August), pp. 927-954.
Klein, Paul. 1997. “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a System of Linear
Expectational Difference Equations.” Working Paper, Stockholm University.
Krugman, Paul. 1998. “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. (No. 2), pp. 137-187.
____________. 1999. “Deflationary Spirals.” The Official Paul Krugman Web Page.
Lacker, Jeffrey M., and Stacey L. Schreft. 1996. “Money and Credit as Means of
Payment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 38 (August), pp. 3-23.
Lewis, Karen. 1995. “Puzzles in International Financial Markets.” In Gene M. Grossman
and Kenneth Rogoff, eds. Handbook of International Economics, vol.3. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1972. “Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis.” In
Otto Eckstein, ed., The Econometrics of Price Determination. Washington, D.C.: Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

46

McCallum, Bennett T. 1987. “The Optimal Inflation Rate in an Overlapping-Generations
Economy with Land.” In William A. Barnett and Kenneth Singleton, eds. New
Approaches to Monetary Economics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
_________________ . 1999a. “Analysis of the Monetary Transmission Mechanism:
Methodological Issues.” In The Monetary Transmission Process: Recent Developments
and Lessons for Europe. London: Macmillan Publishers, forthcoming.
__________________. 1999b. “Role of the Minimal State Variable Criterion in Rational
Expectations Models,” International Tax and Public Finance 6 (November), pp. 621-639.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson. 1999a. “Performance of Operational Policy
Rules in an Estimated Semiclassical Structural Model.” In Taylor (1999).
__________________________________. 1999b. “Nominal Income Targeting in an
Open-Economy Optimizing Model.” Journal of Monetary Economics 43 (June), pp. 553578.
__________________________________. “An Optimizing IS-LM Specification for
Monetary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
31 (August, Part 1), pp. 296-316.
Meltzer, Allan H. 1999. “The Transmission Process.” In The Monetary Transmission
Process: Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe. London: Macmillan Publishers,
forthcoming.
Nelson, Edward. 1998. “Sluggish Inflation and Optimizing Models of the Business
Cycle.” Journal of Monetary Economics 42 (October), pp. 303-322.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1996. Foundations of International
Macroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Okun, Arthur M. 1981. Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and Volker Wieland, 1998. “Price Stability and Monetary Policy
Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero.” Working Paper 199835, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board.
Phelps, Edmund S. 1972. Inflation Policy and Unemployment Theory. London:
Macmillan Press.
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 1999. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy
in a Low Inflation Era,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.

47

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1997. “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy.” In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J.
Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stockman, Alan C. 1992. “International Transmission Under Bretton Woods.” In
Michael P. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen, eds. A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods
System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 317-348.
Summers, Lawrence. 1991. “How Should Long-Term Monetary Policy be Determined?”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 23 (August, Part 2), pp. 625-631.
Taylor, John B. 1993a. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
____________. 1993b. Macroeconomic Policy in a World Economy. New York: W. W.
Norton.
____________. 1999. Monetary Policy Rules, editor. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Uhlig, Harald. 1997. “A Toolkit for Analyzing Nonlinear Dynamic Stochastic Models
Easily.” Working Paper, Tilburg University.
Vickrey, William S. 1954. “Stability Through Inflation.” In Kenneth T. Kurihara, ed.
Post-Keynesian Economics. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Wallace, Neil. 1997. “Absence-of-Double-Coincidence Models of Money: A Progress
Report.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 21 (Winter), pp. 2-20.
Wolman, Alexander S. 1998. “Staggered Price Setting and the Zero Bound on Nominal
Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 84 (Fall), pp. 124.
Woodford, Michael. 1999. Interest and Prices, Chapter 2. Manuscript.

48

Figure 1: Alternative Specifications of Transaction Cost Function

-3

- psi sub2

20

x 10

10

0
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7
0.8
m(c)

0.9

1

1.1

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7
0.8
m(c)

0.9

1

1.1

-3

- psi sub2

20

x 10

10

0
0.3

49

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.2

q

y

Figure 2: Impulse Responses to IS Shock, Basic Model

0

0
10

20

0

0.2

-0.2

0

s

p

0

-0.4

0

0

R

delta p

20
0.1

0

20

0

10

20

-0.1
10
20
0
10
2A: Responses to Unit Shock to IS; mu1=1.0, mu2=1.0

0.2

1

0.1

0.5

q

y

10

0.2

-0.2

0

20

0
0

10

20

0

0

10

20

0

10

20

0.5

-0.05

s

p

10

-0.2
0

-0.1

0
0

10

20

0.05

0.1

0

0

R

delta p

0

-0.05
0

-0.1
10
20
0
10
2B: Responses to Unit Shock to IS; mu1=10.0, mu2=1.0

50

20

Figure 3: Impulse Responses to IS Shock, Model with (62)

0

-0.05

q

0

y

0.2

-0.2

-0.1
0

10

20

0

0

s

0.1

p

0.02

-0.02
10

20

-5
0

-0.2

q

0

y

10

20

-0.1
10
20
0
10
3A Responses to Unit Shock to IS, mu1=1.0, mu2=1.0

0

-0.2

20

-0.4
0

10

20
0

0

-0.2

s

0.02
p

0

0

0.2

-0.02

0

10

20

0

10

20

-0.4
0x 10-3

0

10

20
0.1
R

delta p

20

0.1

0

5

10

-0.1
0x 10-3

R

delta p

5

0

-5
0

0

-0.1
10
20
0
10
3B Responses to Unit Shock to IS, mu1=1.0, mu2=10.0

51

20

0.1

1

0.05

0.5

q

y

Figure 4: Impulse Responses to Policy Shock, Basic Model

0

0
10

20

0.4

1

0.2

0.5

s

p

0

0
20

0.1

0.1

0

R

delta p

10

0.2

0
0

20

0

10

20

-0.1
10
20
0
10
20
4A: Responses to Unit Shock to Policy Rule, mu1=1.0, mu2=1.0

2

y

q

0.05

0

1
0

0

10

20

0.1

2

0.05

1

s

p

10

0
0

0

0

10

20

0

10

20

0
0

10

20

0.02

0.1

0.01

0

R

delta p

0

0
0

-0.1
10
20
0
10
20
4B: Responses to Unit Shock to Policy Rule, mu1=10.0, mu2=1.0

52

0.2

1

0

0

q

y

Figure 5: Impulse Responses to Policy Shock, Model with (62)

-0.2

-1
0

10

20

s
0
20

0.02

0

R

delta p

0

10

20

-0.1
10
20
0
10
20
5A: Responses to Unit Shock to Policy Rule, mu1=1.0, mu2=1.0

0.05

1

0

0

q

y

10

0.1

0

-0.05

-1
0

10

20

0.1

1

0.05

0

s

p

20

1

0.04

0

0

0

10

20

0

10

20

-1
0

10

20

0.01

0.1

0

0

R

delta p

10

0
0

-0.01

0
2

p

0.5

-0.1
0
10
20
0
10
20
5B: Responses to Unit Shock to Policy Rule, mu1=10.0, mu2=1.0

53

Figure 6: Inflation Dynamics In Model (63)-(65)
5
4
3

inflation(t)

2

A

pi*

1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-5

-rbar
----slope = 1+mu1
pi*
0
inflation(t-1)

54

5

