                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HUMAN CAPITAL, HETEROGENEITY, AND ESTIMATED
                    DEGREES OF INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY


                                                Song Han
                                            Casey B. Mulligan


                                          Working Paper 7678
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7678

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2000




We appreciate the comments of Abhijit V. Banerjee, anonymous referees, Roland Benabou, Steven N.
Durlauf, Costas Meghir, and Gary Solon, workshop participants at the University of Chicago, and NBER
“Income Distribution and Macroeconomics” program participants. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Song Han and Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Human Capital, Heterogeneity, and Estimated Degrees of Intergenerational Mobility
Song Ham and Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 7678
April 2000
JEL No. J62, J24, E21

                                            ABSTRACT


       Some of the important implications of the parental investment model of intergenerational
mobility have been derived under the assumption that parental income is the main source of
heterogeneity. We explicitly model the variability and inheritability of “innate” earnings ability and
the variability of tastes, showing how they affect observed degrees of intergenerational consumption
and earnings mobility. Heterogeneity increases the difficulty of detecting the existence of borrowing
constrained families. Conversely, the presence of heterogeneity means that economic and linear
statistical models of inheritance generate similar intergenerational data on consumption and earnings.
In this sense, our findings offer some support for Goldberger's (1989) criticism of human capital
models of inheritance. Finally, we suggest that any cross-country differences in intergenerational
earnings mobility are more readily interpreted according to the heterogeneity of inherited ability,
rather than optimal family responses to country-specific institutions for accumulating human capital.




Casey B. Mulligan                                             Song Han
Department of Economics                                       School of Business Administration
University of Chicago                                         University of Mississippi
1126 East 59th Street                                         Holman Hall 331
Chicago, IL 60637                                             University, MS 38677
and NBER                                                      shan@bus.olemiss.edu
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
1 Introduction
The relationship between a citizen's economic status and his family background is an im-
portant clue for understanding and evaluating a country's economic performance. Some
(eg, Bowles 1972) have suggested a close relationship between economic status and family
background indicates some failure of labor markets or of institutions fostering investment in
human capital. Others (eg., Altonji et al. 1992; Mulligan 1997 Table 4.1) have o ered an
apparently contradictory suggestion, that \eÆcient" allocations involve a very close relation-
ship, on some measures, between the economic status of parents and children. Still others
  nd family background e ects to be the most o ensive sources of inequality, regardless of
whether those e ects are consistent with \eÆciency."
    Empirical studies of this relationship date back to the earliest days of statistical social
science (e.g., Galton's 1869 British study of the \success" and \eminence" of relatives), and
many can be found outside the eld of economics (see Goode's 1966 survey for a few exam-
ples), but the increasing availability of new data sets for exploring the relationship between
earnings, income, wealth, and consumption of parents and, years later, of adult children has
appropriately led to new and better econometric estimates of \intergenerational mobility," or
the intergenerational (auto)regression of various measures of economic status, and has even
permitted some careful comparisons of those estimates across countries. However, fewer re-
sults are available on interpreting such estimates in terms of economic models of inheritance
or of the labor market. Loury (1981), and Becker and Tomes (1986) are among the excep-
tions, where they show how access to capital markets or other means of nancing human
     1


capital investment can increase the degree of intergenerational earnings mobility. This has
led many to search for, and interpret, cross-country di erences in intergenerational earnings
mobility as evidence of di erential eÆciency in those countries' institutions for human capital
investment (e.g., Bjorklund and Jantti 1997; Checchi et al. 1999).
    It has been pointed out (e.g., Mulligan 1997 pp. 61-2) that Becker and Tomes' analysis
assumes that parental income is the dominant source of heterogeneity across families. The
purpose of our paper is to build a mathematical economic model of inheritance that not only
has heterogeneity of parental income, but also heterogeneity of \earnings ability" and/or of
  1 Others include Becker and Tomes (1979), Behrman et al. (1995), Benabou (1994), Durlauf (1996),
Glomm and Ravikumar (1992), Laitner (1992), and Tamura (1991), many of which also emphasize capital
market access.


                                                1
tastes - and is otherwise similar to Becker and Tomes' model - and to derive quantitative and
qualitative implications of our model for intergenerational earnings and consumption mobil-
ity and, more generally, the relationship between borrowing constraints and the transmission
of economic status.
    Section 2 builds the model. We display the various structural parameters dictating de-
grees of intergenerational mobility, and show how they are related to the presence of bor-
rowing constraints. We brie y address the question of the optimal statistical technique for
detecting and measuring the importance of borrowing constraints, but the bulk of our anal-
ysis relates our economic model to the various linear statistical models that are so prevalent
in the literature dating back to Galton (1877). Section 3 shows how, with parental income
as the only source of heterogeneity, the linear regression speci cations found in the literature
are, for the most part, consistent estimates of the structural parameters, and the magni-
tude of the linear regression estimates are directly related to the existence and importance
of borrowing constraints. The bulk of the paper comprises Sections 4 and 5, which report
analytic and simulated results showing how linear regression estimates are inconsistent es-
timates of the structural parameters when there is ability or taste heterogeneity, and how
the magnitude of the linear regression coeÆcients is only weakly related to the existence
and importance of borrowing constraints. These inconsistencies are di erent from, and in
addition to, the e ects of measurement errors and inadequate sampling which have been
emphasized in some of the recent literature (eg., Solon 1989, 1992).
    Several lessons are learned from our analysis. First, it further explores the links between
statistical and economic models of intergenerational mobility, showing how those links de-
pend on the amount and types of heterogeneity in the economy. Second, it suggests that
heterogeneity substantially increases the diÆculty of detecting the existence and importance
of borrowing constraints with linear regression estimators, or even with nonlinear estimators
tailored to the economic model. To the extent that there are important cross-country di er-
ences in degrees of earnings or consumption mobility, we o er an alternative interpretation
of such di erences - that countries di er in the amount of \ability" heterogeneity. Third,
our study highlights the importance of the \intergenerational elasticity of substitution" to
the economic approach to intergenerational mobility, about which quantitative empirical
knowledge is terribly limited.


                                               2
2 Model
Two mathematical economic models are drawn from Mulligan (1999a). One is called the
perfect capital market or permanent income (PI) model, where parents can make both posi-
tive and negative nancial transfers to their child. When the nancial transfers are negative,
parents are borrowing against their child's earnings. The other model is called the imperfect
capital market (ICM) model, where borrowing against child's earnings is prohibited.
2.1 ICM Model
We denote consumption of parents and their child by Ct and Ct , respectively. Parents               +1

solve the following intertemporal optimization problem:
                                                                          1                            1
                                                                  
                                                                                               
                               max
                        Ct ;Ct+1 ;ht+1 ;Xt+1
                                               Et
                                                                1 Ct +
                                                                       
                                                                                          1 Ct +1
                                                                                                    



subject to:
                        Ct + Xt+1 + ht+1 = It = ((1 + r)Xt + At ht ) t
                                           (1 + r)Xt + At ht  t
                                        Ct+1 =                         +1          +1      +1           +1


                                  Xt  0    +1


Parents begin with resources It, which is a combination of earnings and nancial transfers
that they received from their parents. Parents spend It on three items: their own consump-
tion Ct, nancial transfers to their child Xt , and investments in the human capital of their
                                                        +1

child ht . Parents are altruistic{they care about their child's consumption in addition to
       +1

their own consumption. The degree of altruism is . Parents do not necessarily place the
same weight on their consumption as on the consumption of their child ( 6= 1).
    Notice that children do not have (or care about) grandchildren in our mathematical
model. Ct therefore equals It . This two-generation model is not as restrictive as it
              +1                       +1

seems; an alternative way to motivate our formulation of the model is to allow for in nitely
lived dynasties and then assume that parents care about their own consumption and the
income of their child according to the homothetic utility function above. In this case, Ct                   +1

would, as an approximation, be proportional to It .                +1
                                                                               2


    At and At are the \innate" earnings ability of parents and child, respectively. It is
                   +1

assumed that parents know their child's ability. The random variable t is a shock whose
  2 This is the motivation of the two period model that appears in Becker and Tomes (1986).

                                                             3
value is unknown to parents at the time they invest in children. We assume that t has the
                                                                              3


following property.
Assumption 1        is
                    t       and log-normally distributed, ln t  N ( ;  ); Moreover,
                          i.i.d.                                                   ln
                                                                                         2
                                                                                         ln

t is independent of At and It .
  +1                          +1



    Notice that shocks to human capital and nancial investments are common, and equal
to t . We make this assumption not for realism, but to abstract from risk considerations
that would a ect human capital investment and intergenerational mobility in a more general
model.  4


    The anticipated rate of return on nancial investments is r. Human capital, ability, and
shocks produce earnings for a member of generation t according to the function et = At ht t
with 2 (0; 1). The anticipated component of ability, At , is multiplicative in our model,
                                                                    +1

a ecting both the level of earnings for a given human capital investment and the rate of
return to human capital investments. The importance and validity of this assumption is
discussed below.
2.1.1       Group I: The Borrowing Constraints Are Not Binding


Families can be divided into two groups according to whether they hit the borrowing con-
straints. For those whose borrowing constraints do not bind, the Lagrangian multiplier on
the borrowing constraint is zero and Xt > 0. We have
                                                 +1

                                                  1
                                   h =
                                     ?      1 + r     1
                                                                                      (1)
                                               t+1
                                                       At+1
We call h?t as eÆcient human capital investment in the sense that if the access to capital
             +1

market is perfect, all families will make
                                     1
                                          their optimal human capital investment according
to equation (1). De ne  = Et (t ) and t = ln t  . Several manipulations lead
                                       1
                                        +1
                                           
                                                      +1      +1         ln

to
                                          It + ( 1)h?t 1

                                   Ct =                        +1
                                                                                       (2)
                                        1 + ( ) (1 + r)          1

   3 Without changing the mathematics of our model, one could allow some component of the ability of child
to be unanticipated by parents. Our variable  would capture such \ability shocks."
   4 Becker and Tomes (1986, p. 23) have some discussion, but more research on the e ect of investment risk
on parental decisions to investments in children is needed.




                                                       4
and
                    ln Ct +1    = ln((1 + r) ) +   + ln Ct + t   ln                           +1                              (3)
                                             1
                     ln et      = ln    1 + r 1
                                                  +   + 1 1 ln At + t                                                  :        (4)
                          +1                                               ln                                  +1    +1




2.1.2    Group II: The Borrowing Constraints Are Binding


When the borrowing constraint binds, Xt = 0 and the Lagrangian multiplier on the bor-
                                                            +1

rowing constraint is positive. So the optimal human capital investment is determined by
                                         It   ht+1 = (           )               + (1
                                                                          A1t+1 ht+1              )
                                                                                                       :                           (5)
The above equation implies an implicit function, ht = h(It ; At ). Note that ht is smaller
                                                                            +1                         +1                     +1

than the eÆcient human capital investment h?t . Intuitively, those borrowing constrained
                                                                      +1

parents would have invested more on kid's human capital if they were able to borrow against
child's earnings.
    Given the optimal human capital investment ht , parent's optimal consumption is
                                                                                +1



                                                       Ct = It         ht+1 :

De ne =  . Then 2 (0; 1). Several manipulations lead to the evolution equations
             + (1     )

for consumption and earnings:
                                                                     
                       ln Ct   +1    = ln (  ) At +   + ln Ct + t
                                                                  +1                 ln                             +1             (6)
                        ln et  +1    =   + ln At + ln h(It ; At ) + t
                                              ln             +1                               +1               +1                  (7)
with t de ned as before; and h(It ; At ) is the solution to equation (5).
        +1                                              +1




2.2 PI Model
In the PI model, there is no non-negativity constraint on Xt . So parents in all families will+1

invest on the human capital at the eÆcient level h?t as in (1). The optimal consumption
                                                                                +1

is as in (2). Equation (3) gives the evolution equation of consumption from parents to their
child. Child's earnings are given by (4).
    The optimal nancial transfer for all families in the PI model is:
                                                                 
                                 It h?t 1 + ( )  (1 + r)                                  1            1

                        Xt? =                                                             (8)
                                                       +1
                                                                    :
                                    +1
                                         1 + ( )  (1 + r)                              1



                                               5
Notice that Group I families in the ICM model are those having Xt? > 0. In other words,
                                                                                +1

(1) and (8) imply that Group I families are those with (It ; At ) 2 , where the set  is
                                                                      +1

de ned as :                                                       
                                                   1
                           (It; At ) : ln It 1 ln At  k                                 (9)
                                     +1                          +1

                                                   
with k = ln 1 + ( )  (1 + r)  
                                1    1
                                           1
                                              ln r . Let  be the complementary set of
                                               1       1+


. Then Group II families in the ICM model are those with (It ; At ) 2 .   +1

    Many of the implications of the ICM and PI models depend on whether a family is in
the set . Becker (1989, p. 514) de nes  as we do, referring to those families \richer
families": \Richer families, de ned as families that give bequests (or gifts) to children, can
readily and costlessly self- nance investments in the human capital of children by drawing
down bequests. They invest in human capital until the marginal rate of return equals the
rate on assets." Becker refers to the complement of the set of \richer families" as \poorer
families" (p. 515), which we denote .
2.3 Structural Parameters of Interest
There are four structural parameters, or combinations of structural parameters, that are of
primary interest. The rst is the \partial family income elasticity of earnings" among non-
borrowing constrained families which measures the e ect of an exogenous change in parental
income (i.e., a change that holds the ability of children constant) on the earnings of an adult
child. As we see in (4), the partial family income elasticity is zero both in the PI model and
for Group I in the ICM model because all of these families participate in the same capital
market. The second parameter is the partial family income elasticity of earnings among
borrowing constrained families, which we denote by .  can be computed from (5) and (7):
               h;I ; with h;I = @@lnlnhIt , evaluated at some (It ; At ) 2 .
                                            +1
                                                                                     +1    (10)
                                             t
Although h;I is not a constant - it depends on It and At - we de ne  according to some
                                                            +1

(It ; At ) 2 . For our purposes, it will not matter which (It ; At ) is used to de ne , so
      +1                                                                   +1

long as it is in the range of our data. Using (5), it is straightforward to show that
                                       (
                                   2 (( ;; )) ifif 0 <> 1:< 1;                          (11)
     The third structural parameter of interest is the persistence of log consumption among
non-borrowing constrained families, which measures the e ect of an exogenous change in
                                                   6
parental consumption (say, from a change in parental income that holds ability and prefer-
ences constant) on the consumption of the adult child. According to (3), this parameter is
1. The nal structural parameter of interest is the persistence of log consumption among
borrowing constrained families which, according to (6), is .
    Notice that the partial family income elasticity is greater among borrowing constrained
families while the persistence of log consumption is greater among non-borrowing constrained
families. Among non-borrowing constrained families, the partial family income elasticity is
zero, which is less than the persistence of log consumption. The two corresponding parame-
ters for borrowing constrained families cannot be ordered.
    Becker and Tomes (1979,1986), Becker (1989) and others have discussed how estimated
degrees of intergenerational consumption and earnings mobility are related to these four
structural parameters. Our paper explores this question, with a special emphasis on how
heterogeneous ability and preferences a ect these relationships.
    In next section, we study a benchmark model with no heterogeneity. Then in Sections 4
and 5, respectively, we introduce two types of heterogeneity: First, we assume that all families
are homogeneous in altruism rates, i.e., all parents have the same , but that earnings ability
is variable across families and inheritable across generations. Then we drop the homogeneity
assumption on preference so that parents across families have di erent altruism rates. We
study the property of OLS estimators of the degrees of earnings and consumption mobility.
In particular, because ability and altruism rates are unobservable and we divide the entire
sample into two subsamples, OLS estimates may be inconsistent because of both omitted
variables and sample selection. We ask the following questions: What are the direction
and magnitude of the inconsistency? How is the inconsistency related to the amount and
type of heterogeneity and to the model's structural parameters? Is it possible to empirically
distinguish PI and ICM models? When and when not?

3 Intergenerational Mobility in the Absence of \Het-
  erogeneity"
We rst derive some benchmark results to which our simulations, and some of the previous
literature, refer. In our benchmark case, parental income and the shocks (t ; t ) are the
                                                                                    +1

only sources of heterogeneity in the model{all children have the same ability and all parents

                                               7
have the same degree of intergenerational altruism. That is,
    Benchmark:      ln At and are the same for all families, and ln At =  ln At :
                                                                        +1                (12)
The parameter  2 (0; 1) indicates the inheritability of innate earnings ability. Note that,
although ability is homogeneous, the shocks t and t introduce earnings heterogeneity
                                                         +1

among parents and children.
    The benchmark case permits analytic results for intergenerational consumption and earn-
ings mobility in both PI and ICM models, results which we report as Propositions 1 and
2 below. As we shall see, the benchmark case is also interesting because its analytical re-
sults agree with Becker's (1989) account of the nature of intergenerational mobility in the
Becker-Tomes model.
3.1 PI Model
In PI model, the evolution of consumption from parents to kids follows (3), and both parents'
and children's earnings have the same function forms as (4). We consider estimating the
degree of consumption persistence by running ordinary least squared (OLS) regressions of
log child's consumption on log parents' consumption, and estimating the degree of earnings
persistence by running OLS regressions of log child's earnings on log patents' earnings.
Assumption 1 and speci cation (12) imply the following.
Proposition 1     In PI model, the OLS estimator of the degree of consumption persistence
is consistent (i.e., its probability limit equals to 1). The OLS estimator of the degree of
earnings persistence is a consistent estimator of the partial family income elasticity (0), but
an inconsistent estimator of the inheritability of ability, .
    Throughout the paper, probability limits are taken with respect to the number of families
in the sample. The proof of the proposition is straightforward. The OLS estimator of the
degree of consumption persistence is consistent because t is uncorrelated with Ct and is
                                                           +1

constant. So by (3), the probability limit of the OLS estimator is 1. For earnings persistence,
because At is constant, both parents' and children's earnings are white noises by (4). So,
           +1

the probability limit of the OLS estimator of the degree of earnings persistence is zero, and
thus, less than .

                                              8
3.2 ICM Model
For ICM model, we split the whole sample into two subsamples: One contains only Group
I families and the other Group II families. For each group, we consider estimating the
degrees of intergenerational mobility by running OLS regressions of log child's consumption
(earnings) on log parents' consumption (earnings). Denote the estimates of the degrees of
consumption persistence for Groups I and II by ^c and ^c , respectively, and the estimates
                                                     1        2

of the degrees of earnings persistence for Groups I and II by ^e and ^e , respectively. The
                                                                   1        2

estimates have the following properties.
Proposition 2     For the benchmark case, the OLS estimate of the degree of consumption
persistence for Group I is consistent (i.e., the probability limit equals to 1); the OLS estimate
of the degree of earnings persistence for Group I has a probability limit of 0. For Group II,
the OLS estimate of the degree of consumption persistence is consistent (i.e., the probability
limit equals to ); the OLS estimate of the degree of earnings persistence is a consistent
estimator of  if grandparents are borrowing constrained, an inconsistent estimator of 
if grandparents are non-borrowing constrained, and an inconsistent estimator of  whether
grandparents are borrowing constrained.
Proof:  See Appendix.
    Note that as is well known, when we split the entire sample into two subsamples according
to whether families hit borrowing constraints and run OLS regressions for each subsample
separately, we potentially introduce selection biases. But with the benchmark assumption
of homogeneous earning ability and altruism rate, selection only contaminates the OLS
estimate of Group II's earnings persistence. Other group-speci c OLS estimates are immune
to selection bias.
    Proposition 2 also shows that in the benchmark case, the observable di erences in the
degrees of consumption persistence between richer (Group I) and poorer (Group II) families
are 1 . If grandparents are borrowing constrained, the lower bound of the observable
di erences of log earnings persistence between poorer (Group II) and richer (Group I) families
equals if 0 <  < 1, if  > 1.



                                               9
3.3 Comparison with Results in the Literature
Although we have made some additional functional form assumptions, our Propositions 1
and 2 basically agree with several results derived by Becker and Tomes (1979,1986):
1.     there is less consumption mobility in the PI model than in the ICM model;
2.     in the ICM model, there is less consumption mobility in Group I;
3.     in the ICM model, there is more earnings mobility in Group I.
    We quote Becker (1989), \Since endowments regress to the mean at a rate determined by
the `inheritability' of endowments, the earnings of children in richer families tend to regress
to the mean at this same rate.... Earnings of poorer children regress upward to the mean
more slowly than the rate of inheritability of endowments." (p. 515) Also, \If fertility is
unrelated to family resources, children's consumption regresses more rapidly to the mean in
poorer families than in richer families...." (p. 515)

4 Variable and Inheritable Earning Ability
Now we assume that ability is transmitted across generations according to
                                        ln At =  ln At + t
                                               +1              +1   :                        (13)
Random variables At and t are assumed to have the following properties.
                                 +1



Assumption 2           At , t+1 and t+1    are mutually independent and distributed as: ln At 
N (ln A ; ln2 A ); t+1  N ( ; 2 ).
   Our benchmark is the special case with  A =  = 0 and  = 0, which we now
                                                          2
                                                          ln
                                                               2


generalize. The altruism rate, , is still assumed to be the same for all families and constant
over time in this section. To simplify notations, we use cst and error to represent intercepts
(constants) and error terms, respectively, in all regression equations.
4.1 Analytical Results and Intuitive Discussion
All children have the same ability and eÆcient human capital investment in our benchmark
case. There are three ways to relax this assumption, the e ects of which are summarized
in Table 1. First, we could introduce heterogeneity among children that is uncorrelated
                                                     10
with parental ability or income (our \Case 1"). Second, heterogeneity among children could
be perfectly correlated with parental ability (our \Case 2"). Third, heterogeneity among
children could be imperfectly correlated with parental ability (our \Case 3"). We begin
the Table with some analytical results and complete it with an intuitive discussion of the
simulated results.
4.1.1   Analytical Results for the PI Model


In PI model, consumption evolves according to (3). Since the error term is uncorrelated
with parents' consumption, i.e., COV (t ; ln Ct) = 0, the OLS estimator of log consumption
                                          +1

persistence is consistent. For earnings, both parents and kids have the same formula as (4).
Use (13) to get
                                    ln et = cst +  ln et + error
                                     +1                                                     (14)
with error = t t + t :
              1
                  1
                      +1        +1

    Although log earnings persistence is 0, the theory predicts that log earnings persistence
is related to that of ability, i.e., . If we run an OLS regression of ln et on ln et and denote
                                                                                         +1

the estimator by e, then we have
                                plim( e) =  + COVV(ln(lnete; error )
                                                             t)
                                                        2 A
                                                             1
                                                                    ! 2                     (15)
                                           =           (1       )
                                                                      :
                                                                      ln   t

                                                     2 A +  
                                                    1            2             2
                                               (1       )        ln   t        ln


    Therefore, although earnings is exclusively determined by \innate" ability in the PI
model with   i.i.d.  market lucks, the OLS estimate of the log earnings persistence e is,
asymptotically, less than the inheritability of ability . The inconsistency is minor if the
variation of market luck is small relative to that of ability. Because  A > 0, the probability
                                                                                    2
                                                                                    ln   t

limit of e is greater than the partial family income elasticity of earnings for unconstrained
families, 0.
    The following summarizes the properties of OLS estimators of consumption and earnings
mobility in PI model.
Proposition 3   In PI model, with Assumption 2, the OLS estimator of the degree of con-
sumption persistence is consistent (i.e., the probability limit equals to 1). The OLS estimator
 e of the degree of earnings persistence is an inconsistent estimate of the inheritability of



                                                11
ability, , with plim e < , and plim e !  if     A or ! 1. Because  A > 0,
                                                          2
                                                          ln
                                                                    2
                                                                    ln    t
                                                                                       2
                                                                                       ln   t

plim e is greater than the partial family income elasticity of earnings for unconstrained
families, 0.
    The Proposition shows that if the true model is PI model, then OLS estimates of log
earnings persistence by mechanic statistic models are downward inconsistent. On the other
hand, the problem of misspeci cation may be quantitatively unimportant if the inequality
of market luck is small relative to the inequality of ability.
    The results of Proposition 3 are shown in the second, third, and fourth columns of the
PI section of Table 1. The second column (for the case  A = 0) displays zeros in the rst
                                                                     2
                                                                     ln       t

two rows to show that c and e are consistent estimates of 1 and 0, respectively. In the
third and fourth columns (for the case  A > 0), an upward omitted variable bias (namely
                                            2
                                            ln   t

the omission of ln At ) a ects e. In all cases, plim e is less than .
                    +1



4.1.2   One Analytical Result for the ICM Model


Even though ability is heterogeneous and inheritable, we can still analytically calculate the
probability limit of the OLS estimator of log consumption persistence for Group I
                             plim( ^c ) = COV (ln
                                   1
                                                  Ct ; ln Ct j)
                                               V (ln Ct j)
                                                               +1




                                        = 1 + COVV((ln
                                                    t ; ln Ct j)
                                                        Ct j)
                                                               +1                        (16)
                                        =1
The last inequality is true because t is independent of (ln Ct; It; At ). We restate this
                                       +1                                         +1

analytical result as Proposition 4.
Proposition 4     Assuming homogeneous preferences and that ability is transmitted across
generations according to equation (13), with Assumption 2, the OLS estimate of the degree
of consumption persistence using Group I sample is consistent (i.e., the probability limit
equals to 1).
    The results of Proposition 4 are shown in the fourth row of Table 1 (the row marked \ c     1

vs 1") as zeros for the Benchmark and three other Cases.



                                                     12
4.1.3   Intuitive Discussion of Simulation Results


As shown in Section 2.1, the presence of a borrowing constraint divides the population
into two groups. The mechanical statistical models are typically estimated by pooling the
two groups of families together, and are therefore misspeci ed. Furthermore, compared to
PI model, separate group OLS estimates of intergenerational mobility may be subject to
selection bias in addition to the e ects of intergenerational transmission of ability discussed
above. Theoretically, the size of the bias can be assessed by computing the probability limit
of the OLS coeÆcients. However, in order to do that, we must use conditional distributions
(conditional on Xt? < (or >)0). Since it is diÆcult to obtain conditional expectation
                         +1

for nonlinear functions for the generalized model, we use simulation method to assess the
possibilities of directions and magnitudes of the biases.
    Before we present the simulated results, consider some of the qualitative properties of
OLS estimates of the degrees of consumption and earnings mobility in the presence of het-
erogeneous and inheritable ability. In Case 1, we assume that At is independent of It but,
                                                                    +1

because of the selection rule, the two variables fail to be independent in any one of the two
groups. Since the selection rule for Group I is ln At  (1 )[ln It (constant)], ln At
                                                     +1                                     +1

and ln It are positively correlated in both groups. Since ln At enters the earnings (4) and
                                                               +1

(7) for both groups and the Group II consumption equation (6) with a positive sign, the
estimators c , e , and e all su er from an upward selection bias. This same selection bias
             2       1        2

carries over to Cases 2 and 3.
    In Cases 2 and 3, ln At and ln It are positively correlated even in a random sample
                                  +1

because able parents tend to have more income and tend to have more able children. This
positive correlation means that plim e and plim e are greater than the respective partial
                                        1             2

family income elasticities of earnings, 0 and , because the corresponding regression equa-
tions have ln At as an omitted variable. Since ln At also enters the consumption equation
                 +1                                  +1

for Group 2, c is also subject to an upward omitted variable bias.
                 2




                                              13
                            Table 1: Biases Induced by Heterogeneous Ability
                                              ( constant)
                       Benchmark          Case 1                  Case 2              Case 3
                       ln At+1 constant   ln At+1 = t+1          ln At+1 =  ln At   ln At+1 =  ln At + t+1
          c vs 1       0                  0                       0                   0
   PI     e vs 0       0                  0                       OVB(+)              OVB(+)
          e vs        RB(-)              0                      RB(-)               RB(-)
          c1 vs 1      0                  0                       0                   0
          e1 vs 0      0                  SB(+)                   SB(+)               SB(+)
                                                                  OVB(+)              OVB(+)
          e   1 vs    RB(-)              SB(+)                  RB(-)               RB(-)
   ICM                                                            SB(+)               SB(+)
          c2 vs        0                  SB(+)                   SB(+)               SB(+)
                                          OVB(+)                  OVB(+)              OVB(+)
          e   2 vs    0y                 SB(+)y                  SB(+)               SB(+)
                                                                  OVB(+)y             OVB(+)y
   RB=\regression" or \measurement error" bias 0 = no bias
   SB=\selection bias"                                (+)=upward bias
   OVB=\omitted variable bias"                        (-)=downward bias
                       =  elasticity of h(It; At ) with respect to It
                                                             +1

                  evaluated at some (It ; At ) within the range of the data
                                                   +1
    If Case 1 is generated by var(ln At ) = 0, rather than  = 0, then e and e are                1

   regression biased downward as estimates of  (as in Cases 2 and 3).
   y If grandparents are not borrowing constrained, then there is a regression bias.
   The bias can be upward or downward. See, e.g., Proposition 2.
   Notice that an important part of our argument requires that \anticipated ability" a ects
the eÆcient human capital investment in a multiplicative way. If instead ability a ected
earnings in an additive way, then the eÆcient human capital investment would not depend
on ability and there would not be a \selection bias" resulting from the de nition of Groups
I and II. Nor would there be an \omitted variable bias" in the OLS estimation of earnings
equations for Group II. Several other authors have invoked the multiplicative assumption
(Becker (1991), p. 189; Loury (1981), p. 854), but is it realistic? Multiplicative ability seems
plausible, but the point of our analysis is that multiplicative ability is hard to distinguish
from borrowing constraints as a source of strong intergenerational earnings correlations, and

                                                        14
hence diÆcult to test. In the class of models we consider, human capital investments are
uncorrelated with ability and parental income among the unconstrained when ability fails
to act multiplicatively, so a nding that human capital investments (such as schooling) were
correlated with components of ability (such as IQ) even among rich, and clearly uncon-
strained, families would suggest that ability multiplicatively a ects earnings. Behrman and
Taubman (1989) study of twins also suggests that \ability" is an important determinant of
schooling, apart from parental income, but it is still diÆcult to o er a de nitive answer to
this question.
4.2 Calibration
The simulation starts with an initial condition assuming that, rst, grandparents    
                                                                                       for 1all
families are not borrowing constrained. Hence ht is determined as in (1) (i.e., ht = A 1 ,
                                             5                                         r    1+
                                                                                                 t
and et = Atht t ). Second, according to the evolution of earnings ability speci ed in (13),
we assume that                                         
                                                           2
                                   ln At  N 0; 1  :            2


Then with  = 0, ln At has the same distribution as ln At .
                            +1

    Although ability is in its steady state, other variables are not. We do not attempt to
choose steady state initial conditions for other variables because (i) steady states would be
di erent for di erent parameterizations and for di erent models and (ii) a steady state does
not exist for PI model. What is important for our results is not that we do or do not mimic
a \steady state" but that we have a model that \ ts the data" and illustrates the potential
magnitude of the biases of various OLS estimators of intergenerational mobility.
    So the parameters we need to calibrate (assuming that   = 0) are , , ,  ,  ,
                                                                     ln                      ln

 , , r and Xt . We assume that a generation takes 25 years. We choose r and to satisfy
the following two conditions.
    (a) The anticipated component of the net rate of return on nancial assets r = 2:39 so
that the annual rate of return is about 5%.
    (b) We require that
                                          (1 + r) = 1
   5 We have also experimented with the assumption that grandparents may be borrowing constrained. The
results reported here are robust to those di erent speci cations.



                                                     15
because we only consider steady state of the model. Hence = 0:295 with the annual
                                                                  6


altruism rate being about 0:952.
    The rest of parameters are calibrated so that the simulated data from Case 5 speci ed
in Section 5.3 match the following empirical facts.
    (c) The standard deviations of logarithmic earnings for both parents and kids are about
0:4, which matches a conservative estimate from real data. That implies
                              0:4 = (1 1 )  1  +  :
                                                          2
                                      2                               2
                                                   2          2       ln




    (d) The OLS estimate of the degree of log earnings persistence by pooling Groups I and
II is about 0:4. This is the number reported in Solon(1992) and veri ed by Mulligan (1997)
using a variety of data sources and estimation techniques.
    (e) The correlation between child's earnings (logarithmic) and inheritances (logarithmic)
is about 0:06. This essentially requires that the variance of parental income should be large
enough relative to the variance of ability (see Mulligan 1997).
    (f) We also control the fraction of Group I (non-borrowing constrained) families in the
whole sample to be around 50%. There are certain arbitrariness on what numbers we should
use for the fraction. Mulligan (1997, Table 8.10) uses the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances
to calculate that 32% of U.S. (\adult child") households with male head aged 25-35 received
or expected to receive an inheritance of at least $25,000, which he interprets as a lower
bound on the fraction of Group I. We have also tried 30% Group I and 70% Group I and
                                          7


the results (not reported here) for Group I-II comparisons are similar to the 50% case.
    We don't have a good prior about the magnitude of , the elasticity of substitution
between parent's and child's consumption. But according to (5) and (11), we know that 
a ects the elasticity of human capital investment with respect to child's ability and parents'
income for Group II. So our sensitivity analysis varies  2 (0; 4). In the light of (18), we x
the product    while we vary , where  is the standard deviation of  (see (17)). We
choose    = 0:31 to match the above facts.
    The following table summarizes the calibration.
   6 Laitner (1992) and Navarro-Zermeno (1993) suggest that consumption does not grow across generations
among the non-borrowing constrained families.
  7 Another 9% received or expected to receive an inheritance, but less than $25,000.



                                                   16
                                    Calibrated parameters
                      r = 0:05  = 0:6            ln t  N (0; 0:3 )                  2

                        = 0:295 Xt = 0:003 t  N (0; 0:0847 )    +1
                                                                                           2

                        = 0:6    = 0:31 i  N (0;  )                        2



Random variables At ; t ; i; t and t are assumed to be mutually independent.
                            +1                     +1




4.3 Simulation Results
Heterogeneity in ability as described in (13) can be decomposed into two components. First,
ability may vary cross families within a generation (ln At varies); Second, the inheritability
of ability cross generations is imperfect (t varies). To see the e ects of the di erent forces,
                                                        +1

we consider three kinds of ability heterogeneity.
    Case 1:     ln At = t ; i.e.  = 0 and ln At  N (0;  );
                      +1         +1
                                                                               2



                ln At =  ln At with ln At  N 0; 1  ;
                                                                       2
    Case 2:           +1                                                   2
                                                                                      
                ln At+1 =  ln At + t+1 withln At  N 0; 1 2
                                                             2
    Case 3:                                                                                and t  N (0;  ):
                                                                                                +1
                                                                                                            2




So in Case 1, ability is not inheritable. In Case 2, the inheritability of ability cross generations
is perfect, but there are variations in ability cross families within a generation. Both forces
present in Case 3. From the benchmark to either Case 1 or Case 2, then to Case 3, we add
more heterogeneity into the model in the sense of increasing standard deviations of ln At .
    For each case, we simulate a large random sample for each value of  using both PI and
ICM models. For the sample generated from ICM models, we separate it into two subsamples
according to whether a family is borrowing constrained. We run OLS regressions using the
subsamples as well as the pooled samples.
4.3.1   Degrees of Consumption Mobility


For a sample containing only Group I families, consumption evolves according to (3) and,
according to Proposition 4, OLS estimates of the degrees of consumption persistence are
consistent. For samples containing only Group II families, (6) can be rewritten as
                                          ln Ct = cst + ln Ct + error
                                              +1



with error =  ln At + t
                       +1        +1   :


                                                             17
    The model predicts that is between zero and one. Moreover, the magnitude of                                      8


is linked to the magnitude of the structural parameters of the model, so it is desirable to
estimate both to learn about the magnitudes of the structural parameters and to distinguish
ICM model from PI model. However, the estimated coeÆcient from an OLS regression of
ln Ct on ln Ct may be an inconsistent estimator of because of the selection issues. Even
                         +1

if there were not selection bias problem, OLS estimates would still be inconsistent because
ln Ct and error are correlated.
                                  Consumption: Case 1                                          Consumption: Case 2                                             Consumption: Case 3

                         1                                                            1                                                               1
Degree of persistence




                                                             Degree of persistence




                                                                                                                             Degree of persistence
                        0.8                                                          0.8                                                             0.8

                        0.6                                                          0.6                                                             0.6

                        0.4                                                          0.4                                                             0.4

                        0.2                                                          0.2                                                             0.2

                              0           2             4                                  0             2               4                                 0           2             4
                                          η                                                              η                                                             η

Figure 1: The estimated degrees of consumption persistence in Cases 1,2,3. Legend: 
PI model,      Pooled sample, | Group I,    Group II, + .
    In Figure 1, the three windows show, in order, the estimated degrees of log consumption
persistence for Cases 1,2,3. For each case, we plot the OLS estimates obtained from di erent
samples (i.e., pooled sample and Groups I and II). We also plot the parameter , which, by
Proposition 2, is the degree of log consumption persistence for Group II in the benchmark
case. In all cases, introducing heterogeneity in ability does not a ect the estimated log
consumption persistence for both the PI model and Group I in the ICM model: All of them
are consistent estimates of (3) (i.e., the probability limit equals to 1). Hence, we have to
rely on Group II to distinguish ICM model from PI model.
    In all three cases, the estimated degrees of consumption persistence for Group II samples
are, asymptotically, greater than the degrees of consumption persistence in the benchmark
case (i.e., all estimates are greater than ) for all 's. As we move from the benchmark to
either Case 1 or Case 2, then to Case 3, more heterogeneity in earnings ability is introduced
into the model. It appears that the estimated degrees of Group II's consumption persistence
                        8 Recall that = =( + (1            )).

                                                                                                    18
increase as we add more heterogeneity.
                                                  Consumption: Group II                                                   Consumption: Group I − II


                                         1                                                                      0.7

                                                                                                                0.6




                                                                                   Differences in persistence
                Degree of persistence
                                        0.8
                                                                                                                0.5

                                                                                                                0.4
                                        0.6
                                                                                                                0.3

                                        0.4                                                                     0.2

                                                                                                                0.1
                                        0.2
                                                                                                                 0

                                              0   1        2         3    4                                           0    1         2          3     4
                                                           η                                                                         η



Figure 2: Left: The estimated degree of consumption persistence of Group II in Cases 1,2,3.
Right: the di erences in the estimated degrees of consumption persistence between Groups I
and II in Cases 1,2,3. Legend:      Case 1,   Case 2, | Case 3, + , o (1 ).
    This can be seen more clearly in the left window of Figure 2, where in a single graph,
we plot the estimated degrees of consumption persistence of Group II from all three cases.
The graph shows that from the benchmark to Cases 1, 2 and 3, the estimated degrees of
consumption persistence for Group II are getting larger. As a result, since the estimated
degrees of Group I's consumption persistence equal to 1 in all cases, the observed di erences
in the degrees of consumption persistence between Groups I and II are reduced with more
heterogeneity introduced into the model. This is shown clearly in the right window of
Figure 2, where we plot the di erences of the estimated degrees of consumption persistence
between Groups I and II.
    Notice that  plays an important role in determining the size of observed di erence in the
degrees of consumption persistence between Groups I and II. As seen in the right window of
Figure 2, for all cases, the smaller  is, the smaller the di erence. In Case 3, when  < 1, we
observe that consumption regresses toward mean at roughly the same speeds for both Groups
I and II since the intergroup di erences in the estimated degrees of consumption persistence
are small (less than 0:2). This implies that when  < 1, it is empirically diÆcult to distinguish
PI models from ICM models on the basis of the relative consumption persistence of Groups
I and II.9


    9 The di erence in the degrees of consumption persistence between Groups I and II predicted by theory
is (1 ), which, as shown in Figure 2 (right window), is increasing in . So in theory, the di erence may
be already small when  is small. What heterogeneity does is to make the di erences even smaller.

                                                                              19
   If  > 1, the di erences in the estimated degrees of log consumption persistence between
Groups I and II become increasingly apparent. Consumption regresses toward mean more
rapidly for Group II than Group I.
4.3.2                             Degrees of Earnings Mobility


In Figure 3, the three windows show, in order, the estimated degrees of earnings persistence
for the benchmark case and Cases 1,2,3. For each case, we plot the OLS estimates obtained
from di erent samples. Let us rst look at PI model. Proposition 1 states that the estimated
degrees of earnings persistence should be zeros in the benchmark. The speci cation of Case 1
implies that COV (ln et ; ln et ) = 0. So the estimated degrees of earnings persistence are also
                                                +1

expected to be zeros. In Cases 2 and 3, according to Proposition 3, the OLS estimates of log
earnings persistence are, asymptotically, less than the inheritability of ability  and greater
than the partial family income elasticity of earnings, 0. In fact, under our calibration, (15)
implies that the probability limit of the OLS estimates should be 0:26. These are veri ed by
the simulations: In both the benchmark and Case 1, the estimates are zeros; In both Cases
2 and 3, the estimates are about 0:26.
                              Earnings: Benchmark              Earnings: Case 1                  Earnings: Case 2                 Earnings: Case 3
Degree of persistence




                        0.8                          0.8                               0.8                              0.8
                        0.6                          0.6                               0.6                              0.6
                        0.4                          0.4                               0.4                              0.4
                        0.2                          0.2                               0.2                              0.2
                         0                            0                                 0                                0
                              0       2        4           0          2           4          0          2           4         0          2           4
                                      η                               η                                 η                                η

Figure 3: The estimated degrees of earnings persistence in the benchmark and Cases 1,2,3.
Legend:  PI model,      Pooled sample, | Group I,           Group II.
    Note that from the benchmark to Cases 2 and 3, all underlying model's parameters,
including the true degree of intergenerational transmission of earnings ability , are kept
constant, except that the standard deviations of earnings ability (i.e,  A ) are increased.                              ln      t

Hence, our nding that more heterogeneity in earnings ability leads to larger observed degrees
of earnings persistence suggests an alternative interpretation of some observed di erences in
the degrees of intergenerational earnings mobility among di erent countries or regions. For

                                                                                  20
example, Bjorklund and Jantti (1997) found that the observed degree of earnings persistence
in Sweden was smaller than that in the US. One possible explanation of this, according to
our result, could be that there are more heterogeneity in earnings ability in the US than in
Sweden, even though the true degrees of intergenerational transmission of earnings ability 
are the same for the two countries. More discussions on this point are provided in Section 7.
                                  Earnings: Group I                                         Earnings: Group II                                              Earnings: Group II − I




                                                                                                                     Differences in persistence
                        0.8                                                       0.8
Degree of persistence




                                                          Degree of persistence
                                                                                                                                                  0.8

                        0.6                                                       0.6                                                             0.6
                        0.4                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                        0.2                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                         0                                                         0

                              0          2            4                                 0            2           4                                      0             2              4
                                         η                                                           η                                                                η

Figure 4: Left and middle: the estimated degrees of earnings persistence of Groups I and
II, respectively, in Cases 1,2,3. Right: the di erences in the estimated degrees of earnings
persistence between Groups II and I in Cases 1,2,3. Legend:  Benchmark,      Case
1,         Case 2, | Case 3.
    Now let us turn to ICM model. Our theory implies that if there were no selection
problems, the OLS estimates for Group I in the ICM model should have the same probability
limits as those in the PI model. Proposition 2 states that selection does not matter for the
benchmark. But the gure shows that selection does matter for Cases 1,2,3. In all three
cases, the OLS estimates for Group I in the ICM model are larger than those of the PI
model. Those upward biases are solely due to sample selection.
    As before, in order to see the e ects of adding more heterogeneity into the model, we plot
in a single graph the estimated degrees of earnings persistence for each group of families from
all cases. The rst two windows of Figure 4 correspond to Groups I and II, respectively.
As we add more heterogeneity from the benchmark to either Case 1 or Case 2, then to
Case 3, the observed degrees of earnings persistence increase for both groups of families.
The di erences of the observed degrees of earnings persistence between Groups II and I are
plotted in the right window of Figure 4. It shows that the di erences in the observed degrees
of earnings persistence between Groups II and I are smaller in Case 3 than those in the

                                                                                                21
benchmark and Cases 1 and 2. In other words, more heterogeneity makes it more diÆcult
to detect the e ects of capital market imperfection. This is especially true when  is large,
because the di erences decrease in  and are less than 0:15 for  > 1.
4.3.3       Mobility in Pooled Samples


What happens if the data are generated by an ICM model and we run a regression with
all families pooled together, as is often done in the studies built on a mechanical statistical
model of intergenerational mobility? Figure 1 shows that in all cases, pooling Groups I and
II tends to overestimate the degrees of consumption persistence for Group II (borrowing
constrained) families (the degree of overestimation is small in Case 3) and underestimate for
Group I (non-borrowing constrained) families (the degree of underestimation is large in Case
3). Figure 3 shows that in all cases, a mechanical model tends to underestimate the degrees
of earnings persistence for Group II. It overestimates the degrees of earnings persistence for
Group I in the benchmark; and underestimates those in Cases 1 and 2 for  > 1, and in Case
3 for all possible 's.
    However, it seems that for estimating the degrees of consumption mobility, the misspeci -
cation of a mechanical model may not be important if the observed di erences of the degrees
of consumption persistence between Groups I and II are already small in the ICM model.
This is true when  < 1. For estimating the degrees of earnings mobility, the misspeci cation
of the mechanical model presents more serious problems.

5 Heterogeneous Altruism Rates
In this section, we examine the possible speci cation bias caused by heterogeneous altruism
rates. We model the heterogeneity according to
                                       ln i = ln + i;                                   (17)
where i is assumed to be  i.i.d. across all periods and families and normally distributed as
N (0;  ). Note that ln i has a constant mean of ln .
        2




5.1 PI Model: Some Analytical Results
Use (3) to get the evolution equation of consumption
                              ln Ct = cst + ln Ct + t + t
                                    +1                       +1   :                       (18)
                                              22
Hence,
                                                       (ln Ct ; t) :
                               plim( ^) = 1 +  COVV (ln                                (19)
                                                          Ct )
Since (2) implies that @ @C < 0, the covariance term in equation (19) is negative. So
                             ln
                                  t
                                      t                                                               10


the OLS estimator of consumption mobility is downward inconsistent with respect to the
coeÆcient of ln Ct in equation (3) (i.e., less than 1).
    To see the economics of this result, consider a group of families that are identical in
every way except their degrees of intergenerational altruism . More altruistic parents
would choose higher consumption for children and lower consumption for parents, while
less altruistic parents would choose lower consumption for children and higher consumption
for parents. A cross-sectional regression of ln Ct on ln Ct would actually yield a negative
                                                          +1

coeÆcient, which is obviously a downward inconsistent estimator of the true coeÆcient, 1.
    Heterogeneity in altruism rates does not add any other new biases to the estimation of
earnings mobility in PI model. That is because earnings in PI model only depend on the
eÆcient human capital investment, which is the same for all families with the same At ,                    +1

regardless how much they love their children, or how rich or poor parents are. Hence, adding
heterogeneity in altruism rates does not change the evolution of earnings across generations
(which is (14)).
    In summary, the above analysis has proved the following.
Proposition 5    In PI model, with assumptions (13) and (17), the OLS estimate of the degree
of consumption mobility is downward inconsistent with respect to (3) (i.e., less than 1). The
OLS estimate of the degree of earnings mobility has the same property as in Proposition 3.
    The results of Proposition 5 are displayed in the rst two rows of Table 2. To isolate
the e ects of heterogeneous altruism, Cases 4 and 5, as de ned below, are juxtaposed with
their corresponding homogeneous altruism cases. Heterogeneous altruism adds a downward
omitted variable bias to c and no additional bias to e.
    Because the bias of OLS estimates of consumption mobility in above proposition is merely
caused by the correlation between Ct and t, an instrumental variable (uncorrelated with
parental altruism but correlated with parental consumption), say parental income, could be
used in the usual way to eliminate the bias.
  10 It can be shown that if random variables x and y are independent, and f (x; y) is increasing (decreasing)
in x, then COV (f (x; y); x) is greater (less) than 0.

                                                     23
                        Table 2: Biases Induced by Heterogeneous Altruism
                        Benchmark        Case 4                       Case 3      Case 5
                             constant        varies                     constant    varies
                                  ln At constant
                                        +1                                  ln At+1 =  ln At + t+1
           c vs 1       0                OVB(-)                       0           OVB(-)
    PI     e vs 0       0                0                            OVB(+) OVB(+)
           e vs        RB(-)            RB(-)                        RB(-)       RB(-)
           c1 vs 1      0                OVB(-)                       0           OVB(-)
                                         SB(-)                                    SB(-)
           e   1 vs 0   0                0                            SB(+)       SB(+)
                                                                      OVB(+) OVB(+)
           e   1 vs    RB(-)            RB(-)                        RB(-)       RB(-)
    ICM                                                               SB(+)       SB(+)
           c   2 vs     0                SB(-)                        SB(+)       SB(?)
                                         OVB(-)                       OVB(+) OVB(?)
           e   2 vs    0y               SB(+)y                       SB(+)       SB(?)
                                                                      OVB(+) OVB(+)y
                                                                              y

    RB=\regression" or \measurement error" bias 0 = no bias; (?) = bias ambiguous
    SB=\selection bias"                              (+)=upward bias
    OVB=\omitted variable bias"                      (-)=downward bias
                      =  elasticity of h(It; At ) with respect to It
                                                                +1

                 evaluated at some (It ; At ) within the range of the data
                                                      +1
    y If grandparents are not borrowing constrained, then there is a regression bias.
    The bias can be upward or downward. See, e.g., Proposition 2.
5.2 ICM Model: One Analytical Result
Introducing heterogeneous altruism rates into the benchmark does not a ect the property
of the estimated degrees of earnings persistence for Group I families in ICM models. This is
because
                             plim( ^e ) = COV V(ln(lnet ;elnj)
                                             1
                                                             et j)       +1

                                                          t

                                        = COV   (t ; t j)         +1                (20)
                                             V (ln et j)
                                        =0


                                                           24
The last equality is true because t is independent of (t ; It; ) and ln At is constant.
                                               +1                            +1

This leads to the following.
Proposition 6     In the model with the benchmark assumption (12) and assumption (17),
the OLS estimator of the degree of Group I's earnings mobility is a consistent estimate of
the degree of unequal earnings opportunity, 0, and a downward inconsistent estimate of
inheritability of ability, .
    The result of Proposition 6 is displayed in the second column of Table 2: e remains an
                                                                                  1

unbiased estimator of 0 when we deviate from the benchmark case by introducing heteroge-
neous altruism. As shown in the fourth column, we do not in general expect heterogeneous
altruism to introduce any new biases to e .           1

    Table 2 reports that heterogeneous altruism does create selection and omitted variable
biases in the estimation of consumption persistence in either group. The selection biases
occur because enters the consumption equations with a positive sign and because the
selection introduces a negative correlation between and It . The omitted variable biases
are negative because, even in the absence of selection, and Ct are negatively correlated.
    Heterogeneous altruism also creates downward selection biases in the estimation of earn-
ings persistence in Group II because enters the earnings equation with a positive sign and
because the selection introduces a negative correlation between and It .
5.3 Simulation Results for Both Models
To see how heterogeneity in altruism rates a ects the OLS estimates in ICM model, we
conduct two kinds of experiments:         11




                                   Case 4:          Benchmark plus (17) ;
                                   Case 5:          Case 3 plus (17):
That is, in Case 4 we introduce heterogeneity in altruism rates into the benchmark model,
while in Case 5 there exists heterogeneity in both earnings ability and altruism rates. So
Cases 3 and 4 show separately the e ects of heterogeneity in ability and altruism rate, and
Case 5 shows the aggregate e ects of the two types of heterogeneity.
 11 Recall that   = 0:295 and t  N (0; 2 ).


                                                          25
5.3.1                             Degrees of Consumption Mobility


In Figure 5, the last two windows show, in order, the estimated degrees of consumption
persistence for Cases 4 and 5. For each case, we plot the OLS estimates obtained from
di erent samples. As before, we also plot the parameter , and for comparison, we replicate
the plot of consumption persistence in Case 3. We rst compare Group I families of the
ICM model with those in the PI model. The common feature of Cases 4 and 5 is that the
estimated degrees of consumption mobility for both the PI model and Group I sample in
the ICM model are downward biased with respect to the coeÆcient of ln Ct in (3) (i.e., less
than 1). For the PI model, this is what our theory predicts. Also note that in Case 4, the
observed di erences between the PI model and Group I sample of the ICM model are solely
due to selection biases (The selection rule Xt > 0 is correlated with both Ct and even if         +1

At is constant) since without selection issues there should be no di erence between them.
                    +1

When heterogeneity in both ability and preference presents in Case 5, there is also omitted
variable bias for the OLS estimate of Group I samples of ICM model. From the last two
windows of Figure 5, it is apparent that the estimated degrees of consumption persistence of
Group I are higher in Case 5 than those in Case 4. This is clearly shown in the left window in
Figure 6, where in a single graph, we plot the estimated degrees of consumption persistence
of Group I families from all three cases.
                                  Consumption: Case 3                                         Consumption: Case 4                                         Consumption: Case 5

                         1                                                           1                                                           1
Degree of persistence




                                                            Degree of persistence




                                                                                                                        Degree of persistence




                        0.8                                                         0.8                                                         0.8

                        0.6                                                         0.6                                                         0.6

                        0.4                                                         0.4                                                         0.4

                        0.2                                                         0.2                                                         0.2

                              0           2             4                                 0             2           4                                 0           2             4
                                          η                                                             η                                                         η

Figure 5: The estimated degrees of consumption persistence in Cases 3,4,5. Legend: 
PI model,      Pooled sample, | Group I,    Group II, + .
   For Group II families, we plot the estimated degrees of consumption persistence from all
three cases in the middle window of Figure 6. In Case 4, with only heterogeneity in altruism

                                                                                                   26
                                  Consumption: Group I                                         Consumption: Group II                                              Consumption: Group I − II




                                                                                                                           Differences in persistence
                         1                                                            1
Degree of persistence




                                                             Degree of persistence
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                        0.8                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                        0.6                                                          0.6

                        0.4                                                          0.4                                                                0.2

                        0.2                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                         0
                              0            2             4                                 0              2            4                                      0              2                4
                                           η                                                              η                                                                  η

Figure 6: Left and middle: the estimated degrees of consumption persistence of Groups
I and II, respectively, in Cases 3,4,5. Right: the di erences in the estimated degrees of
consumption persistence between Groups I and II in Cases 3,4,5. Legend:      Case 3,
       Case 4, | Case 5, + , o (1 ).
rates presented in the economy, the estimated degrees of consumption persistence for Group
II are downward biased with respect to the coeÆcient of ln Ct in (6) (i.e., less than ) for
all values of . In Case 5, the estimated degrees of consumption persistence for Group II
samples are higher than those in Case 4 for all , and are upward biased (i.e., greater )
when  is large and downward biased when  is small. The observed degrees of consumption
persistence in both Cases 4 and 5 are lower than those in Case 3.
    We plot the di erences of the estimated degrees of consumption persistence between
Groups I and II in the right window of Figure 6. Although it is still qualitatively true that
Group I families have larger degrees of persistence in consumption than Group II ones, the
observed quantitative di erences are less than 0:2 for all , and in particular less than 0:1
for  < 1. So when  < 1, it is empirically impossible to distinguish ICM models from PI
models using the estimated degrees of consumption mobility.
5.3.2                             Degrees of Earnings Mobility


Figure 7 shows the simulation results for earnings mobility in Cases 3,4,5. We rst look at
the PI model and Group I in the ICM model. In Case 4, with only heterogeneity of altruism
rates presented, the estimated degrees of earnings mobility for both the PI model and Group
I sample of the ICM model are consistent (i.e., the probability limits equal to 0). In theory,
if there were no selection issue, the estimated degree of earnings persistence for Group I in

                                                                                                     27
Case 5 would be the same as those in Case 3. As we note before, selection problem exists for
the OLS estimates of earnings persistence in Case 3. What heterogeneity in preference does
is to introduce an additional source that can cause selection bias. We nd that for Group I,
the estimated degrees of earnings persistence in Case 5 are di erent from and indeed lower
than those in Case 3. This is clearly seen in the left window of Figure 8, where in a single
graph we plot the estimated degrees of Group I's earnings mobility from all three cases.
Finally, Figure 7 also shows that adding heterogeneity in ability (from Case 4 to Case 5)
leads to higher observed degrees of earnings persistence for PI models and even more so
for Group I in ICM model. Nonetheless, all estimates are still downward inconsistent with
respect to  = 0:6.
                                  Earnings: Case 3                                         Earnings: Case 4                                         Earnings: Case 5

                        0.8                                                      0.8                                                      0.8
Degree of persistence




                                                         Degree of persistence




                                                                                                                  Degree of persistence
                        0.6                                                      0.6                                                      0.6

                        0.4                                                      0.4                                                      0.4

                        0.2                                                      0.2                                                      0.2

                         0                                                        0                                                        0

                              0          2           4                                 0            2         4                                 0          2           4
                                         η                                                          η                                                      η

Figure 7: The estimated degrees of earnings persistence in Cases 3,4,5. Legend:  PI
model,      Pooled sample, | Group I,     Group II
   For Group II, Figure 7 shows that their observed degrees of earnings persistence are larger
than Group I in all cases. So earnings for non-borrowing constrained families observably
regress to mean faster than borrowing constrained families. In the middle window of Figure 8,
we plot the estimated degrees of Group II's earnings mobility from all three cases. The plot
shows that, unlike Group I families, heterogeneity in altruism rates does have e ects on
the estimated degrees of earnings persistence for Group II in Case 4 { they are lower than
those in the benchmark. But like Group I, heterogeneity in altruism rates reduces estimated
degrees of earnings persistence for Group II families in Case 5, comparing to those in Case
3. Finally, adding heterogeneity in ability (from Case 4 to Case 5) increases the observed
degrees of earnings persistence for Group II families.
   The last window of Figure 8 shows that for both Cases 3 and 5, the di erences in the
                                                                                               28
                                   Earnings: Group I                                         Earnings: Group II                                              Earnings: Group II − I




                                                                                                                      Differences in persistence
                        0.8                                                        0.8
Degree of persistence




                                                           Degree of persistence
                                                                                                                                                   0.8

                        0.6                                                        0.6                                                             0.6
                        0.4                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                        0.2                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                         0                                                          0

                              0           2            4                                 0            2           4                                      0             2              4
                                          η                                                           η                                                                η

Figure 8: Left and middle: the estimated degrees of earnings persistence of Groups I and
II, respectively, in Cases 3,4,5. Right: the di erences in the estimated degrees of earnings
persistence between Groups II and I in Cases 3,4,5. Legend:  Benchmark,      Case
3,         Case 4, | Case 5.
estimated degrees of earnings persistence between Groups II and I become smaller when 
gets larger, and are much lower than the lower bound of the di erences in the benchmark.
Indeed, when  > 1, the di erences are always less than 0:15. So it becomes more diÆcult to
distinguish PI and ICM models when  are large. Conversely, this implies that ICM model
may only be empirically useful for estimating the degrees of earnings mobility when  is in
the low range of (0; 4).
5.3.3                             Mobility in Pooled Samples


Suppose that the intergenerational data are generated by an ICM model with heterogeneity
in both earnings ability and altruism rate, as in Case 5. The third window of Figure 5 shows
that if we pool all families together to obtain OLS estimates of intergenerational mobility,
the misspeci cation leads to an overestimate of the degrees of consumption persistence for
Group II (by almost 0:2 for all ) and a slight overestimate for Group I. The overestimation
for Group I families is particularly small when  is large.
    For earnings, Figure 7 (third window) shows that regressions using pooled samples under-
estimate the degrees of earnings persistence for Group II (by almost 0:2 for all ) . But for
all , the misspeci cation errors are small in estimating the degrees of earnings persistence
for Group I.


                                                                                                 29
6 The E ects of Heterogeneity on Nonlinear Estimates
  of Intergenerational Mobility
Our analysis so far considers a linear speci cation of the OLS estimations of the degrees
of intergenerational mobility. Studying the linear speci cation is important because such
regressions are the most common in the empirical literature and are the starting point of
other estimation methods. Nonetheless, there are studies that appreciates the nonlinearities
of the underlying economic models (Cooper et al. 1994; Durlauf 1996). Although a thorough
study on the e ects of heterogeneity in those methods is clearly a subject of another paper,
we report here some exploratory results for two ad hoc nonlinear speci cations. The rst is a
\quadratic speci cation." That is, we consider a regression of child's outcome (consumption
or earnings) on both parents' outcome and its square. The regression is run by using the
whole sample. The second is a \rich-poor speci cation." That is, we split the whole sample
into two subsamples according to parental income. \Rich families" are those whose parental
incomes are above certain income percentile of the sample and \poor families" are those
below that percentile. The rich-poor speci cation then applies a linear speci cation to the
rich and poor subsamples.
    The data are generated by ICM model. For each of the two speci cations, we obtain
the estimated degrees of intergenerational mobility for three cases: the benchmark, Case 3
and 5. Recall that in the benchmark, families are di erent in only parental incomes. In
Case 3, there is heterogeneity in ability. In Case 5, there is heterogeneity in both ability and
altruism rate. As reported below, our simulation results show that heterogeneity also dulls
the power of both nonlinear speci cations to detect the presence of borrowing constraints.
6.1 Ad Hoc Speci cation 1 { Quadratic
For consumption mobility, we estimate the equation:
                                Xt+1 = b0 + bc1 Xt + bc2 Xt2 +  c;

where Xi is the di erence between log Ci and its cross-section mean for i = t; t + 1. So bc   1

measures the degree of consumption persistence for families with log parental consumption
equal to the mean of log parental consumption in the sample. The estimated bc and bc  1       2

are plotted in the upper two windows of Figure 9. The gure shows di erent e ects of

                                                30
heterogeneity on bc and bc . First, adding heterogeneity in ability (Case 3) in the otherwise
                                  1       2

homogeneous model (the benchmark) increases the estimated bc , especially for  > 1. But                         1

with heterogeneity in both ability and altruism rate (Case 5), the estimated bc becomes only                                         1

slightly smaller than those in the benchmark, except for  < 1. Second, heterogeneity in
both ability and altruism rate reduces the estimates for bc . In particular, with both types             2

of heterogeneity (Case 5), the estimated bc 's are less than 0:1 for most . This implies that
                                                                  2

heterogeneity reduces the power of the nonlinear speci cation for estimating the degree of
consumption mobility.
                                              bc                                                                     bc
                                               1                                                                         2

                             1
                                                                                               0.5

                            0.9                                                                0.4




                                                                                 Coeffieient
              Coefficient




                                                                                               0.3
                            0.8
                                                                                               0.2
                            0.7
                                                                                               0.1

                            0.6                                                                 0
                                  0   1       2        3      4                                      0       1       2       3       4
                                              η                                                                      η
                                              be1                                                                    be2

                                                                                                0
                            0.5
                                                                                         −0.1

                            0.4                                                          −0.2
              Coeffieient




                                                                           Coeffieient




                                                                                         −0.3
                            0.3
                                                                                         −0.4
                            0.2
                                                                                         −0.5
                            0.1                                                          −0.6
                                  0   1       2        3      4                                      0       1       2       3       4
                                              η                                                                      η


Figure 9: A quadratic speci cation of the OLS estimation of the degrees of consumption and
earnings persistence. Legend:  Benchmark,      Case 3, | Case 5.
   For earnings mobility, we estimate the equation:
                                                    Xt+1 = b0 + be1 Xt + be2 Xt2 +  e;

where Xi is the di erence between log ei and its cross-sectional mean for i = t; t + 1. So be                                            1

measures the degree of earnings persistence for families with log parental earnings equal to
the mean of log parental earnings in the sample. The estimated be and be are plotted in the                          1           2



                                                                      31
bottom two windows of Figure 9. The gure shows that in the benchmark, except for some
small , be is decreasing in  (from 0:37 to 0:17), and be is increasing in  (from 0:5 to
           1                                                        2

  0:15). With heterogeneity in ability (Case 3), be is increased by about 0:2 for all , and
                                                            1

the absolute value of be is reduced by as much as 0:4 for  < 1 and about 0:3 for  > 1.
                           2

In particular, be ranges from 0:2 to 0:05. The gure also shows that heterogeneity in
                  2

altruism rate has no e ects on be , but slightly increases be , making it even closer to 0. So,
                                       1                             2

heterogeneity also reduces the power of the nonlinear speci cation for estimating the degree
of earnings mobility.
6.2 Ad Hoc Speci cation 2 { Rich/poor
For the experiment reported here, we de ne \rich families" as those whose parental incomes
are in the top 50 percentile of the sample and \poor families" as those in the lower 50
percentile. We then apply a linear speci cation to each subsample to obtain OLS estimates
of the degrees of consumption and earnings mobility.
    Notice that besides the sources of bias discussed in Tables 1 and 2, the rich-poor spec-
i cation induces a bias from imperfect classi cation of Group I-II in the underlying ICM
model. The classi cation is imperfect because whether a family is borrowing constrained
depends on not only parental income but also child's ability and parents' altruism rate. This
misclassi cation bias is minimized here because in calibrating ICM model, we control the
fraction of Group I (non-borrowing constrained) to be around 50%. In particular, in the
benchmark, parental income is the only factor that determines whether a family is borrow-
ing constrained. So we expect that there will be essentially no misclassi cation bias there.               12


This is con rmed by our simulations.
    In the top row of Figure 10, we plot the estimated degrees of consumption persistence
for both rich and poor families as well as the di erence between the rich and the poor. The
estimates for earnings persistence are plotted in the low row of the gure. For the benchmark,
except for some small , Figure 10 does not show any di erence of the estimated degrees of
both consumption and earnings persistence from those in Figures 6 and 8. For Cases 3 and
5, the misclassi cation does have e ects: The estimated degrees of both consumption and
earnings persistence for the rich (the poor) in both Cases 3 and 5 are smaller than those for
   12 Some misclassi cations still exist in the benchmark because our calibration is based on Case 5. Also the
fraction of Group I can be more or less than, but on average, equal to, 50% for di erent .


                                                     32
                                  Consumption: the rich                                         Consumption: the poor                                             Rich − Poor
                                                                                                                                                        0.8




                                                                                                                            Difference of persistence
                         1                                                             1
Degree of persistence




                                                              Degree of persistence
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                        0.8                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                        0.6                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                        0.4                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                         0
                        0.2                                                           0.2
                              0             2             4                                 0              2            4                                     0       2         4
                                            η                                                              η                                                          η



                                    Earnings: the rich                                            Earnings: the poor                                              Poor − Rich
                        0.8                                                           0.8




                                                                                                                            Difference of persistence
                                                                                                                                                        0.8
Degree of persistence




                                                              Degree of persistence




                        0.6                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                        0.4                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                        0.2                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                         0                                                             0

                              0             2             4                                 0              2            4                                     0       2         4
                                            η                                                              η                                                          η

Figure 10: A \rich-poor" speci cation for the estimation of the degrees of consumption and
earnings persistence. Legend:  Benchmark,      Case 3, | Case 5.
Group I (Group II). For example, in Case 3, the estimated degree of consumption persistence
for Group I (non-borrowing constrained) is 1, but it is less than 1 for the rich. The estimated
degree of earnings persistence for Group I is about 0:55, but it is less than 0:4 for the rich.
Similar results hold for Group II and the poor, as well as for Case 5.
    However, the e ects of heterogeneity on the rich-poor di erences in the estimated degrees
of both consumption and earnings persistence are still similar to those on the Group I-II
di erences. As in Figures 6 and 8, Figure 10 shows that with more heterogeneity introduced
in the model (from the benchmark to Case 3 to Case 5), the rich-poor di erences get smaller.
In particular, with heterogeneity in both ability and altruism rate, the rich-poor di erences
in consumption persistence are less than 0:15 for all but some large  and no more than 0:2
for all ; the rich-poor di erences in earnings persistence (in absolute value) are less than

                                                                                                      33
0:2 for all but some  < 1 and no more than 0:3 for all . In short, heterogeneity makes it
empirically diÆcult to distinguish the rich from the poor for consumption mobility if  is
not large and for earnings mobility if  > 1.
6.3 EÆcient Estimation
We have a mathematical model of intergenerational mobility, and have fully speci ed func-
tional forms and the distributions of unobservables { it is straightforward to derive a like-
lihood function from our model. Maximum likelihood would seem to be the preferred es-
timation method, even though most of the empirical literature explores least squares and
two-stage least squares estimators (Mulligan (1997), Appendix E is one exception). Nev-
ertheless, our analysis of linear estimators highlights some of the diÆculties inherent in
detecting the existence and importance of borrowing constraints even with nonlinear esti-
mators tailored to our economic model. First, there is a \regression bias" in the estimation
of the inheritability of ability  because ability is unobserved, and earnings is an imperfect
proxy for ability. This is a familiar measurement error problem and { whether it be with
instruments, aggregation, or some independent indicator of the relationship between signal
and noise { must be addressed in any consistent maximum likelihood estimate of .
    Second, there are omitted variable biases. Some variables, such as child's ability and
parents' altruism rate, are unobservable, but they are determinants of child's consumption
(earnings) even if given other observables such as parents' consumption (earnings). Omitting
these variables will result in biased estimate even in a correctly speci ed maximum likelihood
estimation. To reduce omitted variable biases, one has to use instrumental variables or nd
proxies for those unobservables. For example, in Dearden et al. (1997) and O'Neill and
Sweetman (1998), test score is used as a proxy for child's ability.
    Third, there are selection biases. The correct likelihood function would explicitly rec-
ognize the selection process, and would make some kind of \correction" relative to an OLS
estimate. However, this is no substitute for having an instrumental variable that a ect the
earnings (consumption) of children di erently than it a ects selection into Group I or Group
II (olsen 1980, pp. 1818-19, comments in more detail). Such instrumental variables are
not readily available, although perhaps region or country of residence might interpreted as
such a variable, and the cross-regional studies of Cooper (1996) and Mulligan (1999) and
the cross-country comparisons we review in Section 7 might be interpreted as attempts to

                                             34
identify selection into the constrained or unconstrained group.

7 Summary and Conclusions
Some of the important implications of the parental investment model of intergenerational
mobility have been derived under the assumption that parental income is the main source
of heterogeneity. We further explore the links between statistical and economic models of
intergenerational mobility, showing how those links depend on the amount and types of
heterogeneity in the economy. The presence of heterogeneity substantially increases the dif-
  culty of detecting the existence and importance of borrowing constraints with regression
estimators, or even with nonlinear estimators tailored to the economic model. In the fol-
lowing, we summarize our main ndings, show how they t into the previous literature, and
point out their implications for future research.
7.1 PI and ICM Models Have Similar Predictions for Intergener-
    ational Mobility
In the benchmark model, families are identical in every aspect except income. From the
benchmark to either Cases 1 or 2, then to Cases 3 and 5, we sequentially introduce het-
erogeneity in earnings ability and altruism rate. Although it is qualitatively true that the
observed degree of consumption persistence is larger among non-borrowing constrained fam-
ilies than constrained ones, and that the observed degree of earnings persistence is larger
among borrowing constrained families than unconstrained ones, the observed quantitative in-
tergroup di erences in the degrees of both consumption and earnings persistence are reduced
with more heterogeneity. So heterogeneity makes it more diÆcult to empirically distinguish
ICM model from PI model. Or to put it another way, borrowing constraints have only subtle
implications for intergenerational mobility.
     OLS regressions using pooled samples, as suggested by mechanical statistical models,
tend to overestimate the degrees of consumption persistence and underestimate the degrees
of earning persistence for Group II (borrowing constrained) families, but have less adverse
e ects on estimating degrees of persistence of both consumption and earnings for Group
I (non-borrowing constrained) families. In the range of  where PI and ICM models are
not distinguishable from each other, the misspeci cation of mechanical models does not

                                             35
cause very serious problems in estimating the degrees of intergenerational mobility of both
consumption and earnings.
    We also nd that di erent types of heterogeneity have di erent e ects on the estimations.
Both our intuitive discussions (Tables 1 and 2) and simulated results show that heterogeneity
in earnings ability tends to make OLS estimates of consumption mobility downward biased
and earnings mobility upward biased, while heterogeneity in altruism rate has somewhat
opposite e ects. The direction and magnitude of the joint e ects of the two types of hetero-
geneity depend on the parameter of preference, . Next subsection provides more comments
on this.
    In our calibration process, we try to be conservative regarding the degree of heterogeneity
introduced into the model. Our benchmark case shows that less heterogeneity would increase
the distinctness of the predictions of the PI and ICM models. Our intuition as well as some
additional (unreported) simulated results suggest that more heterogeneity would further
reduce observable di erences between the PI and ICM models.
7.2 The Importance of              

The problem of heterogeneity presents a bigger challenge to ICM models especially for  < 1
in term of consumption mobility and for  > 1 in term of earnings mobility. When  < 1,
the observed di erences in the degrees of consumption persistence between Groups I and II
are less than 0:2 and 0:1 in Cases 3 and 5, respectively. When  > 1, the observed di erences
in the degrees of earnings persistence between Groups II and I are less than 0:2 and 0:15
in Cases 3 and 5, respectively. Hence, , the elasticity of substitution between parents' and
children's consumption, plays an important role in determining whether alternative models
can be distinguished empirically from each other and from the mechanical statistical model.
    Since  is such an important parameter in the model, we brie y discuss its economic
content. Technically,  serves two roles in our model{as an intergenerational elasticity of
substitution and as a coeÆcient of intergenerational risk aversion. As Hall (1988) points
out, our functional forms parameterize these economically distinct concepts in a single di-
mension while most of our implications are really only related to a family's willingness to
substitute consumption across generations rather than its willingness to accept risk. Nor is
our parameter  related to the life cycle substitution elasticities that have been estimated in
the labor and macroeconomic literatures such as Ghez and Becker (1975), MaCurdy (1981),

                                              36
Mulligan (1999b), Runkle (1991) and others. Economic theory alone does not restrict the
                                                     13


relationship between the willingness of a family to substitute consumption or leisure over
the life cycle of its members and its willingness to substitute consumption across members.               14


Hence, empirical evidence is sorely needed in order to say something about the magnitude
of , but we unaware of a single empirical estimate in the literature to date.
7.3 Earnings Mobility Around the World
Researchers have for decades compared estimates of intergenerational mobility across coun-
tries (eg., Goode 1966). The methods for collecting and/or analyzing intergenerational
data typically di er across countries, so that estimates may vary across countries mainly
for statistical reasons, but signi cant progress has recently been made in applying uniform
sampling, measurement, and estimation procedures across countries in order to mitigate the
importance of statistical di erences across countries (eg., Bjorklund and Jantti (1997, U.S.
vs Sweden), Couch and Dunn (1997, U.S. vs Germany), and Checchi et al (1999, U.S. vs
Italy)). To the extent that intergenerational earnings mobility di ers across countries - some
of the studies suggest that Sweden (and Italy?) is both more equal and more mobile - one
interpretation suggested by the human capital models of Loury (1981), Becker and Tomes
(1986), and others is that the mobile countries have institutions for human capital accumu-
lation that alleviate borrowing constraints. Our analysis suggests that, even if borrowing
constraints are of di erential importance across countries, it will be hard to detect earnings
mobility di erences. To see this, notice from our \PI model" and \pooled sample" simula-
tions that the complete elimination of borrowing constraints decreases earnings persistence
by at most 0:2, and often less (except for some very small ). Since even the \best" country
will not completely eliminate borrowing constraints, the size of the cross-country earnings
persistence gap that can be reasonably be attributed to borrowing constraints is 0.1 or less.             15


  13 Benabou (1997) studied a model with Kreps-Porteus preferences, where an agent's risk-aversion is in-
dependent of his intertemporal elasticity of substitution. But he did not explicitly study intergenerational
mobility.
  14 Mulligan (1993, pp. 56-63) shows that, when the household head is altruistic, the life cycle and inter-
generational elasticities of substitution are identical when the household head linearly aggregates utilities
of di erent members. The intergenerational elasticity is smaller when the household head has a preference
for equalizing utilities (which Mulligan calls \egalitarian"). Perhaps it is also possible that parents have
a preference for unequal utilities (and perhaps primogeniture is evidence revealing such a preference?), in
which case the life cycle elasticity would be smaller than the intergenerational elasticity.
  15 Our study identi es \selection bias" as one of the diÆculties with dividing a single country's data into
groups of \constrained" and \unconstrained" for the purpose of detecting the mobility e ects of borrowing

                                                     37
Cross-country di erences in the                  of inherited ability can produce di erences in
                                     heterogeneity

earnings inequality and    substantial earnings mobility di erences even when the inheritability
of ability and the importance of borrowing constraints are the same across countries. To
see this, suppose for the sake of argument that the permanent income model applies in all
countries. Suppose that, with the exception of \ability" inequality (namely,  ), all countries
                                                                                         2


have the same model parameters, and parameters equal to our benchmark. In particular,
the inheritability of ability () is the same in all countries. Let ability inequality be greater
in the U.S. ( A =  A +1 = 0:026) than in Sweden ( A =  A +1 = 0:005), perhaps
                2
                ln   t
                          2
                          ln   t
                                                                   2
                                                                   ln   t
                                                                              2
                                                                              ln   t

because the U.S. is geographically, racially, and ethnically more diverse than Sweden. It
follows from (4) and (15) that Swedish earnings are more equal (std dev of log earnings =
0.35) and more mobile (earnings persistence = 0.16) than in the U.S. (std dev of log earn-
ings = 0.50, earnings persistence = 0.38). Of course, these calculations do not suggest that
borrowing constraints do not operate in either Sweden or the US, only that cross-country
di erences in the amount of inherited heterogeneity can lead to cross-country di erences in
earnings inequality and substantial cross-country di erences in earnings mobility, even when
borrowing constraints are equally prevalent in all countries.
7.4 A Life Cycle Interpretation
Although we are solely concerned with the distribution of resources across generations, our
models are mathematically similar to life cycle savings models that have appeared in the
literature, including Hall (1978), Zeldes (1989), Runkle (1991), and others. In particular, our
results suggests that, in the presence of heterogeneous determinants of the liquidity constraint
or heterogeneous rates of time preference, it may be diÆcult to empirically distinguish the
\permanent income" and \liquidity constraint" models by estimating consumption Euler
equations as often advocated in the literature. Some work needs to be done to verify our
conjecture, because there are a number of obvious di erences between a life cycle and a
dynastic model. First is the length of a period, and thereby the calibration of the interest
rate, the discount rate, and the persistence of unobservables. Second, even after correcting for
the time dimension di erences, it still seems that unobservables would be more persistence in
constraints. Dividing data from around the world into subsamples by country presumably alleviates selection
bias, and this is one of the advantages of the cross-country comparisons. The disadvantage is that country
of residence is only weakly correlated with facing a borrowing constraint, because there are certainly some
unconstrained Americans and some constrained Swedes.


                                                    38
a life cycle model than in a generational model because the former is about the same person
at di erent points in time while the latter is about di erent people. Other parameters
are also di erent in a life cycle model, as is the nature of the technologies for substituting
consumption over time when borrowing constraints bind.

Appendix: Proof of Proposition 2
1. The OLS estimate of the degree of consumption persistence for Group I is consistent, i.e.,
the probability limit equals to 1.
                              plim( ^c ) = COVV(ln((lnCtC ); jln)Ct j)
                                    1
                                                    +1

                                                            t

                                         = 1 + COVV((ln
                                                     +1 t ; ln Ct j)
                                                              Ct j)
                                                                                         (21)
                                         =1
The last equality is true because t is independent of ln Ct and It.
                                   +1

     2. The OLS estimate of the degree of earnings persistence for Group I has probability
limit of 0.
                               plim( ^e ) = COV V(ln(lnet ;elnj)et j)
                                        1
                                                          +1

                                                            t
                                            COV (t ; t j)                             (22)
                                          = V (ln e j)
                                                     +1

                                                       t
                                          =0
     3. The OLS estimate of the degree of consumption persistence for Group II is consistent,
i.e., the probability limit equals to .
                              plim( ^c ) = COV (ln
                                    2
                                                    Ct ; ln Ct j)
                                                    +1

                                                V (ln Ct j)
                                         = + COVV((ln+1 t ; ln Ct j)                   (23)
                                                              Ct j)
                                         =
     4. For Group II, the probability limit of the OLS estimate of the degree of earnings




                                             39
persistence is
                                 plim( ^e ) = COV V(ln(lnet ;elnj)
                                         2
                                                                 et j)
                                                                  +1

                                                              t

                                            = COV (ln eVt ; (lnlnehj()
                                                                      It ; At )j)
                                                                          +1
                                                                                                     (24)
                                                                    t
                                                COV (ln et ; I h;I ln et j)
                                                                  e
                                                                  t
                                            =                    t
                                                           V (ln e j)
                                                                                 ;
                                                                      t

where h;I = @ h@ x;Ax +1 , evaluted at some x =  . The last equality is obtained by using
                 ln (
                    ln
                         t   )


(5) and mean-value theorem. Note that  is a random variable correlated with It and
(; At ) 2 . Using (5), it is straightforward to show that h;I 2 ( ; 1) if  > 1, and
     +1

h;I 2 (1; ) if 0 <  < 1.
    If grandparents are borrowing-constrained, It = et. So plim( ^e ) 2 ( ; ) if 0 <  < 1;
                                                                                     2

and plim( ^e ) 2 ( ; ) if  > 1. By (11), plim( ^e ) = , evaluated at some (It ; At ) 2 .
            2                                                 2                                 +1

If grandparents are non-borrowing-constrained, It 6= et . Then in general, the OLS estimator
is an inconsistent estimator of .

References
  Altonji, J. G., F. Hayashi, and L. J. Kotliko (1992, December). The extended family
     altruistically linked? Direct tests using micro data.                                 ,
                                                                          American Economic Review 82

     1177{98.
  Becker, G. S. (1989, June). On the economics of the family: Reply to a skeptic.              American

      Economic Review 79    (3), 514{8.
  Becker, G. S. (1991).                          . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                             A Treatise on the Family

  Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1979, December). An equilibrium theory of the distribution of
     income and intergenerational mobility.                                   (6), 1153{89.
                                                        Journal of Political Economy 87

  Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1986). Human capital and the rise and fall of families.            Journal

      of Labor Economics 4   (3, pt 2), S1{S39.
  Behrman, J. R., R. A. Pollak, and P. Taubman (1995). The wealth model: EÆciency and
     distribution in the family. In J. R. Behrman, R. A. Pollak, and P. Taubman (Eds.),
      From Parent to Child  . University of Chicago Press.
  Behrman, J. R. and P. Taubman (1989, December). Is schooling \mostly in the genes"?
     Nature-nurture decomposition using data on relatives.                     Journal of Political Econ-

      omy 97  (6), 1425{46.

                                                        40
Benabou, R. (1994, April). Human capital, inequality, and growth: A local perspective.
   European Economic Review 38       (3-4), 817{26.
Benabou, R. (1997, March). What levels of redistribution maximize income and eÆciency?
    Working paper, New York University.
Bjorklund, A. and M. Jantti (1997, December). Intergenerational income mobility in Swe-
    den compared to the United States.   American Economic Review 87     (5), 1009{18.
Bowles, S. (1972, May/June). Schooling and inequality from generation to generation.
   Journal of Political Economy 80     (Part II), S219{S251.
Checchi, D., A. Ichino, and A. Rustichini (1999, December). More equal but less mobile?
    education nancing and intergenerational mobility in Italy and in the US.     Journal of

   Public Economics 74    (3), 351{393.
Cooper, S. J. (1996, February). Redistribution and the persistence of income inequality.
    Working paper, Harvard University.
Cooper, S. J., S. N. Durlauf, and P. A. Johnson (1994). On the evolution of economic
    status across generations. InAmerican Statistical Association Papers and Proceedings   ,
    pp. 50{58.
Dearden, L., S. Machin, and H. Reed (1997, January). Intergenerational mobility in
    Britain.Economic Journal 107     (440), 47{66.
Durlauf, S. N. (1996, March). A theory of persistent income inequality.    Journal of Eco-

   nomic Growth 1    (1), 75{94.
Galton, F. (1869). Hereditary Genius: An Inquiry into Its Laws and Consequences      . Lon-
    don: Macmillan.
Galton, F. (1877, February). Typical laws of heredity. In   Proceedings of the Royal Insti-

   tution of Great Britain  , pp. 282{301.
Ghez, G. R. and G. S. Becker (1975).    The Allocation of Time and Goods over the Life

   Cycle  . New York: Columbia University Press (for the NBER).
Glomm, G. and B. Ravikumar (1992, August). Public vs. private investment in human cap-
    ital: Endogenous growth and income inequality.   Journal of Political Economy 100   (4),
    818{34.
Goldberger, A. S. (1989, June). Economic and mechanical models of intergenerational
    transmission.American Economic Review 79        (3), 504{13.
Goode, W. J. (1966). Family and mobility. In R. Bendix and S. M. Lipset (Eds.),      Class,

   Status, and Power    (2nd ed.)., pp. 582{601. New York: Free Press.
Hall, R. E. (1978, December). Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income
    hypothesis: Theory and evidence.   Journal of Political Economy 86  (6), 971{87.

                                           41
Hall, R. E. (1988, April). Intertemporal substitution in consumption.   Journal of Political

   Economy 96     (2), 339{57.
Laitner, J. (1992, December). Random earnings di erences, lifetime liquidity constraints,
    and altruistic intergenerational transfers.  Journal of Economic Theory 58   (2), 135{70.
Loury, G. C. (1981, June). Intergenerational transfers and the distribution of earnings.
   Econometrica 49     (4), 843{67.
MaCurdy, T. E. (1981, December). An empirical model of labor supply in a life cycle
    setting. Journal of Political Economy 88     (6), 1059{85.
Mulligan, C. B. (1997). Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality   . Chicago and London:
    University of Chicago Press.
Mulligan, C. B. (1999a, December). Galton vs. the human capital approach to inheritance.
   Journal of Political Economy 107      (6, Part 2), S184{S224.
Mulligan, C. B. (1999b). Substitution over time: Another look at life cycle labor supply.
   NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998 13           , 75{134. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Navarro-Zermeno, J. I. (1993, August).   A Model of Bequests and Intergenerational Mobil-

   ity . Ph. D. thesis, Department of Economics, University of Chicago.
olsen, R. J. (1980, November). A least squares correction for selectivity bias.  Economet-

   rica 48  (7), 1815{20.
O'Neill, D. and O. Sweetman (1998). Intergenerational mobility in Britain: Evidence from
    unemployment patterns.   Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 60    (4), 431{447.
Runkle, D. (1991, February). Liquidity contraints and the permanent income hypothesis:
    Evidence from panel data.  Journal of Monetary Economics 27      (1), 73{98.
Solon, G. (1989, February). Biases in the estimation of intergenerational earnings correla-
    tions.Review of Economics and Statistics 71       , 172{4.
Solon, G. (1992, June). Intergenerational income mobility in the United States.   American

   Economic Review 82       (3), 393{408.
Tamura, R. (1991, June). Income convergence in an endogenous growth model.           Journal

   of Political Economy 99     (3), 522{40.
Zeldes, S. P. (1989, April). Consumption and liquidity constraints: An empirical investi-
    gation.  Journal of Political Economy 97   (2), 305{46.




                                            42
