NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDUCED RETIREMENT, SOCIAL SECURITY,
AND THE PYRAMID MIRAGE

Casey B. Mulligan

Working Paper 7679
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7679
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2000

I appreciate the comments of Chicago GSB Macro lunch eaters, Mark Duggan, Kevin Murphy, Tomas
Philipson, Xavier Sala-I-Martin, Jaume Ventura, Chicago and Iowa State seminar participants, the research
assistance of Shiqiang Zhan, and the financial support the National Science Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and are not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2000 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Induced Retirement, Social Security, and the Pyramid Mirage
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 7679
April 2000
JEL No. J26, D78, D91, H55, D72
ABSTRACT

Does Social Security redistribute across cohorts? Or is it a program for “purchasing the jobs”
of the elderly? I formalize both models, showing how they have some predictions in common – the
most important of which is that generational accounts have the appearance of a “pyramid scheme.”
I also derive important differences between the two interpretations, and compare those differences
with data on the design and incidence of Social Security programs around the world. Since implicit
and explicit tax rates on elderly labor income are so high, and so closely (and positively) related with
the amount of Social Security spending, and because substitution effects of the program can be as
large as its wealth effects, I conclude that Social Security’s induced retirement motive is much more
important for explaining differences among European countries than is the intergenerational
redistribution motive. Furthermore, when policy at least in part designed to induce retirement, its
generational incidence can be very different than the incidence of a pyramid scheme, even for those
countries where the induced retirement motive is not the dominant one. The possibility of induced
retirement also makes it difficult for perpetual intergenerational redistribution to be supported as a
subgame perfect political equilibrium.

Casey B. Mulligan
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

Table of Contents

I. A Nested Model of Social Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Setup of the Nested Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Intergenerational Redistribution and Induced Retirement as Special Cases . . . . . . . . . . . 6
II. Equivalent Implications of Redistributional and Retirement-Inducing Motives . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Generational Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
“Social Security Alleviates Elderly Poverty” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Generational Incidence I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
III. Unique Implications of Redistributional and Retirement-Inducing Motives . . . . . . . . . . . .
Generational Incidence II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Marginal Tax Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cross-Hauling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Importance of Income and Substitution Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12
12
17
20
21

IV. The Design and Generational Incidence of Social Security – Stylized Facts . . . . . . . . . . . .
Social Security Induces Retirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Generational Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Elderly Marginal Tax Rates Increase Significantly with the Size of the Program . . . . . .
Cross-hauling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Distortion Exceeds Redistribution? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Revised Generational Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24
24
27
28
29
29
32

V. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
VI. Appendix I: Corner Solutions in the Nested Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
VII. Appendix II: Is Distortion an Accidental Byproduct of Redistribution? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Means Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Allocative Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39
39
40
41

VIII. Appendix III: A Nested Model of Social Security and Aggregate Capital Accumulation . 41
IX. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

Social Security has for a long time been perceived as a vehicle for intergenerational
redistribution (eg., Samuelson 1958, Barro 1974, Browning 1975, Kotlikoff 1992, Barro 1987,
Becker and Murphy 1988, Murphy and Welch 1998, Cooley and Soares 1999). The perception has
naturally led analysis to pose questions such as “What is the extent of intergenerational
redistribution?”, “For how long can cohorts enjoy fair returns from Social Security?”, “Might
intergenerational redistribution be understood as a political equilibrium?”
The intense focus on intergenerational redistribution by Social Security has distracted from
what may be the main intent of Social Security – to induce the elderly to exit the labor market. Here
I show how retirement-inducing policies are different, in terms of program incentives and policy
incidence, from intergenerationally redistributive policies. I show how policy might achieve both
objectives and, more importantly, how policy that is designed both to help the elderly and to induce
retirement is very different from a policy designed only to help the elderly.
The predictions of the theory are compared with evidence, mainly from OECD countries, on
the design and incidence of Social Security, and government policy more generally. On the whole,
the evidence suggests that policy is designed to both redistribute and to induce retirement, and the
policies are both qualitatively and quantitatively different from a (hypothetical) policy designed only
to help the elderly. Within-European differences in program design and incidence can only be
understood in terms of the retirement inducing motive. My estimates also suggest that Folk Theorem
versions of the pyramid model (eg., Kotlikoff et al 1988, Bohn 1998, Cooley and Soares 1999 and,
essentially, Browning 1975) cannot support as subgame perfect political equilibria the Social Security
programs in Europe, or even programs elsewhere.
Since it is so important to understand, and so feasible to measure, the basic differences
between policies designed to induce retirement and those designed to help the elderly, I do little in
this paper to consider the important questions of why policy might have one or both motives.

Pyramid Mirage - 2

Previous studies have offered some answers (eg., Cooley and Soares 1999, Mulligan and Sala-iMartin 1999a,b,c, Sala-i-Martin 1996, Tabellini 1992), and have tried to derive differences among
intergenerational-redistribution theories and differences among retirement-inducing theories (eg.,
Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin 1999b,c). Future work needs to improve on these answers, and can be
usefully directed by the achievements of this paper: derivation of implications likely to be common
to the intergenerational redistribution theories, derivation of implications likely to be common to the
induced retirement theories, and comparison of those implications with government behavior around
the world.

I. A Nested Model of Social Security
I.A. Setup of the Nested Model
Consider the familiar overlapping generations model, where each generation lives two periods
and both young and old populate the economy in any given period. The generation born at time t has
Nt members. The period t young and the period t old enjoy a time endowment of 1 and labor
productivity of wty and wto, respectively. The time t government pays a lump sum transfer to one
generation and finances that transfer with a labor income tax on one generation, or both generations.1
I denote as Tt $ 0 the net revenue paid by the period t the young to the period t old, as a proportion
of elderly full private income wto.2 Fti denotes the rate at which labor income of the age group i is
taxed at the margin (i = o,y).
For simplicity, I assume that young individuals do not borrow or save. Old and young citizens
choose consumption c and leisure l when young and old to maximize their utility functions u(ci,li) =
ln ci + (i ln li (i = o,y) where their consumption is constrained by their labor income net of the various
taxes. Notice that, for simplicity, I assume utility functions are Cobb-Douglas.

1

I presume that no individual can control his year of birth (or lie about it to the
government) so that generation-specific transfers can indeed be lump sum. Generation-specific
lump sum taxes are presumably more difficult to implement, since a taxpayer might refuse to work
and thereby have no income that could be seized by the government.
2

It will be the old who receive the net transfer in the versions of the model I consider, but
later in the paper it will become obvious how to describe period t transfers to the young. For
example, Tt would be negative, and the budget constraint for the old would have to be modified to
rule out lump sum taxes on them.

Pyramid Mirage - 3

The aggregate resource constraint at date t is:
y

o

y

y

o

o

Nt ct % Nt&1c t ' Nt wt (1 & lt ) % Nt &1 wt (1 & lt )

with lti 0 [0,1] and cti $ 0 (i = o,y). Policy at each date t, (Tt, Fty, Fto), is chosen to maximize a social
welfare function:3
y

Nt ln c t % (y ln lt

y

o

% "t Nt &1 ln ct % (o ln lt

o

% $t (1 % (o) Nt& 1 ln lt

o

(1)

where the terms in first and second parentheses are the utility of the young and old, respectively, and
(o, (y are (positive) preference parameters. The policy objective need not equally weight the utility
of young and old. The date t weight on old utility, "t $ 0, can be interpreted as an index of the
political power of the old, or an index of the young’s altruism for the old, or some combination of
these. The weight placed in the policy objective on retirement relative to the welfare of young and
old varies according to the parameter $t $ 0.4
The policy objective (1) raises two important questions. First, what determines the magnitude
of " and $? Second, to whom accrues the benefits indicated by the third term in the policy objective?
As suggested above, " may be related to the political power of the old, or the degree of altruism felt
by one generation for another. The literature has also suggested why governments may value
retirement, and to whom the benefits of retirement accrue. One suggestion is that workers are more
successful when retirement is common in the economy, and workers have a disproportionate influence

3

The social welfare function could be defined over the remaining lifetime utility of
everyone alive at the time without changing the results. One such case has intertemporally
separable lifetime utility, no opportunity for aggregate saving, and future governments not
otherwise reacting to policies of current and past governments. Other cases are analyzed in
Appendix III.
$t $ 0 is multiplied by the positive constant (1+(o) in the third term merely to simplify the
calculations. With this convention, the marginal social welfare of income for the old equals the
marginal social welfare of retirement exactly when "t = $t.
4

Pyramid Mirage - 4

on policy decisions. Another may be that retirement promotes political stability, and policymakers
value stability itself (over and above how it may benefit citizens).5 Or retirement may otherwise
enhance the political power of policymakers (this is a simplified version of Mulligan and Sala-iMartin’s 1999a argument). Or inclusion of retirement in the social welfare function may proxy for
an external effect of retirement on the operation of labor markets accounted for by policymakers, as
in the model of Sala-i-Martin (1996). Or $ may reflect redistribution in a dimension other than age
– from workers to retirees (perhaps this is another interpretation of Mulligan Sala-i-Martin 1999a).
Nevertheless, much more research is needed to convincing explain why policy might weight heavily
the utility of the old, or retirement.6 But even in a model as abstract as (1), a number of different
implications for the design and incidence of Social Security can be derived – implications shared with
more detailed models of intergenerational transfers and induced retirement.7
The policy choice is subject to the aggregate resource constraint, and subject to the labor
supplied by young and old citizens given the policy they face. In other words, policies solve a
sequence of Ramsey-tax problems, which can be viewed in two stages for each period. In the second
stage, young and old allocate their resources between consumption and leisure, taking as given the
date t policy Tt, Fty, Fto. Second stage behavior is particularly interesting for the young
y

y

ut ' max ln c t % (y ln lt
y

c t , lt

s.t.

y

y

y

y

y

y

c t ' wt (1 & l t ) (1 & Ft ) ,

y

lt 0 [0, 1]

The maximum attained in the second stage for the young is, up to a constant depending only on (y,
5

A related argument is made by Piven and Cloward (1971) and Olson (1982).

6

Diamond and Mirrlees (1978), Mulligan (1999), Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999a,b,c),
Sala-i-Martin (1996), and Tabellini (1992) have done some research on the reasons for publicly
induced retirement.
7

In order to derive some of the main results, it is important that my formulation rules out
the possibility that old age leisure raises the marginal social welfare of consumption by the young
(in this case, the old pay taxes in order to induce retirement). In this regard, my formulation is
consistent with the induced retirement models from the literature.

Pyramid Mirage - 5
ln wt y + ln (1-Fty). Because of the logarithmic functional form, we also have the simple result that
young leisure time is (y/(1+(y).
The old face a similar second stage problem, but it is less interesting because the government
has two policy variables to influence their behavior, namely the marginal tax rate and the amount of
the lump sum transfer. Therefore, without loss of generality, I have the government choose elderly
consumption and leisure in the first stage. Optimal policy can be described as the solution to a
sequence of “planner’s” problems (2):
n

max
o

o

y

c t ,l t ,T t ,Ft , u t

y

s.t.

y

o

e t ut % "t ln ct % (o ln lt
o

o

o

o

% $t (1 % (o) ln l t

o

ct ' wt (1 & lt ) % wt Tt ,

o

o

l t 0 [0, 1]

(2)

y

y

ut ' ln (1 &

where zt / ln

wt
wt

y

o

and nt / ln

Nt
Nt &1

y
Ft )

% ln wt

y

,

Tt ' e

Ft

n t% zt

1 % (y

denote amounts (in log points) by which the period t wage and

cohort size of the young, respectively, exceeds that of the old. The first line of (2) is the social
welfare function (1). The constraint on uty in the problem (2) reflects date t’s second stage, namely
that the government cannot control the behavior (and ultimate utility) of the young, except through
the single policy instrument Fty. The government has two instruments to control the behavior of the
old so, for simplicity, cto and lto are entered as choice variables for the government. Policy values Tt,
and Fto are easily computed from (cto,lto) as Tt = cto/wto - (1-lto) and Fto = 1 - (tcto/(wtolto), while cto, lto,
Fty are derived from the first order conditions of (2). The optimal policy is:8
(

Tt '

8

(

$t % ("t & "t )
($t % "t ) (1 % (y) e

& (n t % z t )

(

% "t

,

y

Ft '

$t % ("t & "t )
$t % "t %

e

nt

1%(

,

Ft '

$t
$t %

(
1%(

"t

(3)

Results reported in the main text are for those parameter values for which the constraints
l , l # 1 do not bind. Appendix I studies corner solutions, and displays the parameter restrictions
required for interiority.
o
t

y
t

Pyramid Mirage - 6

where the age group superscript is suppressed when it refers to the old, a convention which I continue
(

for the remainder of the paper, unless a superscript is necessary for clarity. "t '

1 % (y
1%(

o

e

& zt

is a

function of the model parameters.

I.B. Intergenerational Redistribution and Induced Retirement as Special Cases
This model of social security includes three important models as special cases. The first has
neither redistributive nor retirement-inducing motives:
No Motives: "t = "t*, $t = 0
The optimal policy abstains from both lump sum and distortionary taxes and transfers (Tt = 0, Fti =
0, i = o,y). “No policy” is optimal because, roughly speaking, the policy objective weights each age
group’s utility according to its relative command of market resources e-zt and its relative marginal
utility of income (1+(y)/(1+(o).
The second special case is the intergenerational redistribution (IGR) model:
IGR model: "t $ "t*, $t = 0

Redistribution is the only policy motive in the IGR model. The optimal policy uses only a lump sum
transfer (from young to old, Tt $ 0)9 – abstaining from distorting elderly labor supply (Fto = 0) – and
finances the transfer with a labor income tax on the young. This special case has a lot in common
with many models in the literature viewing Social Security merely as a vehicle for intergenerational
redistribution (eg., Samuelson 1958, Barro 1974, Browning 1975, Kotlikoff 1992, Barro 1987,
Becker and Murphy 1988, Murphy and Welch 1998, Cooley and Soares 1999), not a policy designed
to distort behavior.
The IGR special case can also “explain” the historical emergence of policies that redistribute

With "t < "t* and $t = 0 we have another intergenerational redistribution model, but
perhaps one less interesting to the student of Social Security because redistribution is from old to
young. In this case, (2) might be reformulated so that transfers to the young could be lump sum,
and financed with a labor income tax on the old.
9

Pyramid Mirage - 7
resources transferred across generations with a time sequence of "t’s. Namely, the IGR model with
"t = "t* for t < 0 and "t > "t* for t $ 0 has pay-as-you-go “social security” emerging at t = 0, because
Tt = 0 for t < 0 and T t > 0 for t $ 0. Whether policy in the IGR model accurately reflects actual
Social Security programs is another question, to which I return below.
The third special case is the induced retirement (INR) model:
INR model: "t = "t*, $t $ 0

Inducing retirement is the only policy motive in the INR model. The optimal policy distorts the labor
supply of the old (Fto > 0) in those periods when $t > 0. The optimal policy also subsidizes the old
(Tt $ 0), in a sense, as compensation to the old for tolerating deviation from their preferred labor
supply. The labor supply of the young is distorted whenever $t > 0 as a necessary consequence of
raising revenue, but the young marginal tax rate is still less than that for the old (Fty < Fto) in those
periods.
The INR special case can also “explain” the historical emergence of policies that redistribute
resources across generations with a time sequence of $t’s. Namely, the INR model with $t = 0 for
t < 0 and $t > 0 for t $ 0 has “social security” emerging at t = 0, because Tt = 0 for t < 0 and Tt >
0 for t $ 0.
That Social Security is primarily designed to induce retirement has been discussed in policy
circles (eg., the references cited by Sala-i-Martin 1996, Gruber and Wise 1999, p. 31). Inducing
retirement is also sometimes cited as a motive for private pensions (eg., the instances cited by Clague
et al 1971, p. 78) but, with rare exceptions (eg., Sala-i-Martin 1996, Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin
1999a,b,c), the induced retirement model of Social Security has neither been formalized nor
systematically compared with the IGR model. My sections II and III do so.

II. Equivalent Implications of Redistributional and Retirement-Inducing Motives
Two basic observations have motivated the study of intergenerationally redistributive models
of public policy. First, Social Security, and government policy as a whole, transfers revenues from
young to old (eg., Auerbach et al 1992, Auerbach et al 1999, House Committee 1996 table 1-50).
Second, the old appear to support the continuation and growth of Social Security (eg., see the
AARP’s web page www.aarp.org) and other related programs. I show how neither of these

Pyramid Mirage - 8
observations can distinguish the IGR model from the INR model or any of the hybrid cases with "t
> "t* and $t > 0.

II.A. Generational Accounting
Although IGR models are often motivated by the observation that governments transfer
resources from young to old, such observations are also consistent with the INR model and all of the
cases in between. This can be seen in the formula (3) for the optimal date t redistribution Tt in the
nested model, a formula duplicated below for the reader’s convenience:
(

Tt '

$t % ("t & "t )
($t % "t ) (1 % (y) e

&(n t %z t )

(

% "t

Notice how the redistributive motive ("t - "t*) is a perfect substitute with the retirement-inducing
motive $t in terms of the amount of resources transfers from young to old, Tt. In other words, any
sequence of intergenerational redistribution generated by the IGR model can be generated by the INR
model (or any of the hybrid cases with "t > "t* and $t > 0), and vice versa.
The two motives also have very similar implications for the so-called “generational accounts”
studied by Kotlikoff (1992), Hagemann and John (1990), and many others.

Date-of-birth

generational accounts compute the lifetime present value of net transfers vt for each generation,
indexed by their date of birth t. In my notation, the date-of-birth generational accounts are:
o

vt ' & wt Tt e

& nt

% e

& rt %1

o

o

wt%1 Tt%1 ' wt Tt e

where rt+1 is the generational interest rate and gt%1 / ln

& nt

e

gt %1 & rt %1

& 1

(4)

o

wt %1 Tt %1 N t
o

is the aggregate growth rate (in log

wt Tt Nt &1

points) of the Social Security program from date t to date t+1. Remaining lifetime generational
accounts – namely, the lifetime net present value of all current and future taxes and transfers – are
also easily computed in my nested model for those alive at date t. As of time t, vt (as computed
above) is the remaining lifetime generational account for the date t young and Tt is the remaining

Pyramid Mirage - 9
lifetime account for the date t old.10
Three conclusions can be derived from the expression (4) for generation t’s date-of-birth
generational account vt. First, since the redistributive and retirement-inducing motives are perfect
substitutes in terms of Tt, they are perfect substitutes in terms of vt – any set of generational accounts
generated by the IGR model can be generated by the INR model (or any of the hybrid cases), and vice
versa.
A second conclusion is more familiar – a generation t a positive date-of-birth generational
account if and only if the interest rate rt+1 is less than the generational growth rate gt+1. In other words,
positive date-of-birth accounts are enjoyed by transitional generations, who age at a time when Social
Security emerges or grows sufficiently rapidly.11 What is novel about this result is that the emergence
of Social Security, and its early generations with positive date-of-birth generational accounts, might
occur even without any redistributive motive (ie, with "t = "t* for all t).
Third, the remaining lifetime accounts for the old are positive in any period t in both the IGR
and INR models, and in any hybrid case with "t > "t* and $t > 0. The first six rows of Table 1 record
this and other common implications of the IGR and INR models.

10

Remaining lifetime accounts are typically computed for studies of the impact of policy
reforms (as in the Auerbach et al 1999 studies), while date-of-birth accounts are computed for
“money’s worth” studies (eg., Leimer 1994, Geanakoplos et al 1998).
In a “steady state” (ie, "t = "t+1 and $t = $t+1), positive accounts are enjoyed only if
population and wage growth rates exceed the interest rate.
11

Pyramid Mirage - 10

Table 1: Common and Uncommon Implications of
Redistributive and Retirement-Inducing Motives
IGR

INR

old age subsidies financed with contemporaneous taxes on the young

yes

yes

SS causes the elderly to work less

yes

yes

the elderly have relatively low private incomes

yes

yes

remaining lifetime generational accounts positive for the old

yes

yes

date-of-birth generational accounts positive only when SS growing

yes

yes

the old are better off with the continuation and/or expansion of SS

yes

yes*

only initial generations gain from SS

yes

no

elderly marginal tax rates are positive

no†

yes

elderly marg tax rates increase significantly with the amount of redistribution

no

yes

elderly both pay taxes and receive benefits (aka, “cross-hauling”)

no

yes

policy motive index exceeds 0.5

no

yes

distortions exceed redistribution

no

yes

SS causes the elderly to consume less

no

yes

assumes $ not too large

*
†

beneficiary behavior is distorted in some models of redistribution (eg., those in Appendix II)

II.B. “Social Security Alleviates Elderly Poverty”
Both models are consistent with the finding that the elderly have lower private incomes than
do the young, and that the size of the Social Security program would increase with the age-income
gap.12 In the IGR model, low private incomes for the elderly might be modeled as a low "t
(remember that "t* is proportional to the relative private full income of the old), which motivates the
redistribution across cohorts. In contrast, low private incomes for the elderly in the INR model are
partly a consequence of policy (as long as labor supply is somewhat elastic), and redistribution across

12

Whether in these findings are true is another matter. See, for example, Gratton (1996).

*

Pyramid Mirage - 11

cohorts is a means of lowering elderly private incomes.

II.C. Generational Incidence I
Generational incidence, the distribution of policy-induced utility gains and losses across
generations, is conceptually distinct from generational accounting, the distribution of taxes and
subsidies across generations. But they are isomorphic in the IGR model – generations with positive
date-of-birth accounts are better off than they are in the absence of policy and generations with
negative date-of-birth accounts are worse off.13 Ignoring the possibility that steady state growth
might exceed the interest rate, date-of-birth generational accounts are positive only if Social Security
is growing, so the generations gaining in the IGR model are only those living while the program
emerges or is growing. The remaining lifetime generational accounts also make it clear that, even for
a mature Social Security system (ie, "t > 0 and stable over time), the date t old are worse off in the
IGR model if Social Security were immediately eliminated. The generational incidence in the IGR
model suggests an explanation why the old would support the continuation and expansion of Social
Security.
Generational accounts and generational incidence are not isomorphic in the INR model.
Nevertheless, the INR model can explain why the old would support the continuation and expansion
of Social Security because, for small $t enough, the remaining lifetime utility of the date t old
(ln cto + (o ln lto) increases with $t. Roughly speaking, the old in the INR model willingly sell their
jobs to the planner and an elimination of Social Security would mean that they would lose the
opportunity to sell their jobs.

13

At least for small policies. Since the interest rate relates to the marginal willingness to
substitute consumption over the life cycle, generational accounting in the intergenerational
redistribution model indicates the willingness to pay for a marginal increase in taxes and transfers
rather than the willingness to pay to avoid the complete elimination of the program. The tax on
the young is distortionary, with a dollar in taxes costing the young more than a dollar, and is
thereby the source of another difference between generational accounts and generational
incidence unless policies are sufficiently small.
My analysis does not focus on either of these conceptional difficulties with generational
accounting, since they are not related to the differences between the “intergenerational
redistribution” and “induced retirement” models. Fehr and Kotlikoff (1999, p. 49f) also suggest
that the distinction between marginal and average willingness to pay for Social Security is not of
practical significance.

Pyramid Mirage - 12

The young may also favor Social Security in the INR model, and date-of-birth generational
accounts tell little or nothing about the generational incidence of Social Security. I return to this
important difference between the IGR and INR models below.

III. Unique Implications of Redistributional and Retirement-Inducing Motives
Both the IGR and INR models predict that the young will be taxed to subsidize the old, and
both are consistent with the old’s being better off under a large Social Security program rather than
a smaller one. But there are a number of differences between the two models. One difference is the
very weak correspondence between generational incidence and accounts in the INR model. The rest
of the differences, roughly speaking, can be attributed to the importance of income effects in the IGR
model and substitution effects in the INR model. These differences between the IGR and INR models
are derived below and recorded in the bottom six rows of Table 1.

III.A. Generational Incidence II
Ignoring the possibility that the steady state growth might exceed the interest rate, date-ofbirth generational accounts in both models are positive only if Social Security is growing. Hence
policy has the appearance of a “chain letter” or “pyramid scheme” because, like a pyramid scheme,
policy has only those at the peak of the pyramid gaining revenue at the expense of those at the
broader base.
Policy is indeed a chain letter in the IGR model, because coming out ahead in terms of
generational accounts is, with the caveats mentioned above, the same as coming out ahead in terms
of utility. But the appearance of a chain letter is deceiving in the INR model because, for two
reasons, the relationship between generational accounting and incidence is weak. First, the amount
of the subsidy Tt paid to the old is not monotonically related with the welfare of the old. To see this
consider increasing $t, starting from zero and holding constant " at all dates and $ at all dates other
than t. The amount of the date t subsidy from young to old, Tt, unambiguously increases with $t as
shown by my formula (3). The utility of the old uto (= ln cto + (o ln lto) increases with $t at first but,
for some parameter values, later decreases with $t and can be less than old utility when $t = 0!14 The
14

Since governments often do not force people to retire, leaving the retirement decision up
to employers and employees, perhaps continued work (even without benefits) is a feasible choice

Pyramid Mirage - 13
reason for the nonmonotonic relationship between Tt and uto shown as a dashed blue curve in Figure
1 is that the old are simultaneously subsidized and forced to change their behavior in the direction of
less consumption and more leisure, and the latter effect becomes relatively large as the old’s marginal
utility of consumption grows with $t.15 Even if the old are better off with Social Security, their
welfare improvement can be a small fraction of what it would be if their subsidy Tt were lump sum.
It is also possible and, as the evidence in Section IV shows, likely that the old are not as well off
under the largest Social Security programs as they are under medium size programs because the
larger programs do so much to discourage work. This possibility is seen in Figure 1 for the INR
model where the utility of the elderly is maximized under the program transferring Ttmax; programs
with Tt > Ttmax are worse for the elderly even if they are better than no Social Security at all.

for the elderly so they are no worse off than they would if Social Security were eliminated? This
logic is not correct (although the conclusion may be) because, even when it is feasible to continue
work and forego Social Security benefits, most governments still require elderly workers to pay
Social Security taxes.
Downward sloping schedules in the [Tt,ut] plane are more likely when population and
wage growth are low, and when the elderly preference for leisure is relatively small.
Holding fixed "t, there is a maximum $t beyond which additional increases in $t have no
effect on policy because the constraint lt # 1 binds. The amount of redistribution for this case is
denoted Ttcorner in the Figure. Ttcorner is computed by evaluating the Appendix I formula for Tt at "t
= "t*.
15

Pyramid Mirage - 14

ut, σt

45o

0

T

max
t

T

Tt

corner
t

Figure 1 INR Model: Elderly Utility and Marginal Tax Rate,
as Functions of the Size of the Social Security Program
Second, the young in the INR model may be better off under Social Security, if they enjoy at
enough of the benefits modeled by the $t term in the policy objective (1). For example, Sala-i-Martin
(1996) suggests that retirement improves productivity for the young, and all generations in his model
are better off from retirement-inducing Social Security. Others have suggested that retirement creates
jobs for the young.
Generational accounts can be revised so that they more accurately reflect generational
incidence. Consider a set of revised date-of-birth accounts vt*:
(

o

y

vt ' & wt Et e

& nt

% e

& rt %1

o

o

o

y

wt%1 Et%1 / wt Et e

&n t

e

gt %1 & rt %1 & gt %1 % 8t

& 1

Pyramid Mirage - 15

There are two differences between my revised generational accounts and those computed in the
literature. The first difference regards the term Eot+1, which is a “compensating variation” – the
amount by which the date (t+1) old value the Social Security program at date (t+1), taking into
account that their benefit is not a lump sum transfer.16 gt+1 / ln (Tt+1/Eot+1) is a convenient
transformation of the gap between the budgetary cost of old age subsidies and their valuation of them,
and is nonnegative because the (t+1) old value Social Security in the amount Tt+1 the most when it
is a lump sum. gt+1 = 0 when Ft+1 = 0, and otherwise depends on Ft+1, Tt+1, and the shape of elderly
utility functions. gt+1 is easy to compute when the utility of the old is ln cto + ( ln lto:

e

& gt

'

(1 % Tt ) 1 &

Ft

&1

1%(

(1 & Ft)1 /(1 % () & 1

(5)

Tt

Ety is the second departure of my revised generational accounts and those computed in the
literature. It is also “compensating variation” – the cost to the young of the Social Security program
at date t, taking into account that taxes may change their behavior and they may benefit from the
retirement of the date t old.17 8t / ln (Tt/Ety) is a convenient transformation of the gap between taxes
paid by the young and the cost to them of the program. 8t is positive as long the young derive
enough benefit from retirement by the old. If the young derive no benefit from retirement by the old,
then 8t is negative, with its magnitude determined by Fty, because the young would prefer to pay a
lump sum tax rather than a distortionary one. The young’s benefit from retirement depends on the
third term in the policy objective (1), and the fraction of that term that accrue to the young, rather
than to the old or someone else influencing policy. Hence there are three reasons why 8t is more
difficult to compute than gt+1. First, the magnitude of third term depends not only on Ft+1, Tt+1, and
16

In other words, Eot+1 is the size of the lump sum benefit that would give the (t+1) old the
same utility as they have under the program, expressed as a fraction of their full private income.
17

More precisely, Ety is the lump sum amount the date t young would forego in the absence
of the program in order to achieve the same utility as they do under the program.

Pyramid Mirage - 16
the shape of elderly utility functions, but also on the magnitude of $t, zt, and nt. Second, neither
theory nor evidence gathered to date tells us much about the share of those benefits accruing to the
young. Third, even if these first two items were known, their value to the young depends on the
shape of their utility function.
Comparing the revised accounts with those (4) computed in the literature, we see that old age
benefits are effectively discounted at rate (rt+1 + gt+1 - 8t) rather than rt+1. Except in the IGR model
where transfers are lump sum and retirement is not valued per se, this rate is higher than rt+1 for those
retiring under a new or growing Social Security system because induced retirement was relatively
unimportant (or nonexistent) when that generation was young (hence, gt+1 > 8t). In other words, my
revised accounts suggest that benefits are smaller, or even negative, for the early participants in a payas-you-go Social Security system. For those participating in a mature system, it could be that gt+1 <
8t ; old age benefits are effectively discounted at less than the interest rate. This means that
generations participating in a mature system could benefit, in the lifetime sense, from the system even
though when interest rt+1 exceeds the rate of growth of the program. I show in Section IV how the
revised generational accounts are quite different in magnitude from those computed in the literature.
Except when the program growth rate exceeds the interest rate, even the usual generational
remaining-lifetime accounts (4) show why the young would oppose, and the old favor, the
continuation of Social Security. Generational accounts cannot be computed in my model for the
“middle aged” because it has only two periods, but it is well known (eg., Browning 1975, Kotlikoff
et al 1988) that, according to the usual generational accounts, the middle aged strongly favor a
temporary reduction in Social Security but may weakly oppose a permanent reduction. Browning
(1975), and students of the Folk Theorem for repeated games (eg., Kotlikoff et al 1988, Bohn 1998,
Cooley and Soares 1999) have exploited the middle-aged opposition to permanent reductions to
argue that perpetual intergenerational redistribution can be a subgame perfect equilibrium of an
infinitely repeated political game determining the sequence of coefficients {"t}. However, all of this
presumes that benefits are valued at their budgetary cost (as, for example, in Bohn 1998) so that the
usual generational accounts (4) are closely related to generational incidence. The fact that the
transfer to the elderly is not lump sum means that they do not value benefits at their budgetary cost;
future benefits are effectively discounted at rate (rt+1 + gt+1), rather than rt+1. Even a small revision can
mean that the middle aged favor a permanent reduction is Social Security. More importantly, gt+1

Pyramid Mirage - 17

needs to be large enough for only one generation, even if that generation is very far in the future, for
the young and middle aged to form a winning coalition eliminating Social Security and eliminating
as subgame perfect equilibria intergenerational redistribution in prior periods – even periods when
the middle aged favor the continuation of Social Security.

III.B. Marginal Tax Rates
While the different predictions of the models for generational incidence are important, they
are difficult to verify. A more easily verified implication is for marginal tax rates, and their
relationship with the size of the Social Security program. The IGR predicts that marginal tax rates
are zero, while the INR model predicts a positive marginal tax rate for the old, Ft '

$t
$t %

(

(
"t
1%(

.18

For the hybrid models, the magnitude of elderly marginal tax rates, Ft, is an indicator of the
absolute importance of the retirement inducing motive and, to some degree, an indicator of its
importance relative to the redistributive motive. Recall from the formula (3) that Ft depends only on
( and the ratio $t/"t. Hence, large elderly marginal tax rates indicate a strong retirement-inducing
motive and, holding constant "t*, a relatively weak redistributive motive. Large elderly marginal tax
rates are consistent with strong retirement inducing motives and strong redistributive motives if "t*
is small, say, because the elderly would have relatively low private incomes in the absence of Social
Security.
The INR model not only predicts a positive marginal tax rate on the old, but also a positive
correlation between the magnitude of the marginal tax rate and the size of the Social Security
program. This can be seen by increasing $t, starting from zero and holding constant " at all dates and
$ at all dates other than t, and comparing Tt with Ft. Ft varies monotonically with Tt according to:

(6)

18

Notice that the INR model and the IGR model have the same number of free parameters,
because the INR model sets "t = "t* for all t while the IGR model sets $t = 0 for all t. Hence there
are facts that would be consistent with the IGR model but not the INR model, and vice versa.

Pyramid Mirage - 18

This function is graphed as a solid red curve in Figures 1 and 2. Even in the hybrid models, Ft varies
monotonically with Tt. The main difference in this regard between the hybrid models and the INR
model is that Ft does not exceed Tt unless $t is sufficiently large (roughly speaking, the solid red curve
shifts down and to the right as "t exceeds "t*, as shown by the solid blue curve in Figure 2).
Also notice from equation (6) that the slope of the relationship between Ft and Tt can exceed
one. As shown below, such a steep slope cannot be derived from the IGR model, or from hybrid
models with a dominant redistributive motive.

σt

elderly indifference
curve

0

IGR model

Tt

Figure 2 Elderly Marginal Tax Rate vs Program Size in Three Models
Equation (6) shows that Ft and Tt are positively correlated in the INR model. (6) also

Pyramid Mirage - 19
suggests that Ft is a concave function of Tt, but the concavity of the relationship is due only to the
logarithmic functional forms for the utility and social welfare function. If cost of taxing the young
increased sufficiently rapidly – perhaps because their marginal utility increases more rapidly than it
does with log utility – Tt would increase more and more slowly relative to Ft as the induced retirement
motive became stronger.
Variation in the size of the Social Security program Tt is, in the INR model, attributed to
differences in the strength of the retirement-inducing motive $t. There is no such motive in the IGR
model, so the same variation must be explained by differences in the redistributive motive "t. Since
the marginal tax rate is zero in all cases of the IGR model (and Figure 2 is labeled accordingly),
regardless of ",t it trivially follows that the relationship between Ft and Tt is not increasing. Perhaps
the hybrid models are more interesting in this regard, where we can study the relationship between
Ft and Tt induced by differences in the redistributive motive "t holding constant the strength of the
retirement-inducing motive $t. In other words, consider increasing "t, starting from "t* and holding
constant $ at all dates and " at all dates other than t. The induced relationship between Ft and Tt is:

which is decreasing in Tt as shown by the downward sloping dashed green line in Figure 2.
Perhaps the IGR model is oversimplified because it does not allow any distortion of the old’s
behavior as a response to the redistributive motive. My Appendix II, and other work (Mulligan 2000,
Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin 1999c), considers ways of embellishing the IGR model to allow for some
distortion, but two conclusions are robust to those and other likely modifications of the IGR model.
First, the marginal tax rate will not increase too rapidly with the size of the program because, holding
constant the amount of redistribution Tt, the utility of the old falls with the marginal tax rate Ft. In
other words, there is a tradeoff between Tt and Ft from the date t old’s point of view; an elderly
indifference curve such as the dashed curve in Figure 2 slopes up in the [Tt,Ft] plane. If marginal tax
rates increase more rapidly with size of the program than indicated by indifference curves for the
elderly, then the bigger programs make the old worse off and cannot be explained by the redistributive

Pyramid Mirage - 20
motive.19 As shown above, a relationship between Ft and Tt with slope greater than one indicates that
the retirement-inducing motive dominates.
Second, redistributive motives cannot explain the prevalence of “cross-hauling.” Third,
income effects must be more important than substitution effects in the IGR model, and less important
in the INR model. We see the third conclusion in an heuristic way in the formula (6) where the
“substitution effect” Ft exceeds the “income effect” Tt. The next two subsections derive the second
and third conclusions more rigorously.
Fourth, it would seem that, if transfers and distortions could be targeted at a subset of the old,
then the targeting would be very different in the IGR and INR model. In particular, an IGR planner
would target transfers, and the associated unavoidable marginal tax rates, toward the least responsive
old because, in effect, it is cheaper to raise their utility while optimal INR marginal tax rates would
not vary among the old according to their responsiveness. This fourth point is just a conjecture, and
cannot be proven in my model since the old are homogeneous. But it is testable, so I leave it to
future research to explore the different implications of redistributive and retirement-inducing motives
for the targeting of pensions.

III.C. Cross-Hauling
Those subsidized by the government are often taxpayers too, a phenomenon known as “crosshauling.” Cross-hauling occurs with old age subsidy programs too, since the old pay some taxes and,
when they work, they pay Social Security taxes. Of course, when taxes and subsidies are lump sum,
most economic approaches suggest that what matters is the net tax or subsidy, and not how any net
tax is composed of taxes and subsidies. But, when their incentive structures are different, the
composition of taxes and subsidies paid and received by an individual or group matter for behavior

With uo(c,l) = ln c + ( ln l, the old’s indirect utility as a function is T and F is:

19

u o ' ln (1 & F) & (1 % () ln (1 % ( & F) % (1 % () ln (1 % T) % constants

which implies that redistributive motives cannot cause F to increase with T more rapidly than
(1-F)(1+(-F)(1+()/[F((1+T)], an upper bound which is smallest for large T and large F.

Pyramid Mirage - 21

and welfare.
Since policy is designed to improve the welfare of the elderly in the IGR model, the elderly
are subsidized and their optimal marginal tax rate is zero (Ft = 0). Hence the IGR model cannot
explain why the old would also pay the same (distortionary) labor income tax as the young, or any
labor income tax for that matter, unless the old were also paid a subsidy with a marginal tax rate
negative enough to render the net transfer lump sum. Nor can the hybrid models with relatively small
$t explain why the old would also pay the same labor income tax as the young, because the optimal
marginal tax rate is smaller for the old in those models. The INR model, and hybrid models with
relatively large $t, have larger optimal marginal tax rates for the old, so they are perfectly consistent
with the old both paying a labor income tax at rate Fty and receiving a subsidy that implicitly taxes
their labor income, bringing the combined marginal tax rate to (Ft > Fty).
It might be argued that exempting old people from Social Security taxes would be
administratively complex, but there are reasons to be skeptical of such a claim. First, age is easily
verifiable, and is already used to determine personal income tax liabilities (eg., IRS 1999 Form 1040,
line 35a). Indeed, the American Form 1040 already includes a line (62) for refunding excessive Social
Security Tax withholding, and it would be trivial to modify the rules so that all some or all of the
Social Security taxes paid by those over age 65 were defined to be “excessive.” Nor has
administrative complexity stopped state and local governments from exempting the elderly from some
of their property taxes.

III.D. Importance of Income and Substitution Effects
Policy in the IGR model is motivated to improve the utility of the old, and hence optimal
transfers to the old have only an “income effect” on them. Policy in the INR model is motivated to
change the behavior of the old, and hence has a substantial “substitution effect” on their behavior.
“Income” and “substitution” effect can be defined more precisely, but the basic idea that substitution
effects are dominant in the INR model and income effects are dominant in the IGR model is the
essence of my analysis and should be robust to modifications of those models.
The relative importance of income and substitution effects can also be used to classify the
hybrid models where there are both redistributive and retirement-inducing motives. Such a
classification is likely to be very useful in applications, since it is reasonable to believe that there is

Pyramid Mirage - 22

some role for both redistributive and retirement-induce motives in understanding Social Security. The
question then is the relative quantitative importance of the two motives. Consider first a policy
motive index Dt which takes values on the unit interval [0,1] and, heuristically, is computed as:
Dt /

substitution effect t
substitution effect t % income effect t

More precisely, consider an index calculated as:
Dt '

ĉt & c t
(

(ĉt & ct) % (ĉ t & ct )

ĉt / argmax u o c, 1 % T t &
c

(

ct / argmax u o c, 1 &
c

c
wt

o

c
wt

o

In other words, ĉt - ct is the amount by which old consumption is reduced by the optimal policy as
compared to what would be consumed if the old were given their subsidy as a lump sum, and can be
thought of as a substitution effect.20 The income effect on consumption is the difference ĉt - ct
between what the old would consume if given their subsidy as a lump sum and what they consume
if they received no subsidy and faced a zero marginal tax rate.
Dt measures the importance of the retirement-inducing motive relative to the redistributive
motive. Two critical values of the index are of particular interest. The first is Dt = 0, which occurs
if and only if ct = ĉt . In other words, policy has only an income effect and not a substitution effect
– as it does in the IGR model where there is no retirement-inducing motive. Dt = 0.5 is another
critical value which occurs when the substitution effect exactly equals the wealth effect (ie, ct = ct*).
Dt = 0.5 is perhaps the most interesting one because it can be used to partition the hybrid cases: Dt >
0.5 (Dt < 0.5) indicates that the substitution effect is larger (smaller), so that the retirement-inducing
By definition, ĉt & ct ' wt (lt & lˆt) , so the “substitution effect” on consumption is the
same as the substitution effect on earnings.
20

*

Pyramid Mirage - 23
motive dominates (is dominated by) the redistributive motive. Dt exceeds 0.5 in the INR model.21
The test of whether Dt exceeds 0.5 has several other interesting, and intuitive, interpretations.
The following “tests” are equivalent:
(i)

Dt

< (>)

0.5

(ii)

ct*

< (>)

ct

(iii)

wt(lt - lt*)

< (>)

wtTt

(iv)

$t

< (>)

("t - "t*)(1+(y)ent+zt

The equivalence of (i) and (ii) follow directly from the definition of Dt. The budget constraints ct* =
w(1
- lt*) and ct = w(1
- lt) + wT
t
t
t t imply the equivalence of (ii) and (iii). The assumed functional forms
imply that (i) and (iv) are equivalent. In words, the retirement inducing motive dominates the
redistributive motive when Dt exceeds 0.5, $t exceeds ("t - "t*)(1+(y)ent+zt, the dollar value of
*
distortions w(l
t t - lt ) exceeds the dollar amount of redistribution wtTt, and when the old are forced “to

pay” (ie, reduce ct) for at least some of their increased leisure.22
While budget constraints and the definition of Dt imply the equivalence of (i)-(iii), (iv) is
equivalent only because the functional forms. In other words, policy outcomes determine whether
(i)-(iii) point to the dominance of the redistributive or retirement-inducing motives. (iv), in contrast,
measures the dominant motive according the policy objective – whether $t exceeds ("t "t*)(1+(y)ent+zt. Which is more the more relevant test depends on the purpose for conducting a test,

21

Given the assumed functional forms for social welfare and elderly utility functions,
(

1%
Dt ' 1 %

"t & "t

&1

$t

1 % (1 %(y) e

&(n t % z t )

which approaches one for INR models with negative (nt + zt).
22

Since there are a number of studies that compute wtTt program-by-program and for all
government programs taken together, Mulligan and Philipson (2000) suggest that (iii) may be the
computationally most economical version of the test (for the purposes of showing the
redistributive motives are less important for all government programs taken together), because
wt(lt - lt*) might be computed just for the largest program and still exceed wtTt for all government
programs taken together.

Pyramid Mirage - 24

and the believed accuracy of the logarithmic functional forms. If retirement were very inelastic to
taxes, then $t could far exceed ("t - "t*)(1+(y)ent+zt while the measured income effects of the program
exceeded the substitution effects.

IV. The Design and Generational Incidence of Social Security – Stylized Facts
There are six readily available facts that are relevant for determining the importance of Social
Security’s retirement inducing motive: (1) elderly marginal tax rates are positive and large, (2) Social
Security taxes young and subsidies old, (3) elderly marginal tax rates increase significantly with the
size of the Social Security program, (4) the elderly are liable for the same payroll tax as the young,
(5) Social Security reduces the earnings of the elderly by about as much as it pays them, and (6) the
usual generational accounts are only weakly related to generational incidence. I present these
empirical findings, and compare them with the predictions of the nested model.

IV.A. Social Security Induces Retirement
As of 1995, over 100 countries had public pension programs.23 Among the 88 of those
countries reporting to the U.S. Social Security Administration sufficient detail of their public pension
benefit formulas, 75% pay pension benefits in such a way as to discourage work by its elderly citizens.
The most typical means by which benefit formulas induced retirement is remarkably transparent:
retirement is a necessary condition for receiving public pension benefits, and no credit is given to
those who decide to retire later and collect benefits for fewer years. Other countries had more
complicated benefit formulas extending some less-than-actuarially fair credits to those who delay
retirement, or allowing employed elderly to collect partial benefits, or both (the case for U.S. Social
Security for elderly aged 65-69). But the more complicated formulas have much the same effect as
the simple one: elderly labor income is implicitly taxed.
At least in higher income countries, the rates of implicit and explicit taxation are enormous.
Contributors to the Gruber and Wise (1999) volume attempt to quantify the effective marginal rates
for 11 countries. According to their calculations for the early 1990's, the “typical” marginal tax rate
for “someone of retirement age” ranges from roughly 20% for Japan, U.S., and Canada, to more than
23

Data in this paragraph are reported and described in more detail by Mulligan and Sala-iMartin (1999a,b) and Sala-i-Martin (1996).

Pyramid Mirage - 25
75% for Belgium, the Netherlands, and maybe France.24

24

In any one country, marginal implicit rates vary with earnings, age, calendar year, and
other variables. For a person of age t in the early 1990's, where t is between 60 and 69, the 1999
volume computes for a worker of median earnings the present value of public pension benefits
foregone (net of Social Security taxes) by delaying retirement one year, and express it as a
fraction Jt of earnings (after income and payroll taxes) for that year. I average Jt, which can be
interpreted as an implicit tax rate, from t = 60 to 69 to arrive at the “typical” implicit tax rate for
each country’s elderly. This is basically the same exercise done by Gruber and Wise (1999) in
their Table 1, although they compute a sum (aka, “tax factor”) somewhat differently for different
countries. Also, I am unable to reconcile the French tax factors reported in their Tables 1 and 3.5,
so I graph France twice in the Figure – once based on their Table 1's data (“France (GW)”) and
once based on their Table 3.5's (“France”).

1

Netherlands
1995 implicit + explicit tax rate

0.8

Italy
France (GW)

0.6

France
Belgium
UK
Spain

0.4

Canada
0.2

Japan

Germany

Sweden
US

0
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
1995 Spending/(GDP*fraction elderly)

0.8

1

Pyramid Mirage - 27

Gruber and Wise make some reasonable judgements as to when programs not called “old
age”, such as disability insurance and unemployment benefits, are in practice earlier retirement
programs paying most of their benefits to relatively old citizens. However, Mulligan and Sala-iMartin (2000) point out that old age, disability, and unemployment programs are not the only
government programs that strongly induce retirement. Other important examples include national
labor union rules requiring retirement, tax-favored retirement savings, and mandatory private definedbenefit pensions. Their results suggest that the true marginal tax rate is probably higher than shown
in Figure 3, although too little is known about these programs to say whether the slope of the
relationship shown in Figure 3 is accurate.
It is interesting, but difficult, to compute marginal Social Security tax rates for the young and
compare them with those for the old shown in Figure 3. The payroll tax rate is one proxy for Fty
although, as Feldstein and Samwick (1992) explain, it overstates the marginal rate to the extent that
young workers anticipate their marginal contribution to increase their retirement benefits. For
example, their Table I reports gaps between the payroll tax rate and the marginal tax rate ranging
from one to nine percentage points. With this in mind, we can compare the difference between the
tax rates reported in Figure 3 and the payroll tax rate (combined for employer and employee). Those
two rates are basically identical for Japan and Sweden, and differ by roughly 50 percentage points for
France (GW), Italy, and the Netherlands. Hence, we can conclude that elderly marginal tax rates
significantly exceed those for the young.
Gruber and Wise also suggest that the large elderly marginal tax rates have a significant
impact on retirement behavior in the countries they study. But it is important to note that the basic
insights of the IGR and INR model obtain even if retirement is not very responsive to marginal tax
rates. In particular, optimal policy in the INR model involves a positive marginal tax rate regardless
of the responsiveness of labor supply because the marginal tax rate serves the purpose of
“internalizing” into an elderly person’s decision to supply labor the social effect represented by
equation (1)’s third term.

IV.B. Generational Accounts
Public retirement funds are almost always paid for by the young. It is rare for a country to
have a fully-funded program (Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin 1999), so that most Social Security

Pyramid Mirage - 28

programs redistribute from younger generations to older ones. In fact, the cross-cohort redistribution
is much more important than redistribution in any other dimension by these programs (e.g., Auerbach
et al 1992, Auerbach et al 1999, Jensen and Raffelhuschen 1997, Hagemann and John 1997, House
Committee 1996 table 1-50).

IV.C. Elderly Marginal Tax Rates Increase Significantly with the Size of the Program
Figure 3 measures Social Security spending for 1995 on the horizontal axis25 for the 11
countries studied by Gruber and Wise, normalizing by GDP and the fraction of the population over
age 65. Social Security is a very large program in these countries, with governments spending a
fraction of GDP on elderly that is nearly as large as their fraction of the population. More relevant
for comparing the IGR and INR models, however, is that the largest Social Security programs also
have the largest elderly marginal tax rates (F). F increases rapidly with the size of the program (T),
especially among the countries with bigger programs. This finding is difficult to reconcile with a
redistributive motive that operates at the margin, because it is likely that the elderly in France, Italy,
or the Netherlands are worse better off (or at least not much better off) with their Social Security
program than with a program like that in Germany where the government does less to distort elderly
labor even while it spends a lesser fraction of its GDP on each elderly person.26 The difference
between Germany and these other countries is more easily explained by the retirement-inducing

25

"Social Security spending” is the sum of public old age cash, disability cash, and
survivor’s benefits from OECD (1997, lines 1, 2, and 6). These include civil servant and military
pensions and in kind benefits for survivors, but exclude private pensions mandated by the
government, worker’s and unemployment compensation, sickness and family benefits, and in kind
benefits for the elderly and disabled.
26

Within Europe, the slope of marginal tax rate with respect to (spending per elderly)/(per
capita GDP) is at least 2 in Figure 3. If we think each country’s elderly person’s private full
income roughly equal to 4 times that country’s per capita GNP (see my computations in section
IV.F), then Figure 3 displays a European slope of Ft with respect to Tt of at least 8 (remember that
Tt is expressed as a fraction of elderly private full income). A logarithmic elderly utility function
with ( = 2 implies a marginal rate of substitution of Ft with respect to Tt of much less than 8 for a
typical European country. In other words, elderly indifference curves in the [Tt,Ft] plane are
flatter than the empirical relationship shown in Figure 3. Relatively steeper indifference curves are
implied by the theory if the Frisch labor supply elasticity were less than one, ( > 2, or the ratio of
elderly private full income to per capita GNP were much less than 4.

Pyramid Mirage - 29

motive.
It might be said that implicit marginal tax rates and program size are correlated because both
derive from a social “taste” for government activity. “Social taste” is one way to interpret the
parameters of the social welfare function, but the question posed in this paper is whether that the
“taste for government” is mainly a taste for redistribution, a taste for altering private-sector decisions,
or some combination of these.

IV.D. Cross-hauling
Most countries around the world have a Social Security payroll tax (SSA 1995, as tabulated
by Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin 1999a), whose rules apply equally to young and old. 27 Furthermore,
the rates of payroll taxation are quite significant and, including the old age, disability, survivor, health,
and maternity portions of the tax, are near 50% in a number countries, such as Netherlands, Egypt,
and Italy. In other words, even if Social Security benefits were lump sum, the old would face large
marginal tax rates. Since cross-hauling is so prevalent and important in Social Security programs,
how can it be that the programs are designed to help the elderly at the expense of the young when
deciding to work results in an old person’s being treated (by the program) like a young one?

IV.E. Distortion Exceeds Redistribution?
Test (iii) of the dominance of the retirement-inducing motive is perhaps the most intuitive and
straightforward to implement, although its interpretation relies most heavily on the assumed
logarithmic functional form. The test requires three data items: the amount wtTt transferred by the
government from young to old, the marginal elderly labor product wt, and the change in elderly work
induced by the program lt - lt* (which includes both income and substitution effects). I make estimates
for the three items, for the U.S. (1970 and 1995), and for three of the countries shown in Figure 3:
Spain, Netherlands, and Belgium (1995 only).
The first data item, wtTt, is relatively easy to obtain. wtTt is reported as a fraction of GDP in
Table 3, from the National Income and Product Accounts for the U.S. and from OECD (1997, lines
1, 2, 6) for the others, and includes public Old Age, Disability, and Survivors pensions paid to
27

Sweden is one exception, where part of the “employer’s share” of the payroll tax is
forgiven when the worker reaches age 65 (Palme and Svensson 1999, p. 370).

Pyramid Mirage - 30

(former) government and civilian employees.
I obtain the second item for men, wt, from the gross annual pay used for the “base case” in
various chapters of Gruber and Wise (1999). wt is computed for women as 80% of its male value.
Mine might be an underestimate because it excludes the value of fringes provided by employers, but
might be an overestimate because the marginal product of those age 60+ may be less than those
younger.
The third item – the change in elderly work induced by Social Security lt - lt* – is much more
difficult to estimate. Constructing trustworthy estimates is well beyond the scope of this paper,28
especially when it is recognized that most pensioners are women, but a few rough calculations can
be informative. I offer three, each of which measures lt - lt* as the labor force participation rate for
four elderly groups: men age 60-64, men aged 65+, women age 60-64, and women aged 65+. My
three calculations differ according to the source of their estimate for lt* for each of the four groups.
The first sets (1-lt*) = equal to the 1995 gender-specific aged 25-54 labor force participation rate
which, even though it presumes that Social Security has no effect on hours worked, is obviously and
upper bound on a more accurate estimate. My second calculation, “Method 1,” sets lt* = l1950 for men
and 1-(1-l1950)(1-ly1995)/(1-ly1950) for women, where (1-lty) is the year t aged 25-54 female labor force
participation rate and (1-lt) is the gender-specific elderly labor force participation rate.29 “Method 2"
is the same as “Method 1,” except that it assumes Social Security does not affect labor force
participation for those aged 65+. The three calculations are displayed in the second, third, and fourth
columns of Table 2, with changes in the labor force participation rates for the four groups are
displayed as small numbers and the results of the calculation displayed as large numbers.

28

There are many studies attempting estimates. Kapteyn and do Vos’ (1999, p. 302)
summary of studies for the Netherlands is equally applicable for the other countries: “[There is]
ample evidence for the dominant role of financial incentives and eligibility rules in the explanation
of the low labor force participation rate among the elderly in the Netherlands. However, no study
has yet fully quantified the part of the decrease that can be ascribed to the changes in incentives
and eligibility rules that have occurred over the last three decades.”
29

In other words, “Method 1" assumes that, in the absence of Social Security, elderly labor
force participation 1950-95 would have been constant for men, and would have grown for old
women in the same proportion it did for young women.

Pyramid Mirage - 31

Table 2: “Distortion” Exceeds Redistribution
(large numbers are % of GDP)
“distortion”
country

year

redistribution
Upper bound

US

1995

Spain

1995

Nether
Belgium
US

1995
1995
1970

5.9
10.6
11.9
12.0
4.7

11.7
10.2
14.5
8.6
10.1

37

73

38

67

48

90

39

53

72

91

54

62

75

91

61

65

16

65

10

40

Method 1
3.7
7.3
5.8
2.7
2.3

Method 2

28

29

13

11

44

63

33

33

62

29

31

16

59

17

30

13

7

20

0

4

0.9
1.8
2.6
1.4
0.3

28

0

13

0

44

0

33

0

62

0

31

0

59

0

30

0

7

0

0

0

Notes: (1) large numbers are redistribution and “distortion” as a percentage of GDP
(2) small numbers are the estimated Social-Security-induced changes in labor force participation rates, used to calculate
distortion, in percentage points (each country-method cell’s top row is male aged 60-64, 65+; bottom row is female
aged 60-64, 65+)

My “upper bound” estimates of the distortion wt(lt - lt*) are close to, or larger than, the size
of the Social Security program wtTt. For example, the 1995 US estimate of the upper bound of the
reduction of elderly earnings by Social Security is 11.7% of GDP, while the program paid “only”
5.9% of GDP to the elderly. However, the Method 1 and 2 estimates of the distortion are smaller
than the size of the program for each of the countries. Hence, my preliminary calculations suggest
that the value of distortions is similar to the cost of the program, perhaps with the former a bit
smaller; both redistributive and retirement-inducing motives are important for explaining the average
dollar of Social Security.
The amount of redistribution grows by 26% in the U.S. between 1970 and 1995, while the
amount of distortion grew by 16%, 61%, and 313% according to the upper bound, Method 1, and
Method 2, respectively. Since the amount of redistribution did not grow rapidly 1970-95, it seems
that, as long as it is true that Social Security substantially increased retirement since 1970 as
suggested by all three methods, the retirement-inducing motive has been particularly important in the

Pyramid Mirage - 32

U.S. since 1970.
Table 2 makes it clear how an estimate of “amount of distortion” is sensitive to estimates of
the effect of Social Security on the elderly labor market. If, for example, one believed that retirement
were insensitive to Social Security retirement incentives (ie, both its income and substitution effects
were small), then distortion estimates would be smaller. However, also remember that my
interpretation of the gap between distortion and redistribution in terms of the parameters "t and $t
depends on the logarithmic functional form; distortions that are less than redistribution are consistent
with $t larger than "t when retirement is insensitive to policy.

IV.F. Revised Generational Accounts
At least among the developed countries, it appears that the INR model explains more of the
differences over time and across countries in the design and incidence of Social Security. It is less
clear whether the INR or IGR model better explains the average dollar of Social Security spending.
But even if intergenerational redistributive motives were dominant on average and at the margin, the
presence of any retirement-inducing motive means that the generational incidence of Social Security
can be very different than suggested by the generational accounts (4) as computed in the literature.

IV.F.1. Revision 1: Benefits are Valued at Less than Budgetary Cost
Remember from section III that the presence of an induced retirement motive implies two
revisions to the date-of-birth account for generation t. The first revision I denote gt+1, when measures
the logarithmic gap between the budgetary cost of old age subsidies Tt and their value to the elderly.
With a logarithmic elderly utility function (ln cto + ( ln lto), gt+1 is easily computed using the formula
(5), which is repeated below for convenience:

e

&gt

'

(1 % Tt ) 1 &

Ft

&1

1%(

(1 & Ft)1 / (1 % () & 1

Tt

This formula depends on three things: (i) the marginal elderly tax rate Ft, (ii) the size of the program

Pyramid Mirage - 33

as a fraction Tt of elderly private full income, and (iii) the demand for leisure in the absence of the
program (dictated by ().30 Ft can be read from the data in Figure 3. Figure 3 also reports
government spending per elderly person, but as a fraction of per capita GDP rather than as a fraction
of elderly full private income. If we suppose that elderly full private income is proportional to per
capita GDP, then what we need to transform the Figure 3 data into a series for Tt is the proportion.
In the U.S., for example, 1995 GDP per capita was $28,000 while GDP per worker was $58,000
(Council of Economic Advisers 1998, Tables B-1, B-34, and B-35). A worker’s full income is, of
course, greater than actual income, so perhaps elderly annual full private income is between $75,000
and $150,000. At $100,000, elderly full private income is nearly 4 times larger than per capita GDP,
so I divide Figure 3's elderly spending data by 4 to compute a series for Tt. Finally, I conservatively
choose a fairly large value for (, 2 (the revision gt+1 decreases with (), although the formula (5) is not
particularly sensitive to (. I report the results in the first two columns of Table 3 for each country
shown in Figure 3. Since my policy data is for the 1990's, these computations of gt+1 are for those
generations t elderly in the 1990's.

30

1/(1+() is the fraction of time the elderly would spend working if there were no Social
Security program and they had no financial assets.

Pyramid Mirage - 34

Table 3: Revised Generational Accounts
(for those elderly in 1995)
revision gt+1 for 1990's elderly
Country

Netherlands

revision 8t+1 for 1990's workers

avg value of

ROR (%/yr, -)

avg cost of

ROR (%/yr, +)

benefits

adjustment

taxes

adjustment

-0.27

4

-0.17

4

Italy

0.10

7.8

-0.11

4

France

0.67

1.4

-0.09

4

Belgium

0.72

1.1

-0.62

4

U.K.

0.83

0.6

0.59

1.7

Spain

0.86

0.5

0.45

2.6

Germany

0.89

0.4

0.30

4.0

Canada

0.92

0.3

0.18

5.7

Sweden

0.95

0.2

0.89

0.4

U.S.

0.97

0.1

0.76

0.9

Japan

0.97

0.1

0.89

0.4

Notes: (1) “avg value of benefits” is the program’s lump sum equivalent (Eo) divided by size of the program (T) = e-gt+1
(2) Elderly Rate of Return adjustment is computed according to equation (5), and then annualized = gt+1/30
(3) both elderly calculations assume log utility with ( = 2
(4) “avg cost of taxes” is the program’s lump sum equivalent (Ey) divided by size of the program (T) = e-8t+1
(5) Workers’ Rate of Return adjustment is annualized = 8t+1/30
(6) Canada pays for much of its Social Security from general revenues (SSA 1995). If a payroll tax rate of 12% (rather
than 6%) were used in the Ey calculation, then the avg cost of taxes would be 0.60
Source: Figure 3 and author’s calculations

The first column is the average value of benefits, which is the Social Security program’s lump sum
equivalent divided by the size of the program. For example, the average value of benefits is 0.97 for
the U.S. – the representative elderly person with log utility (( = 2), would accept a 3% reduction in
benefits if those benefits were paid as a lump sum (ie, paid independent of earnings after age 61). For

Pyramid Mirage - 35

the typical European country studied by Gruber and Wise, the average value of benefits is about 0.8.
Elderly in two countries – Italy and the Netherlands – value benefits at well less than half of their
budgetary cost. Indeed, I calculate a negative value of benefits for the Netherlands, suggesting that
their elderly might be better off with no subsidy and incentive to retire.
The second number reported in Table 3 for each country is the additional discounting by the
revised generational accounts so that, ignoring the intergenerational incidence of the benefits of
induced retirement indicated by the third term in the policy objective (1), the accounts are indicative
of generational incidence. To put the return adjustments in perspective, compare them with the
annual “Social Security” rates of return (in my notation, gt+1/30) of 3 to 5% computed by
Geanakoplos et al (1998) and Leimer (1994) for the U.S. Social Security system for cohorts retiring
in the 1990's. Hence, the 0.1% adjustment indicated by Table for the U.S. and Japan is quantitatively
unimportant, while adjustments for Belgium, Netherlands, France, and Italy are quite substantial.
Both the Table and equation (5) show that estimates of the average value of benefits are
sensitive to the marginal tax rate measures, especially for high tax rates. More research is needed to
accurately estimate those rates, but a few things are clear from the computations reported in the
Gruber-Wise (1999) volume. First, estimated marginal tax rates would be higher if discount rates
were higher than those on government bonds, which might be the case if the elderly have some
difficulty borrowing against future Social Security benefits. Second, there is variability in marginal
rates across persons within a country which, since the value of benefits is a concave function of the
marginal tax rate, means that value of benefits averaged across persons is lower than the value of
benefits for the average person reported in the Table. Both of these considerations suggest that I may
substantially overestimate the average value of benefits for the European countries.
Remember from Section III that the revised remaining-lifetime generational accounts must
always be sufficiently close to the usual accounts (4) in order for perpetual intergenerational
redistribution to be supported as subgame perfect political equilibrium. The first two columns of
Table 3 show that the revised accounts are quite different for current generations in several European
countries. More importantly, given the current prevalence of high elderly marginal tax rates, is it
reasonable to suppose that voters in countries with small revisions like the U.S. or Japan expect that
their country will never have such high marginal tax rates? This supposition is required if perpetual
intergenerational redistribution is to be supported as a subgame perfect political equilibrium.

Pyramid Mirage - 36

IV.F.2. Revision 2: Budgetary Cost May Overstate the Young’s Cost
In the case that half of the benefits of the third term in the policy objective (1) accrue to the
young, 8t can be computed as:

y

y (1 & lt )

1 & ( 1 & Ft )
e

& 8t

'

&z t
y
y
(
l
Ft Ft (1 & l t ) % e
t
2
y
(
1&F
1 & Ft (1 & l )
t
t

lt
(

lt

y

y

(1 & lt ) Ft

Data on Ft comes from Figure 3, and Fty is measured as the payroll tax rate reported by SSA (1995).
In addition, computing 8t requires data on nt, zt, lty and the change in elderly leisure time induced by
the program lt/lt*. As an example, I set zt = 0, lt = 2/3, and estimate nt and lt/lt* for each country using
demographic and labor force data. Since my policy data is for the 1990's, 8t can be computed for
cohorts of working age in the 1990's, and hence a younger cohort than those for whom the average
value of benefits is computed in Table 3.
Table’s 3 third column shows that the average cost of taxes to workers can be quite small,
which implies the often large rate of return adjustments to their date of birth generational accounts
shown in the fourth column. To put the return adjustments in perspective, compare them with the
expected annual “Social Security” rates of return of 1.5-2% computed by Geanakoplos et al (1998)
and Leimer (1994) for the U.S. Social Security system for cohorts retiring in the 1990's, and with the
1-3% gap between the lifetime rates for retired and working cohorts. For nearly every country, the
fourth column’s revisions meet or exceed the level of, and cohort gaps in, returns computed in the
literature.
The average cost can even be negative, which means that workers gain more from induced
retirement than they pay in taxes. In this case, their lifetime rate of return is “infinite” because they
gain both when young and old! Of course, the estimates in the third and fourth column are much
rougher than those in the first two columns because additional data – including the fraction of the
benefits of induced retirement that accrue to the young – is required to make the estimate. And a
complete calculation requires estimates of 8t for the cohorts elderly in the 1990's and gt+2 for the
1990's working cohorts. But there is one important, and less easily refuted, reason why the revisions

Pyramid Mirage - 37

reported in the second two columns of the Table are so large – all 11 countries have substantial
marginal tax rates which, in my nested model of Social Security, indicates that induced retirement is
of substantial value to somebody other than the retiree.
In summary, two lessons are learned from my revision of date-of-birth generational accounts.
First, early generations gain less from Social Security than suggested by the generational accounts
computed in the literature, and may not gain at all. This adjustment is of quantitative importance
mainly in countries like Belgium, Netherlands, France, and Italy where marginal elderly tax rates well
exceed 50%. Second, later generations lose less than suggested by the generational computed in the
literature, and may actually gain. This second revision is uncertain, since little is known about exactly
why governments encourage retirement, but my calculations suggest that the second revision can be
very substantial.

V. Conclusions
I model redistributive and retirement-inducing motives for paying social security benefits. I
do not say much about why governments would want to induce retirement, or to improve the welfare
of the old, but basic similarities and differences can be derived even without saying much about these
motives. Both motives are consistent with programs redistributing funds from young to old, and can
give rise to a sequence of policies that look like a “pyramid scheme.” Both are consistent with
programs that improve the welfare of the elderly.
However, the two approaches have a number of different implications. Intergenerational
redistributive motives are difficult to reconcile with programs that strongly encourage retirement and,
when they operate at the margin, difficult to reconcile with a strong positive relationship between
retirement incentives and Social Security spending. Generational accounts and generational incidence
are only weakly related, if at all, under retirement-inducing motives. Income effects do the most to
change behavior under redistributive motives while, assuming the substitution elasticity of retirement
is large enough, substitution effects dominate under retirement-inducing motives.
These differences between the redistributive and retirement-inducing motives mean that it is
important to determine the relative importance of each motive for the creation of, and marginal
changes in, actual Social Security programs. I show how most Social Security programs around the
world induce retirement, and strongly so in more than a few countries. I show how cross-country

Pyramid Mirage - 38

or time-series relationships between elderly marginal tax rates and Social Security spending can be
used to gauge the marginal importance of redistributive and retirement-inducing motives. For the
eleven OECD countries studied by Gruber and Wise (1999), elderly marginal tax rates are closely
(and positively) related with the amount of Social Security spending. Rates increase so rapidly with
program size in Europe that inducing retirement seems to be the only model for understanding
European differences in Social Security design and incidence. It appears that cross-hauling is a
prevalent and important feature of Social Security program; it is hard to justify with a cohortredistributive motive why, to the extent that an old person works, he is treated like a young one by
the system.
Much more work is needed to accurately measure the elderly substitution effects of Social
Security. They appear to be large, but not quite as large as the income effects. The importance of
income effects suggest that the redistributive motive may be important for understanding the creation
of Social Security, even if it is relatively unimportant for understanding its recent growth and
differences across countries.
I introduce two revisions to generational accounts, so that they more accurately measure the
generational incidence of government policy. The first revision accounts for the gap between the
budgetary cost of benefits and their value to the elderly, a gap created by the positive elderly marginal
tax rates. The second revision values the benefits to the young of induced retirement. Even though
Social Security’s income effects may exceed its substitution effects on the elderly, the evidence shows
the first revision is quite substantial for some countries while the second revision may be substantial
for all of the eleven countries studied. Policy is at least in part designed to induce retirement, and its
generational incidence is probably very different than the incidence of a pyramid scheme.

VI. Appendix I: Corner Solutions in the Nested Model
The analysis in the text ignores the constraints lty # 1 and lto # 1 in the planner’s problem (2).
For some values of "t and $t, the constraints bind. Here I derive results for the case when lto # 1
binds, but lty # 1 does not. From the first order conditions of the planner’s problem (2), it is easy to
show that lto # 1 binds if and only if

Pyramid Mirage - 39

$t >

corner
$t

/

(
("t

1 % (1% (y) e
& "t) %
1%(

& (n t % z t )

"t

In this case, the optimal solution to (2) is:
Tt '

"t
"t (1% (y) e
Ft '

& (n t % z t )

"t (1 %(y) e

"t

y

(

% (1 % () "t

&(n t %z t )

"t (1 %(y) e

, Ft '

"t % e

nt

,

(

% (1 % () "t & ( "t

&(n t %z t )

(

% (1 % () "t

As long as $t > $tcorner, neither Tt nor Ft does not vary with $t. Hence, changes in $t do not induce a
positive relationship between Tt and Ft, as they do when $t < $tcorner. Changes in "t induce a negative
relationship between Tt and Ft, as they do when $t < $tcorner.

VII. Appendix II: Is Distortion an Accidental Byproduct of Redistribution?
Perhaps the IGR model is oversimplified because it does not allow any distortion of the old’s
behavior as a response to the redistributive motive. In particular, might distortion of the elderly labor
supply decision be an accidental byproduct of redistribution? There is not much research attempting
to answer this question, and a thorough answer is beyond the scope of this paper, but this appendix
briefly considers some embellishments of the IGR model. I suggest that two results derived in the
main text for the IGR model are robust to these and other likely modifications: (1) the marginal tax
rate will not increase too rapidly with the size of the program and (2) income effects must be more
important than substitution effects in the IGR model.

VII.A. Means Test
Perhaps redistribution in general, and intergenerational redistribution in particular, is not
politically feasible unless it favors the poor. And one of the realities of public finance is that helping
the poor involves distorting labor supply. Tabellini (1992) has built one such model of Social
Security, where the elderly invite the poor to form a winning coalition in a government for which

Pyramid Mirage - 40

policies are chosen by majority vote.
The main problem with such an explanation is that, in practice, Social Security does not favor
the poor, nor do other government policies do nearly as much redistribute across income classes as
they do across cohorts. First, in 98% of the 88 countries studied by Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin
(1999a), Social Security benefit formulas have no link to the beneficiary's non-labor income. An
elderly person can make millions of dollars in the stock market without sacrificing public pension
benefits, but will make a sacrifice with only a small amount of income from work.
Second, it does not appear that Social Security, tax, and other government policies for the
elderly are progressive. Many studies of American SS (Burkhauser and Warlick 1981, Garrett 1995),
Medicare (McClellan and Skinner 1997), and elderly tax policy (Nelson 1983) suggest that
government policy toward the elderly is neither progressive nor regressive.31 Third World Social
Security Programs appear to be regressive (Pampel and Williamson 1989, page 10; Midgley 1984).
Several European programs have far more generous benefits at higher salary levels (apRoberts 1996,
pp. 109, 112) and may thereby be more regressive than American SS. A comparison of empirical
studies of the generational incidence (eg., Auerbach et al 1999 study 14 countries) of government
policy with studies of its income incidence (eg., Pechman 1985) makes it clear that generational
redistribution is vastly more important than redistribution across income classes.
The worldwide scarcity of large mean-tested programs is easy to understand in the INR model
where inducing retirement, not helping the poor, is the primary policy motive. A means-tested
program discourages retirement savings which, because retirement savings facilitate retirement,
implies that a means-tested program has a weaker impact on retirement than does a program that
implicitly taxes the earnings of the elderly without taxing their assets or unearned income.

VII.B. Allocative Efficiency
If the IGR model were modified to rule out the use of lump sum taxes on the young, then
clearly the optimal policy would involve Fty > 0. But, since year of birth is both observable and
difficult to change, it seems that lump sum subsidies for the old are still feasible. Would the optimal
policy in the IGR model still involve Fto = 0? Because a policy setting Fty > Fto = 0 violates the law

31

Boskin et al (1987) is one study showing a little progressivity in the OASI system.

Pyramid Mirage - 41

of one price, it might not be optimal, depending on the ability of the young to evade their payroll
taxes. With Fto = 0, an old person has an incentive to hire an “unemployed” young person to do his
work for him, pay “under the table” the young worker his marginal product, and report the young
man’s earnings as his own. Such arrangements might occur in families and firms, or even in the black
market, and would reduce the ability of the government to redistribute across cohorts.32

Setting

Ft o = Ft y would eliminate incentives for such arrangements, and would clearly induce a positive
correlation between the amount of intergenerational redistribution (which varies directly with Fty) and
the magnitude of elderly marginal tax rates. However, this version of the IGR model rules out Fto >
Fty, and requires that Fto not increase too rapidly with Fty (for the reasons shown in Figure 2). Also,
as long as the elderly population is small relative to the young population, the substitutions effects
on young and old are small relative to the income effects on old.

VII.D. Screening
Many have suggested that redistribution is optimally distortionary in order to prevent
excessive entry into the subsidized group. For example, Stigler (1975, pp. 115f) suggests that this
is why special interests do not lobby for cash subsidies, and Besley and Coate (1991) suggest that this
may be a reason why some antipoverty programs do not pay in cash. If subsidies were in cash, they
argue, too many people would become farmers or claim to be poor, or whatever it takes to join the
subsidized group. Many policy distortions may in fact serve to screen recipients, but is this a good
theory of Social Security? Are benefit distortions needed to prevent too many people from becoming
old, or claiming to be old? While it may not be possible for government to determine who would be
a farmer, or who would be poor, in the absence of a subsidy, governments easily observe a citizen’s
year of birth, and already use its observations to determine benefits.

VIII. Appendix III: A Nested Model of Social Security and Aggregate Capital Accumulation
Here I show similar implications might be derived for an infinite horizon economy with
capital. For brevity, the Appendix assumes that taxes on the young can be lump sum, so that the only
budget constraint is an intertemporal budget constraint for the planner:
32

See Mulligan (1999) for additional analysis of the allocative efficiency of policies
affecting young and old labor markets.

Pyramid Mirage - 42

j Rt Nt ct % Nt &1ct & Nt wt (1 & l t ) & Nt&1 wt (1 & l t ) # k0
4

y

o

y

y

o

o

t' 0

where Rt is the interest rate factor for period t, and depends on the return to capital between periods
0 and t. r is the life cycle rate of time preference, which is the same for citizens and government (ie,
government relatively weights a person’s young and old utility the same way the person does). k0 is
the initial capital stock, and N-1 is the initial population of old people. The time zero government
cares about the discounted sum of remaining lifetime utilities of those alive and unborn as of time 0:

N&1 a&1 u o (c0 , l0 ) % b&1 v(l0 ) % j N t at u y (ct , l t ) % e &ru o (ct%1 , lt%1) % bt e &rv(lt%1)
o

o

4

o

y

y

o

o

o

t '0

where {at,bt}-14 are sequences of constants. The first term in braces is the sum of the per capita utility
of the initial old, and the extra social benefit (per initial old) of their retirement. The terms in square
brackets are the per capita discounted lifetime utilities of those born at date 0 or later. The term
under the sum, but outside the square brackets, is the extra social benefit retirement (per old person).
Using the definitions "t = e-rat-1/at, $t = e-rbt-1/at, the time zero government’s objective can be written
as:
y
o
t
j Nt&1 at e u (ct , l t ) % "t u (c t , lt ) % $t v(l t )
4

n

y

y

o

o

o

t '0

Notice the similarity with the objective of (2) in the text. Let the time zero government choose a
sequences consumption and leisure for young and old subject to the intertemporal budget constraint
above, and derive the optimal policies {Tt, Fty, Fto} as in the text (Tt be the difference between
earnings and consumption of the time t young). Using the log functional forms from the text, the
optimal policies are:

Pyramid Mirage - 43

(

Tt '

($t % "t) (1 & I t) & "t
($t % "t ) e

&(n t %z t )

(

% "t

,

y

Ft ' 0 ,

Ft '

$t
$t %

(
1%(

"t

where It is optimal date t national savings per young person. The optimal marginal tax rates are the
same as in a static economy. Tt is different than reported in the text, but mainly because there is an
ambiguity between savings and taxes paid by the young.

IX. References

Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. "Social Security and Medicare
Policy from the Perspective of Generational Accounting." in Poterba, James M., ed. Tax
Policy and the Economy. Volume 6. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992: 129-45.
Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds. Generational Accounting Around
the World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Barro, Robert J. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy. 82(6),
December 1974: 1095-1117.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. “The Family and the State.” Journal of Law and
Economics. 31(1), April 1988: 1-18.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. “Public Provision of Private Goods and the Redistribution of
Income.” American Economic Review. 81(4), September 1991: 979-84.
Bohn, Henning. “Will Social Security and Medicare Remain Viable as the U.S. Population is
Aging?” Working paper, Department of Economics, UCSB, June 1998.
Boldrin, Michele, Sergi Jimenez-Martni, and Franco Peracchi. “Social Security and Retirement in
Spain.” NBER Working Paper No. 6136, August 1997.
Browning, Edgar K. “Why the Social Insurance Budget Is Too Large in a Democracy.” Economic
Inquiry. 13(3), Sept. 1975: 373-88.
Clague, Ewan, Balraj Palli, and Leo Kramer. The Aging Worker and the Union. New York: Praeger
Publishers, 1971.

Pyramid Mirage - 44

Cooley, Thomas F. and Jorge Soares. “A Positive Theory of Social Security Based on Reputation.”
Journal of Political Economy. 107(1), February 1999: 135-60.
Costa, Dora L. The Evolution of Retirement. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees. “A Model of Social Insurance with Variable Retirement.”
Journal of Public Economics. 10(3), December 1978: 295-336.
Fehr, Hans and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. “Generational Accounting in General Equilibrium.” in Alan
J. Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds. Generational Accounting
Around the World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999: 43-72.
Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick. “Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax Rates.” National
Tax Journal. 45(1), March 1992: 1-22.
Geanakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Zeldes. “Social Security Money's Worth.”
NBER Working paper series no. 6722, September 1998.
Gratton, Brian. “The Poverty of Impoverishment Theory: The Economic Well-Being of the Elderly,
1890-1950.” Journal of Economic History. 56(1), March 1996: 39-61.
Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise, eds. Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the
World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1999.
Hagemann, Robert P., and Christoph John, “Fiscal Reform in Sweden: What Generational
Accounting Tells Us.” Contemporary Economic Policy. 15(3), July 1997: 1-12.
Kapteyn, Arie and Klass de Vos. “Social Security and Retirement in the Netherlands.” in Gruber,
Jonathan and David Wise, eds. Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1999: 269-303.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. Generational Accounting. New York: Free Press, 1992.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Torsten Persson, and Lars Svensson. “Social Contracts and Assets: A
Possible Solution to the Time Inconsistency Problem.” American Economic Review.
September 1988: 662-77.
Leimer Dean R. “Cohort-Specific Measures of Lifetime Net Social Security Transfers.” Office of
Research and Statistics Working Paper No. 59. Washington, DC: Social Security
Administration, February 1994.
Miron, Jeffrey A. and David N. Weil. “The Genesis and Evolution of Social Security.” NBER
Working paper #5949, March 1997.

Pyramid Mirage - 45

Mulligan, Casey B. “Can Monopoly Unionism Explain Publicly Induced Retirement?” NBER
Working paper, May 2000.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Tomas J. Philipson. “Merit Motives and Government Intervention: Public
Finance in Reverse.” NBER Working paper, May 2000.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Gerontocracy, Retirement, and Social Security.”
NBER Working Paper #7117, May 1999a.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice I: Facts and
Political Theories.” NBER Working Paper #7118, May 1999b.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice II: Efficiency
Theories and Implications for Reform.” NBER Working Paper #7119, May 1999c.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Retirement-Inducing Policy Wears Many Disguises.”
Working Paper, Columbia University, March 2000.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch. “Perspectives on the Social Security Crisis and Proposed
Solutions.” American Economic Review. 88(2), May 1998: 142-50.
Myers, Robert J. Social Security. 4th edition. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993.
OECD. Social Expenditure Database. 1997.
Olson, Laura Katz. The Political Economy of Aging: The State, Private Power, and Social Welfare.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1982.
Palme, Martin and Ingemar Svensson. “Social Security and Retirement in Sweden.” in Gruber,
Jonathan and David Wise, eds. Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1999: 355-402.
Pechman, Joseph A. Who Paid the Taxes 1965-85. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1985.
Pestieau, Pierre and Jean-Phillippe Stijns. “Social Security and Retirement in Belgium.” NBER
working paper #6169, September 1997.
Piven, Francis Fox and Richard A. Cloward. Regulating the Poor: The Functions of Social Welfare.
New York: Vantage Books, 1971.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier X. “A Positive Theory of Social Security.” Journal of Economic Growth.
(1)2, June 1996: 277-304.
Samuelson, Paul A. “An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest With or Without the Social
Contrivance of Money.” Journal of Political Economy. 66(6), December 1958: 467-82.

Pyramid Mirage - 46

Stigler, George J. The Citizen and the State: Essays on Regulation. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1975.
Tabellini, Guido. "A Positive Theory of Social Security." mimeo IGIER, Milano, Italy, February
1992.
United States Census Bureau. Population Division, Population Projections Branch. Annual
Population Estimates by Age Group and Sex, Selected Years from 1990 to 1999. 1999.
United States Census Bureau. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970.
Bicentennial edition. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1975.
United States Congress, House Committee on Ways and Means. Overview of Entitlement Programs,
1996 Green Book. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1996.
United States Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office, February 1998.
United States Social Security Administration. Social Security Programs Throughout the World 1995. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1995.

