NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELLING COMPANY SHARES TO RELUCTANT EMPLOYEES:
FRANCE TELECOM’S EXPERIENCE

François Degeorge
Dirk Jenter
Alberto Moel
Peter Tufano

Working Paper 7683
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7683
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000
We thank Gérard Gruet-Masson, Karine Daniel and Frédéric Dubacq of France Télécom for kindly providing us with
France Télécom data, and for helpful discussions; Patricia Bordin of ENSG for help with the geographic data; and
Nicholas Barberis, Shlomo Benartzi, Marc Bertoneche, John Campbell, George Chacko, Doug Diamond, Nicolas
Dufourcq, John Gourville, Richard Green, William Greene, G.S. Maddala, Daniel McFadden, Jack Porter, Georges
Trepo, Luis Viceira, Luc Wathieu, Martin Weber, Ivo Welch and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute,
Darden School (University of Virginia), London Business School, Séminaire Bachelier, UCLA, French Finance
Association Meetings (AFFI), and Mannheim University for their comments and suggestions. This research was
supported by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business School under the Global Financial System project and
by Fondation HEC. Frédéric Pannecière provided able research assistance. The views expressed here are those of the
authors and do not reflect the views of France Télécom or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by François Degeorge, Dirk Jenter, Alberto Moel, Peter Tufano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Selling Company Shares to Reluctant Employees: France Telecom’s Experience
François Degeorge, Dirk Jenter, Alberto Moel, Peter Tufano
NBER Working Paper No. 7683
May 2000
JEL No. G0, G10, G11, G20, G32
ABSTRACT

In 1997, France Télécom, the state-owned French telephone company, went through a partial
privatization. The government offered current and prior France Télécom employees the opportunity
to buy portfolios of shares with various combinations of discounts, required holding periods,
leverage, tax treatment, and levels of downside protection. We adapt a neoclassical model of
investment decision-making that takes into account firm-specific human capital and holding period
restrictions to predict how employees might respond to the share offers. Using a database that tracks
over 200,000 eligible participants, we analyze the employees' characteristics and their decisions
whether to participate; how much to invest; and what form of stock alternatives they selected.

François Degeorge
HEC School of Management
78351 Jouy en Josas
Cedex
France
and CEPR
degeorge@hec.fr

Dirk Jenter
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
djenter@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu

Alberto Moel
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
amoel@hbs.edu

Peter Tufano
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
ptufano@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Many of the proposed solutions to the misalignment of managers’, workers’, and
shareholders’ interests recommend that managers and workers hold shares in the firms in which
they work.1 By giving employees the financial incentives of shareholders, they will act to
increase shareholder value. This prescription is embodied in a number of institutional practices:
the payment of stock (and stock options) to executives and workers as a portion of their
compensation, the establishment of Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs), the sale of
discounted stock to employees, and government mandates that workers of privatized firms buy
shares in the firms for which they work.
Yet selling stock to their employees often proves a substantial challenge for companies.
Workers whose undiversified human capital fluctuates with the fate of their employer may prefer
to invest their financial assets outside the firm.2 Furthermore, in many countries, there is still
little tradition of individuals investing in the stock market. Finally, in privatizations employees
may oppose private ownership and may voice their opposition by refusing to buy shares. Thus
the sale of company stock to employees represents a large-scale marketing challenge especially in
privatizations. Designers of privatization schemes are often instructed to motivate workers to
buy and hold the firm’s stock, but to respect the budget constraints of the firm (or government).
In this paper, we study one of the larger privatizations in Europe, which faced this
problem: France Télécom’s 1997 Ouverture du Capital or “opening of shareholding”. The stateowned French Télécommunications giant was planning to sell a portion of the firm’s shares to
private investors, and under French law, needed to induce employees to invest as well. The firm
created four distinct investment vehicles for employees. The schemes were all based upon the
firm’s common stock, but differed along five dimensions: the level of discounts and free shares
granted to employees; the access to subsidized financing and additional leverage; the period that
employees were required to hold the stock; the tax treatment; and finally, the degree of downside
protection offered to the employee in the event that the stock price declined below the initial
offering price.
Our paper analyzes the employees’ response to the firm’s stock offering proposal. Our
database consists of information on each of the more than 200,000 past and present France
Télécom workers eligible to participate. For each eligible participant, we have personnel data
1

including their age, tenure, rank, gender, and employment status (civil servant, non-civil
servant, retiree, or former employee). We also have information on the number and type of
shares requested and obtained for each employee.
We have two related goals in writing this paper. The first is to describe the employee
response to the investment offers, addressing three related questions: Which employees chose
to participate in the employee stock offering plan? How much did they invest in the plan?
And how did the employees choose from among the four different alternatives?
Our second goal is to extend existing theory to produce testable implications about
the investment choices of the worker-investors of France Télécom. Drawing primarily upon
neoclassical models of optimal investment and consumption, we build a stylized model of the
investment choices facing a risk-averse worker-investor whose human capital is partially
firm-specific, i.e., his labor income is correlated to the firm’s fortunes. (The model is
detailed in Appendix A). We then examine how the size of human vs. financial capital, the
degree of firm-specificity in human capital, the investors’ horizon, and the degree of relative
risk aversion should influence the investment choice of the worker-investor. We relate these
unobserved parameters to observed employee characteristics to draw implications about
different investment choices. For example, our sample includes current workers (both civil
servants and employees-at-will), retirees, and prior workers still in the workforce. We appeal
to these differences to capture levels and firm specificity of human capital.
We find that employees’ decisions whether to participate in the offering and how
much to contribute are driven by different factors. Several groups of employees–especially
former employees and retirees–participated less frequently, but conditional on participating,
invested more. It appears that a threshold level of desired investment must be attained for
participation to occur, and we measure this threshold in a latent variable framework. We find
that employees may forgo benefits equal to one or two months’ salary by failing to
participate. We conjecture that this threshold arises due to the cost of analyzing the France
Télécom offering, and our findings hint at the importance of marketing efforts in the
employee stock offering.
We find some evidence of a human capital effect on investing decisions, but the
2

magnitudes are small. We use tenure at France Télécom as a proxy for a worker’s firmspecificity of human capital, and we find that workers with tenure one standard deviation
above the mean are 0.6% less likely to participate in the offering, and make 11-14% smaller
personal contributions. The small size of the human capital effect may be consistent with
Thaler’s [1998] “mental accounting” hypothesis, which would imply that employees assign
their financial capital and human capital to different mental accounts, and do not take into
consideration the correlations between the two sources of risk. Equally plausible, employees
with longer tenure may feel more optimistic about the prospects of France Télécom and the
France Télécom share price.
The effects predicted by the neoclassical model for financial wealth and salary are
broadly borne out by the data: Workers with higher financial wealth and salary participate
and invest more, and, consistent with the notion that as retirement horizon decreases, risk
aversion increases, we find that older workers tend to invest less.
While a neoclassical model helps explain broad patterns in employee investment
behavior, there are still anomalies that it cannot explain. We document unexpected and
economically significant seemingly sub-optimal investment choices by France Télécom
employees. We are at a loss to explain why. Many purchased insufficient amounts of (or
completely shunned) the most attractive investment vehicle offered to them – a downsideprotected stock-based asset.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the challenge
of selling company stock to France Télécom employees. Section 3 describes the alternatives
the government and France Télécom made available to eligible participants in the employee
stock plan. These choices allowed employees to trade-off larger discounts in return for either
longer holding periods or some downside protection. Section 4 reviews the existing theory of
investment decision-making and discusses the predictions of this theory as applied to our
problem. The formal model we use is detailed in Appendix A to the paper. Section 5
describes the data and the variables we use. Section 6 provides the core of the empirical
analysis, in which we report on the three aspects of employee response: The decision to
participate, the quantity of funds invested, and the portfolios. We examine the cross-sectional
3

dispersion of employee choices as a function of observable characteristics. Finally, Section 7
briefly concludes.

II. The challenge of selling company stock to France Télécom employees
Selling stock to France Télécom employees was a challenge for three reasons: First, the
fraction of French individuals with prior experience in stock investing was quite low.
Second, the privatization of France Télécom had met with political opposition from a large
number of employees.

Third, at least some employees might appreciate the appeal of

diversification and be reluctant to invest in the stock of their employer.
The first challenge for France Télécom and the government was to overcome the
absence of a tradition of stock market investing by individuals in France. According to the
Commission des Opérations de Bourse (the French stock market regulatory body) about 5
million French individuals held stock in 1997, out of a population of 60 million.3 This
reluctance to invest in stocks was even more pronounced for blue-collar workers or civil
servants that made up the bulk of France Télécom’s employees.4 Research showed that less
well-to-do French households were less inclined to hold shares.5 The choice of many France
Télécom employees to be civil servants might also indicate a low tolerance for bearing risk or
a minimal interest in the private sector. Although no data are available on employees’
portfolios of financial assets, anecdotes suggest only a minority was familiar with the basics
of stocks as investments.6
The second hurdle for marketing the stock to employees was political. Initially,
France Télécom’s unions opposed its privatization.

France Télécom’s civil servant

employees enjoyed job security and a generous pension scheme that privatization could
jeopardize. On October 12, 1993, 75% of France Télécom employees went on strike against
privatization. In 1996, the company negotiated an agreement with unions that defused
employees' fears.7 However, a lingering hostility to privatization remained among at least a
minority of employees. Moreover, the platform of the Socialist government elected in the
spring of 1997 explicitly opposed the privatization of France Télécom. Under the combined
pressure

of

fiscal

realism

and

the

upcoming
4

deregulation

of

the

European

telecommunications market, the Socialist government performed a quick about-face, and in
September 1997 officially announced a slightly scaled-back privatization of France Télécom.8
The result of

this uncertain

path to privatization was that among France Télécom

employees, most of those favoring the privatization were recent converts, while those
opposing it may have felt betrayed and embittered by the Socialist government’s reversal.
The third obstacle to selling company stock to France Télécom employees was the
desire of employees to diversify their risk. Workers whose undiversified human capital
fluctuates with the fate of their employer may prefer to invest their financial assets outside
the firm. To be sure, French labor laws make it costly to fire employees, even if they are not
civil servants. But an employee’s firm-specific human capital suffers whenever the firm
performs poorly, even if he keeps his job: Salary raises and promotions are more scarce, or
employees may be subject to forced job relocations. Thus the human capital of France
Télécom employees was still to be at risk after the privatization, and they may have hesitated
to add a financial risk closely correlated to their existing human capital risk.9
While the firm expended substantial marketing resources to make the offering a
success, the financial incentives the government could offer to employees were constrained
by law and politics. The France Télécom offer to employees was reported to be “the best
ever agreed to by the State to employees of companies that list their shares in the Stock
Exchange.”10 It was not feasible to merely give the shares to employees, so to induce workers
to buy shares (albeit at a discount) the security designers needed to create an attractive set of
investments.

III.

The privatization of France Télécom: The offering schemes

The challenge of designing employee stock offerings that simultaneously addressed
the low level of liquid financial wealth of most employees, their risk aversion, their poorly
diversified human capital and their hesitation with holding shares had been an issue in all of
the prior French privatizations. France Télécom adapted the program initially used by the
French Trésor (Treasury) and Rhône-Poulenc in 1993.11 In literature describing the program
to employees, the company outlined the principles that dictated the design of the offerings:
5

“To make the purchase of France Télécom shares accessible to everyone, the offer
reserved for employees follows five principles:
•
•
•
•
•

Concentrates a majority of benefits on the first few thousand francs in investment.
Helps each of you to finance your investment by offering payment terms and by
offering a plan with a bank loan.
Offers a number of choices, and the possibility of investing in more than one plan at
the same time.
Gives incentives for long-term shareholding to foster the creation of a stable
shareholder base.
Respects the freedom of choice of each agent and guarantee the confidentiality of the
operation.”
The desire to offer employees choices was manifested in the fact that France Télécom

offered its employees four different share ownership programs: Abondix, Multiplix, Simplix,
and Disponix. In general terms, the employee could get bigger discounts, more attractive
financing, tax-free treatment or protection from losses by committing to hold the France
Télécom shares for a longer period of time. Table I presents details of each program. The
most important characteristics of the plans are as follows:
•
•
•

Effective discount (including price discount from the offering price, matching bonus
given by France Télécom, and free shares): Abondix was the most advantageous,
followed by Simplix and Disponix.12
Required holding period: Abondix and Multiplix required the stock to be held for 5
years, compared to 2 years for Simplix, and no requirement for Disponix.
Downside protection: Of the four plans, only Multiplix offered downside protection.
Functionally, the Multiplix scheme is quite different from the other three plans.

Where the other plans offer linear payoffs, Multiplix offers a non-linear, option-style payoff.
The payoff can be represented as the sum of two components: (a) a risk-free zero-coupon
bond paying 1.25 times the employee’s personal contribution plus bonus, and (b) 10 call
options struck at the offer price for each share that the employee bought directly. Legally,
this payoff was delivered through a peculiar guaranteed "loan" which allowed the employees
to buy nine additional shares for each one purchased through personal contributions and
bonus.13 The Multiplix option dominates investments in Abondix for a wide range of final

6

stock prices; it is downside protected and offers much larger upside. See Figure I for a
graphical description of the payoffs.
Each plan’s distinctive feature was well captured in the pamphlet given to employees:
•

Disponix: “Be able to sell the shares at any time.”

•

Simplix: “Achieve a balance between offering plan benefits and holding period.”

•

Abondix: “Acquire numerous benefits and invest for the long term.”

•

Multiplix: “Multiply, with full security, your savings capacity.”
All 174,091 current French employees of France Télécom (or of more than 50%-

owned subsidiaries) were eligible to participate. In addition, 30,985 former employees who
left the firm between 1991 and 1997 were eligible to participate, but could purchase only two
of the four plans (Simplix and Disponix). The group of former employees includes 22,357
retirees as well as 8,628 former employees who left prior to retirement.
Overall, the share alternatives were quite attractive to the employees. To give a sense,
were an employee to invest 9000 FF, he could buy about 12,000 FF of stock under the
Disponix plan, 16,312 FF under Simplix and 25,610 FF under Abondix. (These ignore the
subsidized financing, avoidance of transaction costs, and tax-free status under Abondix).
Were he able to invest 9,000 FF in Multiplix, he would receive a package worth between
27,500 and 39,000 FF, depending on the volatility of France Télécom stock.14 These are
substantial benefits, large enough to attract employee attention. Under the principle of
allowing employees freedom of choice, the program allowed employees to participate in
more than one plan, subject to numerous limitations, such as:
•

Total contributions to the Abondix and Multiplix programs combined in each year
could not exceed 1/4 of the employees’ gross France Télécom income. The loan
implicit in Multiplix would count towards this limit. This limitation often turned
out to be binding.

•

The total personal investment into Multiplix could not exceed FF 9,000.

•

The maximum request for shares could not exceed FF 823,200. The bonus and the
bank loan implicit in Multiplix counted towards this total, while free shares were
excluded.
7

•

Were the employee offering to be oversubscribed, rationing rules would be
determined and announced by France Télécom and the government at that time.
Formal allocation rules were not announced in advance.

With combinations of the four alternatives, employees could create highly customized
shareholding packages. Within the limitations above, they could vary the degree to which
investments were taxable, the average holding period, the payment options, the average total
discount (taking into account discounts, bonuses and free shares) and the average number of
shares with downside protection.
If we were to ignore taxes, risk aversion, needs for liquidity, and heterogeneity among
workers, we can solve the linear programming problem suggested by the constraints above to
calculate the “naïve optimal” (value-maximizing) investment package. Given the extreme
discounts offered, investors would certainly participate in the offering. Our calculations
show that Abondix and Multiplix, which offer the highest discounts, dominate the optimal
naïve portfolios. Whenever the combined constraint on Abondix and Multiplix is binding,
Abondix is the preferred choice over Multiplix. While Multiplix delivers a higher return, it
triggers the most severe program constraints. Simplix enters the value-maximizing portfolios
only for small personal investments to take advantage of the free shares, and again for large
personal investments when the constraint on the combined investment into Abondix and
Multiplix binds.
This “naïve optimal” solution obviously ignores the actual situation facing security
designers who are encouraging these employees to buy shares:
•

Employees are risk-averse.

•

Employees have a mix of human and financial capital.

•

Human capital can be risky and also firm-specific, i.e., its value can be related to
the value of France Télécom.

•

Employees may be unable to borrow against their illiquid positions and thus the
holding period of an investment may be important.

•

The pool of workers is heterogeneous with respect to these characteristics.

8

To understand the optimal portfolio under these circumstances, we model the joint
consumption, investment and portfolio choices of investors.

IV.

Applying investment decision-making theory at France Télécom
In this section we first present the two principal strands of theory dealing with

portfolio choice decisions: Standard neoclassical models and behavioral finance approaches
to the portfolio selection problem. We then use a simple neoclassical model to obtain
predictions on the employees’ decision about participation, level of investment, and choice of
investment vehicle in the context of the France Télécom employee offering.
Standard neoclassical models, as developed in Samuelson [1969] and Merton
[1969,1971] derive optimal consumption-portfolio decisions from utility maximization by
rational consumers. A number of extensions of these models consider portfolio allocation
decisions when investors have non-diversified human capital or when they face uncertain
labor income. Bertaut and Halliasos [1997] solve a life-cycle model in which investors
choose portfolios in order to buffer against long-run career uncertainty. An implication of
their model is that employees with more risky human capital would be less likely to
participate in the France Télécom offering, and on the margin more likely to prefer a scheme
with downside protection like Multiplix.

Viceira [1997] solves an infinite horizon

consumption and portfolio selection problem where labor income is subject to permanent and
transitory shocks, and employees face an exogenously given probability of retirement per
period.

He shows that the demand for the risky asset declines as workers approach

retirement, implying that younger workers would be more likely to participate in the risky
France Télécom share offering. If labor income shocks were positively correlated with the
risky asset (as would be expected in the case of employees purchasing France Télécom
stock), Viceira demonstrates a negative hedging demand for the risky asset.
Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson [1992] choose a somewhat different strategy to model
labor income uncertainty. They allow human capital to be partly random and partly under the
control of the investor. Their main result is that flexibility in labor supply induces higher risk
taking. Negative portfolio returns are smoothed out by increased labor supply, especially for
9

young workers, who can assume relatively more risk in their financial portfolio. This implies
greater participation by younger France Télécom workers. Little empirical work addresses
how well these models perform in predicting investing behavior.15
A quite different theoretical approach to understanding investors’ choices comes from
the behavioral finance literature. This approach derives predictions about individual behavior
based on a set of anomalies reported in the psychology literature and observations from
experimental studies. In this literature, individuals are not rational utility maximizers as in
the neoclassical framework, but instead suffer from mental biases and use simplifying
heuristics when making decisions.
Kahneman and Tversky [1979] first incorporated behavioral biases in a formal
decision theoretic model in their prospect theory model.16 Their formulation encompasses a
number of behavioral effects, one of which – loss aversion – is of particular importance for
portfolio allocation. Loss aversion means that investors perceive losses relative to the status
quo as worse than equivalent foregone gains, and investors behave strictly risk-averse even
for infinitesimal gambles. Hence prospect theory predicts a strong preference for certain
outcomes even over favorable bets. In the context of the employee stock offering at France
Télécom, prospect theory leads investors to minimize the downside risk of their investments,
while being less concerned about large up-side potentials. This might push employees
toward the Multiplix scheme.
Mental accounting as described in Thaler [1985, 1990 and 1998], Shefrin and
Statman [1993 and 1994] and Shefrin and Thaler [1988] refers to the tendency of investors to
subdivide their total wealth into disjoint accounts and apply different decision rules to
different accounts in isolation without pursuing overall utility maximization. In Shefrin and
Thaler [1988], agents distinguish current wage income, asset income and future income, and
spend differently out of the present values of these three mental accounts. Applied to the
decision situation faced by the France Télécom employees, the mental accounting hypothesis
casts doubt on the notion that investors consider their human capital when allocating their
financial portfolio.
The theory of self-control has received considerable attention in the behavioral
10

economics literature (Thaler and Shefrin [1981], Schelling [1984], Shefrin and Statman
[1984]). The desire to restrain one’s short-term behavior leads investors to adopt rules and
self-imposed constraints on behavior, such as automatic savings plans or “no-debt” rules.
The implications of self-control considerations for the employees at France Télécom are
twofold: Firstly, the long holding periods of the Abondix and Multiplix packages may be
attractive because they can constrain myopic consumption decisions. Secondly, if investors
follow a rule against borrowing, then the fact that the Multiplix package was framed as
including a bank loan may be detrimental to its success.
While we are able to intuit some predictions of behavioral theory, when applied to the
problem at hand, it is often difficult to produce crisp testable hypotheses.17 While we will
frame our analysis primarily in terms of neoclassical investment behavior, we discuss later
how behavioral forces could provide alternative explanations for our results.
A. Predictions from a simple model of portfolio selection
While the neoclassical models of investment behavior are rich, no one model is
designed to capture the essence of the problem faced by the France Télécom employees. In
particular, employees have risky human capital tied to the value of the France Télécom stock,
have a choice of liquidity (holding period), and can buy assets with downside protection.18
We develop a stylized, three-period model to obtain predictions with respect to the
employees’ decisions about participation, level of investment, and choice of investment
vehicle in this particular setting. The model explicitly analyzes how utility-maximizing
employees would choose among a set of investments that are realistic representations of the
choices facing the France Télécom workers. In addition to the France Télécom offerings, the
investor is given the choice of a riskless asset and an additional risky asset unrelated to
France Télécom. Appendix A details the setup of the model and relates it to the existing
literature. Starting from a realistic baseline calibration, we analyze the consumption, savings
and optimal investment by the worker-investor as a function of his relative risk aversion, his
initial financial wealth, the level of labor income/human capital, the firm specificity of his
human capital, and the idiosyncratic riskiness of labor income.19 Selected predictions are
discussed in the following paragraphs.
11

Participation rate and investment intensity. The model predicts that all employees
will participate in at least one of the employer’s stock choices. At face value, as more than a
third of eligible participants choose not to participate, the model obviously fails to capture
some critical aspect of their decision-making.
However, the model does predict that the intensity of participation will vary across the
population.

Bearing out simple intuition and echoing earlier models, it predicts that

employees who are more willing and able to bear financial risk hold more risky securities:
•

As relative risk aversion increases, employees shift away from the risky France Télécom
assets towards cash until they hold only moderate amounts of the downside protected
Multiplix. With the baseline calibration, the predicted personal contribution falls from FF
59,800 for log-utility (relative risk aversion of 1) to FF 2,700 for relative risk aversion of
20.

•

As labor income becomes more correlated to the firm, workers invest less in the risky
financial assets offered by France Télécom. Again with the baseline calibration, the
predicted personal contribution is at FF 42,800 for no correlation and falls to FF 2,100 for
strongly positive correlation between labor income and stock returns (ρ greater than 0.3).

•

When labor income (human capital) increases for a given financial wealth then the
intensity of participation increases, but less than proportional to the increase in labor
income. The predicted personal contribution rises from FF 13,600 for no labor income to
FF 45,800 for an annual labor income of FF 2,000,000.20

•

The effect of adding idiosyncratic risk to the labor income process has an ambiguous
effect on the intensity of participation.

The unavoidable risk in human capital

discourages risk taking in the financial portfolio, but at the same time increases the
savings rate for precautionary reasons. For relative risk aversion of five we find the net
effect on personal contribution to be positive, while for relative risk aversion of twelve it
is negative.
Mix of investments among participants. The decision of how to allocate the personal
savings among the France Télécom assets and the outside alternatives is severely restricted by
the rules of the offering. Because the Multiplix plan delivers downside protection and
12

appreciation on ten shares, it is a nearly dominant security and without additional constraints
would be part of all participating employees’ choices. (More generally, Leland [1980]
suggests that downside protected investments should be more attractive to investors who are
more risk averse, and we see a similar pattern in our model.) However, due to the constraint
on the total amount investable in Multiplix and Abondix combined, the investor has to tradeoff each unit of Multiplix against ten units of Abondix whenever the constraint is binding.
We focus on the predictions for the relative allocations to the France Télécom assets, since
any holdings of outside risky or riskless assets are not observable to us. To further simplify,
the model abstracts from the distinction between Disponix and Simplix and analyzes the
choice between the long-lived assets Abondix and Multiplix and a short-lived asset based on
France Télécom stock.
•

As relative risk aversion increases, the model predicts that the investor's portfolio of
France Télécom assets shifts from 87% in the short-lived asset with relative risk aversion
of 1 to 100% in Abondix with relative risk aversion of 5 and finally to 100% in Multiplix
with relative risk aversion of sixteen and higher.

•

As the firm-specificity of human capital (ρ) increases, the model’s predictions are very
similar to increasing relative risk aversion: With no correlation, the portfolio of France
Télécom assets is 71% in Abondix and 29% in the short-lived asset, shifts to 100% in
Abondix with ρ equal to 0.1 and finally to 100% in Multiplix with ρ equal to 0.3 and
larger.21

•

When labor income increases for a given financial wealth, the investor shifts from the
short-lived France Télécom asset to Abondix and finally to Multiplix. With no labor
income, the employee invests 100% in the short-lived France Télécom asset; the worker
shifts to 100% in Abondix with annual labor income of FF 100,000 and finally to 100% in
Multiplix with labor income of FF 1,000,000. This pattern is caused by both the incomebased constraint on the total investment in long-lived assets and by the negative effect of
increased human capital on the desire to take on additional exposure to France Télécom.
In our model, as the willingness or ability to take additional exposure to France

Télécom decreases, the average holding period of the portfolio of France Télécom assets
13

increases. This result is due to the investors’ ability to substitute away from the France
Télécom assets in favor of outside assets. For very low risk aversion, no firm-specificity of
human capital or little human capital relative to financial capital, the slightly discounted
short-lived France Télécom asset is part of the optimal portfolio. Increasing either risk
aversion or the exposure to France Télécom causes the investor to replace the short-lived
asset by assets unrelated to France Télécom, leaving only the long-lived France Télécom
assets in the observable portfolio.
The model delivers a set of predictions about the factors that should drive
participation, extent of contribution, and the mix of stock plans utilized. These predictions
are framed with respect to a handful of theoretical parameters: The amount of labor income,
the firm specificity of labor income, the idiosyncratic risk of labor income, and the
employee’s risk aversion. The empirical challenge is to find the best-possible proxies for
these parameters, which we discuss in the following section.

V. Data description
Our data set consists of a unique database of 205,076 current and former employees of
France Télécom.

The data were kindly provided to us by France Télécom’s Internal

Shareholders Department. For each individual we have data on age; gender; job tenure; job
category; salary grade; whether the employee is currently employed, formerly employed or
retired; and the location of the employee’s business unit. We also have information on the
number of shares demanded and obtained by each employee. Finally, we have the town and
the postal code of the employee’s home, which we have matched to demographic data from
the INSEE, the French government statistical agency. Table II provides summary statistics
for some of the observed variables.
Amount of human capital. The present value of labor income (human capital) is a
function of the current level of salary, its growth rate, and the time horizon over which salary
will be received. Current salary captures the first component and age captures the third
aspect of human capital, with younger workers generally having more human capital (future
value of labor income) than older workers. We can observe an employee’s salary grade, from
14

which we can estimate his or her salary. 22 In addition, we can identify retirees, whose human
capital (future labor earnings) is presumably small.23
Firm specificity of human capital. We have a number of proxies for the firmspecificity of human capital. First, we can identify former (non-retired) workers versus
current workers. The former would have no France Télécom firm-specific capital, as they
were no longer in the firm’s employ. For current workers, we use job tenure as a proxy for
firm-specificity of human capital. Prior theoretical and empirical research suggests that
tenure is a good measure of this variable.24 In the empirical analysis, we distinguish the
tenure effect between civil servants and non-civil servants. While the firm-specificity of
human capital increases in tenure for both groups, we would anticipate that the job security
implicit in the civil servant status makes this effect less relevant for civil servants.
Idiosyncratic shock to human capital. The possibility of a sudden shock to human
capital should affect the worker’s investment decision. Here we exploit the differences
between the civil servant employees of France Télécom and the non-civil servants. The
former have much more job security than the latter and thus, we argue have lower levels of
idiosyncratic labor shocks.
Financial wealth. We do not directly observe the financial wealth of the workers, but
we construct an instrument based on the worker’s choice of residence. We match the towns
of the worker’s residence to the INSEE (French National Statistical Service) database, and
use the average income of the households in the same town as a rough measure of wealth.
Our logic is that choice of residence is a function of wealth (and income) and given the large
disparities between towns and neighborhoods, it captures some of the unmeasured variation
in household wealth.
Other control variables. To test Viceira’s [1997] predictions that time to retirement
can affect employee’s retirement motives to invest in risky assets, we also control for
employee age and age-squared. Age is a variable that could have many interpretations in this
analysis. Not only does it capture years to retirement, but also it affects human capital,
financial capital and the ratio of the two.25 Younger people have large future labor income
but smaller financial assets, whereas older people have smaller remaining future labor income
15

and larger financial assets. At some point, financial assets begin to dwindle as people use
them to pay for children’s education, support of aging parents or retirement, and to capture
this non-linearity, it is appropriate to include not only an “age” variable, but a squared age
term as well. 26
Prior research, such as Barber and Odean [1999], suggests that men and women make
different investment decisions. They attribute this to differences in self-confidence, but more
generally gender differences could reflect other factors as well, such as risk aversion. To
account for these differences, we include gender as a control variable.
Omitted variable bias and risk aversion. In spite of the uniqueness and breadth of
our database, we acknowledge that some potentially very helpful data have not been made
available. For example, we have no information on employees’ marital status, number of
children, whether their spouse is an employee of France Télécom, and whether the employee
is a homeowner.

Clearly, such variables have bearing on France Télécom employees’

participation in the share offering. Nor do we have information on employees’ promotion
history, union affiliation, training, or other portfolio holdings, which may have influenced
employees’ attitudes toward the offering.
While some of these variables might be made available at some time, the one key
variable that will always be unavailable is risk aversion. However, other observable variables
could be related to risk aversion. Absolute risk aversion should decrease with total wealth
and income. Wealthier workers may be more willing to buy risky assets than less wealthy
workers. The decision to become a civil servant may reflect higher risk aversion; if so, civil
servants might be less likely to participate in the offering. Risk aversion may change over a
person’s lifetime, so older people may become more risk averse. Risk aversion could differ
between men and women. It is prudent to remember that there is no independent measure of
risk aversion, virtually all observable variables may be correlated with it, and thus it may be
difficult to interpret the empirical results.

16

VI.

Empirical results

We first present our results on participation and investment intensity, focusing on the
discrepancies between the two, which we interpret as evidence of a threshold effect. We then
turn to how employees allocated their investment among the various plans.
A. Participation and investment intensity
The theoretical model we developed predicted that all eligible current and former
employees would participate, and that the “average worker” (as determined by our baseline
calibration but with no human capital at risk) should invest about FF 26,000 in the offer.
Table III, Panel A shows that the participation rate was 62.8% overall (68% among current
employees). Thus, the neoclassical model fails to predict that a significant fraction of eligible
worker-investors chose to pass up entirely the sizeable benefits attached to the various
offering plans. Panel B shows that the actual investment among workers –conditional on
participating– was FF 26,554 suggesting that our model calibration is reasonable.
To test our predictions regarding participation and investment intensity we run a
Probit regression of the probability of participation on individual characteristics, and a
truncated regression of personal contribution on the same set of characteristics.
Unlike the Tobit model, the truncated regression framework allows the determinants
of the participation decision to differ from the amount of investment decision without merely
throwing away zero-investment observations and biasing the results. It can accommodate
reasonable deviations from the standard choice setting: for example, even when the optimal
contribution level is non-zero, participation may still not occur due to search, information and
transaction costs. Similarly, the potential investor may first decide whether the offering is
worth analyzing, and only if the answer is in the affirmative, go on to decide the desired
contribution level.27 We report our results for the Probit regression in Table IV, Panel A,
and the results for the truncated regression in Panel B.28
We predicted a negative effect of tenure (a proxy for the firm-specificity of an
employee’s human capital) on participation and personal contribution. These predictions are
partially supported by the data. Tenure has a negative effect on participation only for noncivil servant current employees, who may have felt that their jobs would be most at risk in
17

case France Télécom did poorly. Longer tenure is also weakly associated with a smaller
personal contribution, especially for current non-civil servants who decrease their personal
contribution by 460 FF for each additional year of job tenure. Assuming tenure is a good
proxy for firm-specific human capital, either (a) Employees have little firm- specific human
capital; (b) Human capital is not at risk; (c) Employees may have treated their human capital
and financial capital in separate “mental accounts” (Thaler [1998]) and failed to take into
account the underdiversification resulting from investing in company stock.
According to the neoclassical model, labor income and financial wealth should be
associated with higher levels of participation and personal contribution. We find strong
support for this prediction. Inspecting the relationship between salary grades and coefficients
in the first column of Table IV, Panel A, there is nearly a monotonically-increasing
relationship between salary levels and the propensity to participate, even after controlling for
age, tenure, civil servant status and job category. Moving from the lowest salary grade for
“ordinary employees” to the lowest salary grade for “middle managers,” the probability of
participating increases 58 percentage points. In Column 2 of Panel A, we estimate the actual
level of salary, and the coefficient on salary is the most significant determinant of
participation.
Our instrument for wealth also has a positive impact on participation. We incorporate
both wealth term and a square of wealth to allow for nonlinearities in the wealth-participation
relationship.

The coefficient on wealth is positive, suggesting that as wealth increases

participation is more likely, and the squared term is negative, which suggests that this
relationship flattens off or could even turn around at high levels of wealth. Over the range of
data in our sample, the first-order term dominates the squared term for 95-99% of all the
employees, producing a positive relationship between wealth and participation for virtually
all of the participants in our sample. These findings are consistent with the notion that
employees with greater total wealth have lower absolute risk aversion and are therefore more
willing to invest in risky assets.
Higher-paid workers not only are more likely to participate, but also to invest more in
the stock-offering plan, as shown in Table IV, Panel B. Moving from salary grade 11 to
18

salary grade 31 (31 to 41) results in a FF 10,000 (14,000) increase in personal contribution.
The impact of wealth on amount invested is consistent with this finding. The squared INSEE
wealth measure dominates the first-order term, suggesting that increases in our wealth
instrument are correlated with higher contribution amounts.29

These results are also

consistent with the comparative statics from our model.30
We predicted that adding idiosyncratic risk to labor income has an ambiguous effect
on the willingness to participate in the offering.

For relative risk aversion of five we

predicted the net effect on investment intensity to be positive, while for relative risk aversion
of twelve to be negative. Based on the Probit marginals evaluated at the means, civil servants
are about 7 percentage points less likely to participate (calculated from the first specification
in Table IV, Panel A). This observation is compatible with civil servants having less labor
income uncertainty, and a level of relative risk aversion of five across both civil servants and
non-civil servants. The interpretation is complicated by the fact that civil servants and noncivil servants are likely to differ on more than one (unobserved) dimension. An alternative
explanation for the lower participation among civil servants could be higher average risk
aversion, evidenced by their revealed preference of taking a civil servant position. If civil
servants have both higher job security and higher risk aversion than non-civil servants, then
the predicted negative effect of risk aversion may overwhelm the predicted positive effect of
higher job security. An alternative explanation is that perhaps some residual opposition
against the privatization existed.

Such opposition may have been more likely among

employees who joined France Télécom fully expecting a lifelong public sector career, and
who may have felt betrayed when France Télécom turned itself into a privately-owned entity.
We find that older employees are less likely to participate in any of the stock purchase
plans, with workers one standard deviation older about 4% less likely to participate. On the
other hand, age is associated with a larger personal contribution (conditional on participating)
over almost the entire age range of employees.31 According to Viceira’s [1997] model,
investors closer to retirement will be more risk-averse, since they expect their propensity to
consume out of wealth to go up soon. Hence our finding on participation is consistent with
the idea that this negative effect of age on the demand for risky assets overwhelms the
19

positive effect of diminished firm-specific human capital on the hedging demand for the risky
asset.32 The positive effect of age on personal contribution is compatible with the human
capital effect dominating, or with age proxying for unaccounted variation in personal wealth.
In the extreme, we see that retirees are much less likely to participate in the stock plan than
are current workers, also consistent with Viceira’s hypothesis. Retirees were 30% less likely
to participate, evaluating the Probit coefficients at their mean values.
Finally, while we have no clear hypothesis for why gender should affect the decision to
participate in the stock plans, it does have an effect. Women were about 5% more likely to
participate than men. This might result from differences in family status: French households
are more likely to have two incomes if the woman works than if the man works. It could also
reflect differences in risk aversion33, or a more careful reading of the plan documents. We
merely report the result as consistent with the notion that gender has some impact on this
investment decision.
B. Discrepancies between the participation and personal contribution: a threshold
effect
Our most surprising finding is that several employee characteristics have opposite
effects on participation and personal contribution. For example, while women are more
likely to participate than men, they contribute less. The same is true of retirees and former
employees, and is most vividly seen in Panel A and Panel B of Table III: former employees
were much less likely to participate than current employees (22% vs. 68%). However,
conditional on participating, the personal contribution of former employees is much higher
(in absolute terms and as a percentage of monthly salary).34 This is strong evidence that the
decisions of whether and how much to invest may be driven by different factors, rather than
as a result from a single optimizing decision by employees.
One explanation is that a threshold level of desired investments (latent demand) must
be attained for participation to occur.35 When this threshold is higher, participation rates are
low, but contributions (if made) are high. What might account for such a threshold? Our
suspicion, reinforced by our discussions with management, is that our findings could be
explained by the substantial “cost” (in time and effort) for employees to evaluate the France
20

Télécom offer.

The offering documents sent to employees include a fair bit of legal

paperwork, and as Section 3 attests, analyzing the nuances of the four different plans can be
taxing, especially for investors unfamiliar with investing (and even for finance academics!).
As in models with search costs, self-selection becomes critical: Employees for whom this
“analysis” cost is higher are less likely to participate, but conditional on participating will
invest more.
Testing this explanation is difficult because it is not obvious why “analysis costs”
would vary across groups. Various groups could differ in their innate levels of diligence (for
example, male employees may have spent less time analyzing the offering in detail than
female employees), but we have we no way of measuring these differences. France Télécom
assured us that the marketing effort devoted to the offering was spread evenly across
employees, so there is no reason to think that some employees got better access to
information than others.
But France Télécom management also conceded to us that having former employees
and retirees invest in the offering was not a top priority, and the marketing effort toward them
was much lower than toward current employees. The offering was aggressively marketed or
“pushed” toward current employees, while it was merely made available to former employees
or retirees. Current employees could hear presentations on the offer and compare notes with
one another, while former employees had to make the decision on their own. We hypothesize
that this difference could explain the difference in participation and personal contribution. If
"search costs" were lower for current employees, we would expect the determinants of
participation and personal contribution to diverge less for current employees than former
employees or retirees.36 Comparing columns between the equivalent specifications in Panels
A and B in Table IV, we find that such is indeed the case, lending support to our threshold
explanation.
While we cannot be sure that our threshold explanation is correct, we can measure the
apparent size of the thresholds for various subgroups of employees, letting the data tell us the
level of latent demand below which certain potential participants have chosen to forego
participating. With non-zero thresholds of participation, the truncated regression model
21

presented for personal investment levels (Table IV, Panel B) is misspecified.

When

estimating a Tobit-type model using Heckman’s [1976] two-step estimator, we do not impose
equality of the coefficients from the first-step (participation Probit) and second-step
(contribution amount) regressions.

Combining the estimates from the first-step Probit

regressions and the second-step contribution amount regression, we can back out the implied
threshold levels for different groups of individuals.37 The procedure for estimating groupspecific threshold levels is detailed in Appendix B.
Panel A of Table V shows the average threshold level estimates for different subsets
of individuals. A value of FF 18,749 for the reference group of currently employed male
non-civil servants implies that, on average, individuals of this group do not participate if their
desired (latent) investment is smaller than this threshold. The incremental thresholds for
women, civil servants, former employees and retirees are to be added to this baseline
threshold. The estimated threshold of latent demand to induce participation for retirees is
43% higher than for current male workers, and 70% higher for former (non-retired) France
Télécom employees than for current male workers.
Panel B of Table V uses these thresholds to calculate how much monetary value in
bonuses, discounts and free shares an investor whose latent demand is just below the
threshold forgoes by opting not to participate.38 In essence, this calculation estimates how
much money investors at the threshold limits were willing to “leave on the table” by not
participating. Retirees and former employees have substantially higher demand thresholds,
but because they were not eligible to participate in the most financially-attractive
investments, they actually left less money on the table than current workers, about the
equivalent of one-month’s salary (for a mid-level manager.) Current workers threshold levels
were lower, but they passed up benefits equal to 1.7 month’s salary, because they could have
enjoyed more generous terms than former employees.
While we believe the threshold story is plausible, we are open to alternative
explanations. One possibility is that the differences in participation and investment amounts
could be attributed to certain groups of employees attempting to “game” the system by
requesting more shares than they actually wanted, in order to end up with a post-rationing
22

amount they desired. But as we note earlier, the rationing rules were not announced in
advance, so it may have been difficult to place orders strategically. Further, we were told that
employees were surprised that any rationing took place, suggesting that their requested
investments were their desired investments.

Nevertheless, suppose employees were

completely prescient, and could predict how many shares they would be allocated conditional
on their requests. It would then be appropriate to analyze the post-rationing allocations of
shares rather than the original orders. When we repeated the truncated regressions in Table
IV, Panel B using the ex post measure of wealth invested, the results were virtually identical
to those we report in the table. This suggests that while gaming may have been a problem, it
cannot explain the inconsistency between the determinants of participation and investment
amount.
C. Type of offer
How did participating employees allocate their funds among the four plans? Recall that
the main characteristics of the plans were as follows:
•
•
•
•

Disponix: No holding period, small discounts.
Simplix: 2-year holding period, moderate discounts.
Abondix: 5-year holding period, large discounts.
Multiplix: 5-year holding period, downside protection.
Table III, Panel C reports the actual frequencies with which the different assets are

chosen.

For current employees, the two long-horizon plans with large discounts were

favored: Abondix is the most preferred package, followed by Multiplix.39 We also analyze the
frequencies of particular asset combinations by different groups of individuals. For current
employees, pure Abondix is by far the most preferred choice, followed by the AbondixMultiplix combination. Employees heavily weighted their portfolios to long-horizon/high
discount offerings with all but 2.2% of eligible participating employees buying Abondix,
Multiplix or both. The average participant selects a plan with required holding period of 4.6
years, thus heavily tilting his portfolio to the long-horizon plans. In general, the average
employee portfolio is very much like the utility-maximizing portfolios we derive from our
model.
23

Our model not only suggests the overall composition of the “optimal portfolios,” but
also how portfolio characteristics should vary among participants. We stress two functional
characteristics of the portfolios: the average chosen holding period and the fraction of the
portfolio protected by puts (invested in Multiplix). This analysis is conducted only for
employees who chose to contribute and is limited to current employees (as former employees
and retirees did not have access to the longest horizon or downside protected plans.)
With respect to holding period, we have several testable hypotheses: Holding period
should increase with the firm-specificity of human capital, relative risk aversion and labor
income. We see the first two effects in the first column of Table VI. As the neoclassical
model predicts, the chosen holding period rises with tenure, our measure of firm-specific
human capital, and is higher for civil servants, who are likely to be more risk averse. Holding
period should decrease with initial financial wealth, which is confirmed by the negative
coefficient on the INSEE wealth measure. The finding that holding period decreases in labor
income is inconsistent with our predictions, and again most likely caused by insufficient
control for wealth. (Salary and wealth effects should go in opposite directions, and the more
precise salary variable is probably picking up wealth effects.) In addition, we find that
women choose longer holding periods than men.
The second column in Table VI analyzes the fraction of the portfolio invested in
Multiplix, the plan with downside protection. Our model predicts the desired downside
protection to be increasing in relative risk aversion, firm specificity of human capital, labor
income and weakly in idiosyncratic labor income risk. Consistent with the predictions, we
find that the downside-protected share is increasing in tenure and that civil servants, whom
we expect to be more risk averse, purchase more Multiplix. The tenure effect is barely
significant.

Higher labor income tends to increase the downside-protected share, again

conform to the model predictions. Given the limitations on the amount that employees could
invest into Multiplix, our model predicts a strong negative coefficient on wealth. This
prediction is confirmed by the negative coefficient on the INSEE wealth measure.
Overall, a few preliminary salient facts emerge from the analysis of portfolio
allocations. Investors seem undeterred by long holding periods. Over 90 percent of currently
24

employed participants choose some assets with the five-year holding periods, and over 90
percent of former employees choose some assets with a two-year holding period.40 The
portfolio compositions are roughly consistent with our predictions regarding wealth and firmspecific human capital, suggesting that the neoclassical model is not at odds with the data.
D. Deviations from “optimal” portfolios.
While our results are generally consistent with a neoclassical model, we also find that
employees sometimes deviated from optimal portfolio choice.

To understand these

deviations, we examine the choice of Abondix vs. Multiplix. Both plans had a holding period
of five years. Ignoring the constraint that no more than one quarter of annual gross salary can
be invested into Abondix and Multiplix combined, Multiplix dominates Abondix: Multiplix
offers more value per Franc invested and is downside protected.41 Hence no (weakly) riskaverse investor should choose Abondix over Multiplix as long as the salary-based constraint is
not binding.42

This strong prediction will hold for any concave, non-decreasing utility

function and is testable.
We examine those investors who selected a portfolio that includes some long-term
assets (Abondix and/or Multiplix43) and whom the salary constraints would have allowed to
substitute a share of Multiplix for Abondix. By making this substitution, the investor could
have increased the value of his portfolio at no additional cost while simultaneously making
her investment safer.44
The results from this exercise are striking: There are 74,023 participants for which the
relevant salary constraint is not binding, and of these 71,253, or 96%, purchase too many
units of Abondix relative to Multiplix.45 Even more striking, there are 47,136 investors in the
sample for whom the salary-based constraint is not binding and who invest in Abondix, but
do not invest in Multiplix at all. Conditional on their willingness to hold an asset with a five
year holding period, this choice is hard to reconcile with utility maximization.
These suboptimal decisions are economically significant: Ordering investors by the
amount of money left on the table, the mean inefficient investor could have increased the
value of his portfolio by FF 7,682 (37.2%) without changing the holding period of his
portfolio or bearing any conceivable costs.46 Since we can perform our test only on investors
25

who invest small amounts relative to their salary income, one can argue that the sub-optimal
behavior may be restricted to small and probably less sophisticated investors. It is also
possible that the violations of expected utility theory are restricted to the non-linear asset
Multiplix. The payoff and benefits of Multiplix may not have been well understood by many
France Télécom employees. However, a violation of investor rationality of this order of
magnitude casts considerable doubt on the notion that the portfolios are chosen optimally.
E. A measure of the value of liquidity for a subset of investors
The institutional structure of the France Télécom employee offering enables us to
estimate the value that employees put on the liquidity or their ability to sell their France
Télécom stock holdings at will. For the purpose of this analysis, it is convenient to focus on
former employees and retirees, who were restricted to the Simplix and Disponix plans.
Disponix could be sold immediately after the offering, and gave a small amount of free shares
and discounts. Simplix gave more free shares and discounts but had to be held for two years.
Hence retirees and former employees were given the choice of trading off more free shares
and discounts for less liquidity.
Of the 8,672 participating retirees and former employees, 82% chose a pure Simplix
portfolio offering high discounts but a two-year adding period.

Only 6% chose pure

Disponix, and 13% combined Simplix and Disponix. While investors who chose only one
asset can be seen as at a corner solution of their individual optimization problem, the
investors who chose interior combinations reveal their marginal trade-off between portfolio
value and liquidity. We calculate the change in portfolio value for the interior investors when
(i) the total investment into Disponix is replaced by Simplix and (ii) the Disponix holding is
reduced by one share, and the Simplix holding is increased by one share.47
The average interior investor could have increased the value of his portfolio by 9.9%
by replacing his entire holdings of Disponix through Simplix. Simultaneously, the required
holding period of his portfolio would have increased from 2.08 years to 3 years. At the
margin, the average interior investor would have increased the value of his portfolio by FF 45
when replacing one unit of Disponix by a unit of Simplix and FF 36.40 in cash. The marginal
trade-off between portfolio value and holding period can be identified by dividing the
26

marginal change in value through the marginal change in holding period, and averaging
across investors. This calculation yields a value of FF 9,460 or 12.2% of portfolio value,
indicating that the average interior investor trades off a 12.2% increase in portfolio value for
a one-year increase in holding period at his individual optimum. We cannot judge this
behavior as suboptimal, but it gives a sense of how strongly one subgroup of investors values
the ability to rebalance their portfolio at will.
F. Other behavioral explanations
Behavioral finance, grounded in the psychological aspects of decision making,
provides alternative explanations for some of the empirical results we report here. Based on
a naïve understanding of loss aversion, we expected Multiplix to prove to be even more
attractive than our model predicts, as it offered complete downside protection, as well as a
sizeable share of the upside on the France Télécom stock. However, as we note above, more
than half of participants invested nothing in Multiplix (Table III, Panel C) and the fraction
of contribution in protected shares was not substantially larger than we anticipated. Further,
on the margin, employees not at their salary limit constraints could have improved their
wealth (and utility) by substituting Multiplix for Abondix (see section 6 (d) above). Perhaps
employees not used to the hazards of stock market investing underestimated the volatility of
the France Télécom stock, especially over a five-year period. Or perhaps loss aversion
conflicted with a self-control rule against borrowing: the fictional bank loan embedded in
Multiplix may not have been recognized as fictional.
The small size of the human capital effects may be due to many factors,48 but could be
consistent with the mental accounting hypothesis (Thaler [1998]). If employees assigned
their France Télécom human capital to a different account than their France Télécom
financial capital, they will not have perceived the increased risk exposure due to the
correlation of the two. Given the mental accounting effects documented in the behavioral
literature when just money is at stake, the mental separation of human and financial capital is
plausible. Equally plausible, employees with longer tenure may feel optimistic about the
prospects of France Télécom, and be confident about their knowledge of the prospects of
France Télécom. When people are given more information on which to base a forecast or
27

assessment, accuracy of their forecasts tends to improve much more slowly than their
confidence in the forecasts.

Thus, additional information can lead to an illusion of

knowledge and foster overconfidence.49
Loyalty effects may have been at work in the offering. Employees in the high-salary
range may be better performers and therefore feel greater loyalty to France Télécom, and
express it through more participation and more personal contribution.
We find these post-hoc behavioral explanations of our findings unsatisfying, in part
reflecting of what Laibson and Zeckhauser [1998] label the “promiscuous prediction
problem”: behavioral theories may yield opposite predictions, and allow too many degrees of
freedom. However, as Laibson and Zeckhauser note, “the promiscuous prediction problem
also plagues mainstream economics.

Both behavioral models and standard economics

models are often so flexible that almost any outcome can be explained by them.”

VII. Conclusions
The partial privatization of France Télécom offers an interesting setting for analyzing
the investment decisions of individuals with human and financial capital at risk. We develop
a neoclassical model that attempts to capture the essential features of the decision facing
employees, and compare the predictions of our model to the observed participation of France
Télécom employees.
The data are consistent with many predictions from the simple neoclassical model. In
general terms, we expect that employees who are better able and willing to bear risk will
participate in the stock offers. We find evidence to this effect. Wealthier workers and those
who are better paid are more likely to buy shares in France Télécom, consistent with the
predictions of the model, and invest more in the firm. They also invest more in short-horizon
assets and less in Multiplix, given the plan limitations on their investments in long-horizon
assets.
Our most surprising finding is that the decisions whether to participate and how much
to invest are driven by different factors. It seems that a threshold level of desired investments
must be attained for participation to occur, perhaps because of the cost to employees of
28

analyzing the offering. We attempt to measure the size of these thresholds, and find that
employees may forgo benefits equal to one to two months of salary by failing to participate.
We interpret this finding as manifesting to the importance of marketing efforts in the
employee stock offering, but recognize that alternative explanations might be at work.
Our empirical analysis reveal a related puzzle: human capital considerations suggest
that former employees should have been the most eager participants, followed by currently
employed civil servants, and finally by non-civil servants. We find the opposite pattern.
Among current employees, we do find some evidence of human capital effects, but they are
small: one standard deviation of tenure above the mean is associated with 0.6% less
likelihood of participation, and with 11%-14% less personal contribution, conditional on
investing. Employees may have fallen prey to a “mental accounting” illusion, treating their
human capital separately from their financial capital, and neglecting the risk due to the
correlation between the two.
We also document a clear-cut and economically significant asset allocation anomaly
by France Télécom employees: many purchased insufficient (or zero) amounts of the most
attractive investment vehicle offered to them – a downside-protected stock-based asset.
Merely creating and offering a superior investment vehicle does not guarantee that investors
will buy it.
For a subset of participants, we can measure the apparent value that investors place on
an additional year of holding period. This crude measure gives us a window into how
individual investors value liquidity and the apparent value is substantial. We also find that
men and women invest differently with respect to their likelihood of participating, the levels
of their investments and their chosen portfolios.
While this empirical study uses imperfect data to test highly stylized models, we
believe that work of this sort can be very valuable in revealing how investors make decisions.
Our theories and understanding can be challenged and ultimately enhanced by detailed
examination of actual investment behavior.

29

Appendix A
Setup of a simple model of portfolio selection
Our stylized three-period model provides intuition and testable predictions of the
determinants of portfolio choice in a setting with risky labor income, incomplete markets and
a binding choice of holding period. Markets are incomplete along three dimensions: Firstly,
there is no borrowing at either the risky or riskless rate. This extends the liquidity constraints
that have gained prominence in the literature on precautionary savings (Deaton [1991],
Browning and Lusardi [1996]). Second, idiosyncratic labor income risk is not insurable
(Bodie, Merton and Samuelson [1992], Bertaut and Haliassos [1997], Viceira [1997]). Since
labor income is exogenous in our model, the associated risk is related to the concept of
unavoidable background risk (Gollier and Pratt [1996]). Finally, there are no markets in the
long-lived assets between the date of purchase and the maturity date.
There are two distinguishing characteristics of our model.

First are the state-

dependent period two budget constraints: An investor cannot sell any of the long-lived assets
purchased in period one to finance consumption or new investments in period two. Thus the
period two consumption and investment decision depends on three factors: The amount of
consumable financial wealth, realized period-two labor income, and the value of and
composition of the non-consumable portion of financial wealth. Second are the numerous
discounts, matching bonuses and free shares as well as the constraints on the amounts that
can be invested. It is not clear whether the general predictions from the portfolio selection
literature continue to hold with this unusual investment opportunity set, which we therefore
model explicitly.
Worker-investors choose their investment and consumption in three periods, subject
to shocks to both risky financial assets and risky labor income. The investment choice set–
modeled to closely reflect the choices facing the France Télécom workers–includes the assets
from the France Télécom offering and the standard risk-free asset and a risky asset unrelated
to France Télécom (e.g. an investment in equities unrelated to France Télécom).
In the first two periods, the investor decides about his current consumption and about
the composition of his financial portfolio. In period one, the investor has the choice between
30

five different assets. The first asset is the standard risk-free bond. The second asset is a
slightly discounted share in France Télécom. The share can be traded in period 2, and is
meant to represent a simplified version of the Disponix and Simplix products, which have
short holding periods in exchange for reduced purchase discounts.50

To capture the

discounts, the investors receive free shares as a function of the number of shares purchased
based on the actual terms of the Disponix offering.
Additionally, there are two illiquid, long-lived assets based on the France Télécom
stock. These assets cannot be sold in the intermediate period, such that any investment has to
be held until period three. The first illiquid asset, Abondix, is nothing more than the standard
France Télécom stock, sold at a 20% reduced price. Abondix also comes with a matching
bonus and delivers a number of free shares as a function of the number of units purchased.
The second long-lived asset, Multiplix, is downside protected: Investors have to pay the same
price as for Abondix and are guaranteed a return of 25% on their personal investment in
period three. On top of the guaranteed repayment, investors receive a matching bonus in
period one and ten times the positive difference between the period three share price and the
period one share price as final payoff. Multiplix thus delivers the upside on ten shares for
each share purchased, and the guaranteed personal investment is augmented by an additional
matching bonus.51
The model takes into account the rules applied to the granting of bonuses and free
shares in the offering, and incorporates the constraints put on the amounts that can be
invested into the long-lived assets. In particular, for each level of period one labor income,
not more than 25% of this amount can be invested in Multiplix and Abondix combined. The
bonuses as well as the implicit leverage in Multiplix count towards the constraint.52
Finally, the period one investment opportunity set contains a risky asset unrelated to
France Télécom. This captures the possibility to invest into the stock market or other risky
assets independently from the France Télécom offering. Realistically, one would have to take
into account that the French stock market, and probably most risky assets available to French
retail investors, are correlated with the return on the France Télécom stock. Instead we make

31

the simplifying assumption that the return on the unrelated risky asset is orthogonal to the
return on the France Télécom stock.
In period two, the investor has to hold onto any illiquid assets Abondix and Multiplix
bought in period one. He then faces the standard consumption-savings decision, and has to
allocate any additional savings between the two short-term risky and the riskless asset. The
only assets available for investment at in period 2 are risk-free bonds, standard France
Télécom shares and the independent risky asset. We assume that the investor receives no
utility from bequests and consumes all his wealth in period three. The uncertainty in our
model unfolds as follows. The one-period return on the France Télécom share is given by:
(A1)

RFT ,t = R f + premium + ε FT ,t for t = 1,2

where Rf is the gross risk-free rate, premium is the equity premium and εFT,t is a mean-zero
shock to the stock return between period t and period t+1. Similarly, the return on the
unrelated risky asset is given by:
(A2)

Rt = R f + premium + ε t for t = 1,2

The investor in our model receives labor income in each period. Period one labor
income L1 is known with certainty, but second and third period labor income is risky. It is
subject to two random shocks, one of which corresponds to the shock to the France Télécom
stock. This formalizes the notion that human capital is a risky asset, and related to the
performance of the employing firm. The second shock represents idiosyncratic labor income
risk, such as illness, layoffs, or unexpected income windfalls. Shocks to labor income are
persistent, such that a shock at t=2 affects income at t=3. Formally, period-two labor income
is given by:
(A3)

L2 = L1 (1 + ρ ⋅ ε FT ,1 ) ⋅ (1 + ε L ,1 )

where εFT,1 is the shock to the France Télécom stock return and εL,1 is a mean-zero
idiosyncratic labor income shock. The covariation between labor income and stock returns is
strictly increasing in the parameter ρ. Labor income in period 3 continues to be subject to
shocks to the France Télécom stock:
(A4)

L3 = L2 (1 + ρ ⋅ ε FT , 2 )
32

For simplicity, we set the idiosyncratic labor income shock in period three to zero. To prevent
our investor from simply hedging the positions in the illiquid assets at t=2, we assume that
short sales of both risky and riskless assets are prohibited.53 All three sources of risk –εFT,t ,

εt and εL,t – are mutually independent.
The preferences of our investor are described by a constant-relative-risk-aversion
utility function, a formulation that is common in the neoclassical portfolio selection literature,
and we assume the standard Von Neumann-Morgenstern time-separability conditions. Thus
the investor's objective function is to maximize utility of consumption over the three periods,
which is given by54
U (c1 , c2 , c3 ) = u( c1 ) + δu( c 2 ) + δ 2 u( c3 )
(A5)

and
u ( ct ) =

ct1−γ
1−γ

where δ represents the time discount factor, and γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
In order to solve the model, we assume that each of the three sources of risk –the
France Télécom shock, the shock to the unrelated asset and the labor income shock– can take
on only one of two values in each period. We represent the underlying uncertainty in the
form of a binomial tree and solve the model numerically by backward induction. The
standard calibration of the model uses the following parameter values: Initial wealth equals
FF 200,000 and initial labor income equals FF 180,000 p.a. The relative risk aversion (RRA)
parameter is set to 5 and varied between 2 and 20. This range is arbitrary, but relates to
previous empirical work.55 The individual time preference rate is equal to the risk-free
interest rate at 5%, while the equity premium equals 6%. The risk parameters in the baseline
calibration are a 30% annual volatility for the France Télécom stock return, a 25% volatility
for the unrelated risky asset and a 5% volatility for the independent labor income shock. The
outside risky asset has a more attractive Sharpe ratio than the France Télécom stock,
capturing the idea that holding (for example) an indexed fund offers in general a more
favorable risk-return tradeoff than holding a single stock. The parameter controlling the
covariation between stock returns and labor income, ρ, is set to 0.1
33

Appendix B
Estimating the threshold levels
This section describes the methodology for estimating the threshold levels below
which latent individual investments would not be observable. The double-hurdle
specification is closely related to the censored regression model first proposed by Tobin
[1958] and the sample-selection models described by Heckman [1976]. It follows the model
of Cragg [1971], in which the first hurdle is a probit model for participation, and the second
hurdle is a censored regression for the contribution level similar to Tobin's model.56
We illustrate the methodology for the simple case when there is only one threshold
applicable to all individuals. The underlying latent variable model is given by:
y i* = α + xi' β + ε i
(B1)

ε i ~ N (0, σ 2 )

y i = y i* iff y i* ≥ K
y i = 0 otherwise.

where y i* is the latent personal investment, which will be observed if and only if y i* is larger
than some threshold level K. The likelihood function of the standard Tobit model augmented
by the threshold effect K is given by:
L(α , β , K , σ ) =

∏ Pr( y

yi* ≥ K

(B2)

*
i

≥ K ) * f ( y i | y i* ≥ K ) * ∏ Pr( y i* < K )
yi* < K


 (α − K ) + xi' β 
 * ∏1 − Φ

*
σ
<
y
K



i
Here φ(⋅) and Φ(⋅) correspond to the standard normal pdf and cdf respectively. The
=

1  y i − α − xi' β
∏ φ  σ
yi* ≥ K σ


two parts in (B2) correspond to a classical regression model for the non-censored
observations and to a Probit-type probability term for the censored observations. The only
non-standard feature of this formulation is the appearance of the threshold level as part of the
constant term for the censored observations. Note that estimating the model in (B1) as a
standard Tobit model amounts to forcing the constants in the censored and the non-censored
part to be equal, whereas the correct specification (B2) allows the constant term in the Probit

34

part to be reduced by the threshold level.
Heckman [1976] estimates the standard Tobit model in two steps, using the well
known result that the expected value of a non-censored observation can be written as:

(B3)

 K − α − xi' β 

E ( y i | yi* ≥ K ) = α + xi' β + σλ 
σ



Here λ(⋅) stands for the inverse Mills ratio. An estimate of λ(⋅) can be obtained by
defining a dummy variable which takes the value one for participants and zero for nonparticipants, and running a Probit regression for the participation decision. This provides us
with consistent estimates of ( K − α − xi ' β ) / σ and hence consistent estimates of λ(⋅).
Substituting these into (B3), we can estimate the contribution regression by OLS. This in
turn gives us consistent estimates of α and σ. Finally, combining the consistent estimates of

α and σ from the contribution regression with the consistent estimate of ( K − α ) / σ from the
participation regression, we get a consistent estimate of the threshold level K.

35

References
Arrondel, L., and A. Masson, 1990, “Hypotheses de cycle de vie, diversification et
composition du patrimoine: France 1986,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 17,
1-45.
Barber, B., and T. Odean, 1998, "Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
stock investment,” unpublished manuscript, University of California, Davis.
Becker, G. S., 1964, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
Reference to Education, New York: Columbia University Press (for NBER).
Bertaut, C. C., 1998, "Stockholding behavior of U.S. households: Evidence from the 19831989 survey of consumer finances,” Review of Economics & Statistics 80(2), 263-75.
Bertaut, C. C., and M. Haliassos, 1995, "Why do so few hold stocks?,” Economic Journal
105(432), 1110-29.
Bertaut, C. C., and M. Haliassos, 1997, “Precautionary portfolio behavior from a life-cycle
perspective,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1511-1542.
Blinder, A. S, ed., 1990, "Paying for productivity: A look at the evidence,” Center for
Economic Progress and Employment series, Washington, D.C., Brookings Institution,
xii, 308.
Bodie, Z., R. C. Merton, and W. F. Samuelson, 1992, “Labor supply flexibility and portfolio
choice in a life cycle model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 427-449.
Brav, A., and C. Géczy, 1996, “An empirical resurrection of the simple consumption CAPM
with power utility,” unpublished manuscript, Fuqua School of Business.
Brennan, M. J., and W. N. Torous, 1999, “Individual decision-making and investor welfare,”
unpublished manuscript, UCLA.
Browning, M., and A. Lusardi, 1996, "Household saving: Micro facts and macro theories,"
Journal of Economic Literature.
Collat, D., and P. Tufano, 1994, "The privatization of Rhône-Poulenc,” Harvard Business
School Case 295-049.

Commission des Opérations de Bourse, 1998, “Les porteurs de valeurs mobilières en 1998.”

36

Cragg, J. G., 1971, "Some statistical models for limited dependent variables with application
to the demand for durable goods,” Econometrica 39, 829-844.
Deaton, A., 1991, "Saving and liquidity constraints,” Econometrica 59, 1221-48.
Friend, I., and M. Blume, 1975, “The asset structure of individual portfolios and some
implications for utility functions,” Journal of Finance 30, 585-603.
Gollier, C., and J. W. Pratt, 1996, “Risk vulnerability and the tempering effect of background
risk,” Econometrica 64, 1109-1123
Greene, W. H. 1993, Econometric Analysis, Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
Guiso, L., T. Jappelli, and D. Terlizzese, 1996, “Income risk, borrowing constraints, and
portfolio choice,” American Economic Review 86 (1), 158-172.
Hallock, Kevin F., 1998, “Layoffs, top executive pay, and firm performance,” American
Economic Review 88 (4), 711-723.
Hausman, J.A., and D. A. Wise, 1975, " Social experimentation, truncated distributions, and
efficient estimation,” Econometrica 45 (May), 919-38.
Heckman, J. J., 1976, "The common structure of statistical models of truncation, sample
selection and limited dependent variables and a simple estimator for such models,”
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5/4.
Jones, D. C., and T. Kato, 1995, "The productivity effects of employee stock-ownership plans
and bonuses: Evidence from Japanese panel data,” American Economic Review 85
(June), 391-414.
Jovanovic, B., 1984, "Matching, turnover, and unemployment,” Journal of Political
Economy 92 (February), 108-22,
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky, 1979, "Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk,”
Econometrica 47 (March), 263-91.
Laibson, D., and R. Zeckhauser, 1998, “Amos Tversky and the ascent of behavioral
economics,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 16 (April), 7-47.

Lee, L.-F., 1983, "Generalized econometric models with selectivity,” Econometrica 51, 507512.

37

Leland, H. E., 1980, “Who should buy portfolio insurance?,” Journal of Finance 35, 581594.
Maki, A., and S. Nishiyama, 1996, "An analysis of under-reporting for micro-data sets: The
misreporting or double-hurdle model,” Economics Letters 52, 211-220.
Mankiw, N. G., and S. P. Zeldes, 1991, “The consumption of stockholders and
nonstockholders,” Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97-112.
Merton, R. C., 1969, "Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: the continuous-time
case,” Review of Economics & Statistics 51 (Aug), 247-57.
Merton, R. C., 1971, "Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time
model,” Journal of Economic Theory 3 (Dec), 373-413.
Oskamp, S., 1965, "Overconfidence in case-study judgments,” Journal of Consulting
Psychology 29, 261-265.
Samuelson, P. A., 1969, "Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming,”
Review of Economics & Statistics 51 (Aug), 239-46.
Schelling, T. C., 1984, "Self-command in practice, in policy, and in a theory of rational
choice,” American Economic Review 74 (May), 1-11.
Scholes. M. S., and M. A. Wolfson, 1990, “Employee stock ownership and corporate
restructuring: Myths and realities,” Financial Management 19 (Spring), 19-28.
Shefrin, H. M., and M. Statman, 1993, ''Behavioral aspects of the design and marketing of
financial products,” Financial Management (Summer).
Shefrin, H. M., and M. Statman, 1994, "Behavioral capital asset pricing theory,” Journal of
Financial & Quantitative Analysis 29 (September), 323-49.
Shefrin, H. M., and M. Statman, 1984, "Explaining investor preference for cash dividends,”
Journal of Financial Economics 13 (June), 253-82.
Shefrin, H. M., and R. H. Thaler, 1988, "The behavioral life-cycle hypothesis,” Economic
Inquiry 26 (October), 609-43.

Shiller, R. J., 1997, ''Human behavior and the efficiency of the financial system,” Working
Paper, Yale University, 1997, prepared for Taylor, J.B and Woodford, M., (eds.),
''Handbook of Macroeconomics'”, forthcoming.
38

Sundén, A. E., and B. J. Surrette, 1998, "Gender differences and the allocation of retirement
assets in retirement savings plans," American Economic Review 88 (May), 207-211.
Szpiro, D., 1995, "La diffusion des produits financiers auprès des ménages en France, 1995,"
Economie et Statistique 281, 41-68.
Thaler, R. H., 1985, "Mental accounting and consumer choice,” Marketing Science 4
(Summer), 199-214.
Thaler, R. H., 1990, "Saving, fungibility, and mental accounts,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4 (Winter), 193-205.
Thaler, R. H., 1998, "Mental accounting matters,” forthcoming in Daniel Kahneman and
Amos Tversky (eds.), Choices, Values and Frames, Cambridge University Press.
Thaler, R. H., and H. M. Shefrin, 1981, "An economic theory of self-control", Journal of
Political Economy 89 (April), 392-406.
Tobin, J., 1958, "Estimation of relationships for limited dependent variables,” Econometrica
26, 24-36
Topel, R. H., 1991, "Specific capital, mobility, and wages: wages rise with job seniority,”
Journal of Political Economy 99 (February), 145-76.
Viceira, L. M., 1997, "Optimal portfolio choice for long-horizon investors with nontradable
labor income," unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 1999, "Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice
heterogeneity: Nonfinancial income and participation cost structures,” unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.
Williams, N., 1991, "Reexamining the wage, tenure and experience relationship,” Review of
Economics & Statistics 73 (August), 512.

39

Notes

1. See for instance Blinder [1990] and the articles therein, Jones and Kato [1995], and Scholes and Wolfson
[1990]. The case for employee ownership is advanced by the National Center for Employee Ownership
(http://www.nceo.org).
2. Brennan and Torous [1999] show that the welfare costs of under-diversification can be large.
3. See Commission des Opérations de Bourse [1998]. This figure does not include households holding stock
indirectly through mutual funds.
4. 78% of France Télécom employees were civil servants.
5. See Arrondel and Masson [1990] and Szpiro [1995].
6. We have been told that many employees did not understand why the stock price simulations in the offering
documents included cases in which the stock price fell. After the offering, whenever the stock price went down,
France Télécom received telephone calls from some employees asking for an explanation.
7. Under the deal, the State would keep a stake of at least 51% in France Télécom; current employees would
keep their civil servant status even after privatization, while new employees would acquire private sector status;
and France Télécom would make a one-time payment to the State to fund its employees' pensions.
8. The French State sold 23% of its stake, of which one-tenth (or 2.3% of France Télécom’s shares) were
earmarked for the employee offering. The offering took place on September 23, 1997. The offer price for
individual investors was set at FF 182, while the price for institutional investors was FF 187. The individual
investor tranche was oversubscribed by 2.91 times, while the institutional investor tranche was oversubscribed
20 times. The first day closing price was FF 206.50, for a one-day return of 13.5% from the individual investor
offer price. The exchange rate around this time was approximately 6 FF/1$US.
9. Might investing in the firm’s stock provide employees with a hedge against firm-specific human capital risk?
Such would be the case if, for example, the stock went up at layoff announcements. In fact, Hallock [1998]
documents that (contrary to conventional wisdom) layoff announcements are associated with negative stock
price reactions.
10. Quote taken from the informational brochures given to employees during the privatization.
11. See Collat and Tufano [1994].
12. Multiplix cannot really be compared with the other plans on this dimension.
13. What makes this loan peculiar is that the repayment is effected through the withholding of the dividends and
tax credits (over the five-year life of the plan) and a variable repayment schedule at maturity that is a function of
the ultimate France Télécom stock price. In effect this loan repayment schedule is equal to the positive
difference between the value of ten shares less the payoff to the employee described above. The loan does not
entail downside-risk since the employee is never required to repay more than the value of her shares after five
years.
14. The value of the Multiplix package is calculated using the Black-Scholes formula and assumes that the
dividend plus the tax credit yield on France Télécom is 3.6%.
15. An exception is Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese [1996].
16. See Laibson and Zeckhauser [1998] for a review of the impact of prospect theory on behavioral economics.
17. Shiller [1997] discusses the difficulties in testing the behavioral approaches.
18. In addition, there are constraints on the amounts investors can put into the long-lived assets, and the bonuses
and free shares cause the expected return on any asset to be a decreasing function of the invested amounts.
19. The standard calibration of the three period model uses the following parameter values: Initial wealth equals
FF 200,000 and initial labor income equals FF 180,000 p.a. The relative risk aversion (RRA) parameter is set to
5 and is varied between 2 and 20. This range relates to extant empirical work. Friend and Blume [1975] find an
aggregate relative risk aversion coefficient of 2. More recent findings attempt to calculate RRA coefficients for
subsets of investors. Brav and Géczy [1996] find that RRA parameters for US households in 1980-1991 range

40

from 3 to upwards of 20. Mankiw and Zeldes [1991] find RRA parameters of 36 to 100. The individual time
preference rate is equal to the risk-free interest rate at 5 percent and the equity premium is set to 6%. The risk
parameters in the baseline calibration are a 30 percent annual volatility for the France Télécom stock return, a
25 percent volatility for the orthogonal ‘market’ asset and a 5 percent volatility for the independent labor income
shock. ρ, the parameter controlling the covariation between stock returns and labor income, is set to 0.1.
20. This less than proportional increase corresponds to the hedging motive in Viceira’s [1997] model.
Increasing labor income while holding financial wealth constant implies that the investor has more total wealth,
but also more exposure to France Télécom. While the wealth gain induces the employee to invest more, the
positive correlation between labor income and stock returns dampens the desired investment. The net effect is
weak and not monotone, and depends on the ratio of labor income to financial wealth. The non-monotonicity is
due to the constraint that not more than ¼ of annual salary can be invested into the two long-lived assets
combined. Whenever we increase annual salary for constant initial wealth, this constraint is gradually relaxed,
essentially enlarging the investment opportunity set available to the investor.
21. The effects of risk aversion, human capital, firm-specificity of human capital and idiosyncratic labor income
risk are not always monotone. An investor with low risk aversion or low exposure to France Télécom may buy
Multiplix purely to capture the high returns, an investor with medium risk aversion or medium exposure may not
buy Multiplix due to the constraint on the combined investment into the long-lived assets, and an investor with
high risk aversion or high exposure may again buy Multiplix to take advantage of the downside protection. We
find these non-monotonicities to be a robust phenomenon in our calibrations, but they are not large enough to
reverse the broad patterns described in the text.
22. France Télécom would not reveal individual employee’s salary nor divulge the entire mapping between
salary grades and salary ranges. They did provide detailed information about this mapping for broad subsets of
salary grades (11 to 23, 31 to 33 and 41 to 46), broken down by gender. Based on these six data points, we fit a
piecewise linear function to obtain estimates of the intermediate salary levels. Since there is no information
available on salary levels at France Télécom subsidiaries, we retain the dummy variables for salary grades OE,
AM, IN and CA.
23. We do not have current salary levels for former, non-retired employees who left between 1992 and 1997 and
use their last salary at France Télécom instead. This stale salary data is likely to underestimate the true current
salary level if employees leave for better paying jobs.
24. There are two rationales for why higher tenure should be associated with higher salaries and higher firmspecific human capital. Following Becker [1964], an employee’s firm-specific skills build up over time. They
increase the employee’s marginal productivity on the current job, but are useless when the current employment
relationship is terminated. Another line of reasoning argues that the quality of the match reveals itself gradually
over time (see Jovanovic [1984]). Good matches are more likely to survive than bad matches and result in a
higher marginal product and wage payment to the worker. See Topel [1991] and Williams [1991] for empirical
evidence.
25. See the discussion in Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson [1992].
26. To improve the fit of the second order polynomial, we subtract the mean from age and age-squared when
using it as an explanatory variable.
27. The truncated regression specification uses a MLE framework, correcting for the bias that would occur if
one merely ignored the non-participation data (See Hausman and Wise [1975] or Greene [1993]).
28. Individuals with missing observations on some of the explanatory variables have been eliminated in the
regressions in Table IV. This reduces the sample size from 205,076 in Table III to 167,064 in Table IV, Panel
A, and to 111,912 in Panel B.
29. The negative coefficient on the linear term in the INSEE wealth measure is dominated by the positive second
order term. This is true for the top 99% of the wealth distribution in both truncated regression specifications in
Table IV, Panel B.

41

30. While the model predicts a less than proportional increase of personal contribution as a function of labor
income, this prediction is derived holding wealth constant. Clearly the INSEE measure is an imperfect proxy for
wealth, and the labor income coefficients are likely to pick up much of the residual variance in wealth.
31. For the first specification in Table IV, Panel A, the positive first order term in age dominates until age 55,
and for the second specification in Table IV, Panel A the positive first order term dominates until age 77.
32. The hedging demand is negative due to the positive correlation between human capital and stock returns.
For a given level of wealth and firm-specificity of human capital, diminishing human capital makes the negative
hedging demand smaller in absolute value.
33. Sundén and Surrette [1998] document that women invest their retirement savings more conservatively than
do men, even after controlling for marital status, age, and risk return/preferences.
34. These findings hold in a multivariate setting. Based on the Probit regression results, former employees were
61 percentage points less likely to participate than current workers. The truncated regression estimates show
that former workers invested 21% more than current employees, other things equal.
35. The possibility of threshold levels and fixed (information) costs of stock market participation has been
discussed by Bertaut and Halliassos [1995], Bertaut [1998], and Vissing-Jorgensen [1999].
36. Rather than facing different costs, different potential participants could perceive different levels of benefits,
either on the basis of systematically different levels of risk aversion or due to different expectations of the future
success of a privatized firm.
37. This procedure makes two simplifying assumptions: First, we assume that the threshold levels are not
functions of the other independent variables, and are the same for all individuals in a dummy-indexed subset of
individuals. Second, the threshold levels are assumed to be additive across groups. For example, when the
baseline threshold is estimated for male currently employed non-civil servants, then the threshold estimate for
female currently employed civil servants is the sum of the baseline threshold and the incremental thresholds
estimated for women and for civil servants.
38. The calculations make the illustrative assumption that the investor would have chosen a value-maximizing
portfolio. Given the structure of the assets offered, this allows us to calculate the benefits the government had to
offer to induce individuals to participate. For current employees, the salary-based constraint on the investment
into the two long-lived assets has to be taken into account when calculating value-maximizing portfolios. The
free benefits for retirees and former employees are calculated from the two short-lived assets only, and no
salary-based constraints apply. The fact that the long-lived assets were not available to former and retired
employees explains why their high threshold levels translate into comparatively low levels of lost free benefits.
39. The numbers in Table III, Panel C do not add to one because portfolios may contain multiple assets.
40. The assets with five-year holding periods were not available to former employees.
41. This is true unless we assume an implausibly low value for the volatility of the France Télécom stock.
42. The situation is in fact slightly more complicated. Since the 50% matching bonus on Multiplix is capped at
FF 1,000, while the 100% Abondix bonus runs up to FF 3,000, there exists a small intermediate range in which it
is marginally beneficial to add Abondix rather than Multiplix to the portfolio. The subsequent analysis takes this
complication into account and identifies only those investors who could have increased the value of their
portfolio by substituting Multiplix for Abondix.
43. Whether the individual portfolio also includes Simplix or Disponix is irrelevant for this analysis.
44 The individual limits on the total investment into Abondix and Multiplix can be calculated from our estimates
of the salary levels, as described earlier in the paper (see note 22).
45. In order to test whether this strong violation of investor rationality is due to our misestimation of salary
levels, we repeat the analysis requiring that an investor is further away form the salary-based constraint than
necessary to purchase one unit of Multiplix. Since for 75% of the inefficient investors the estimated slack under
the constraint is more than FF 10,079, the results are essentially the same.
46. The median inefficient investor could have increased the value of his portfolio by FF 8,573 (34%), and the

42

25% and 75% quartile improvements are FF 3,378 (9%) and FF 11,029 (67%) respectively. For 10% of the
inefficient investors, the costless value increase would have been larger than FF 12,834 (77%), with a maximum
of FF 30,055 (121%).
47. Since a unit of Disponix costs FF 182 and a unit of Simplix only FF 145.60, the difference of FF 36.40 is
added to the new portfolio as cash holding.
48. If tenure is an imperfect measurement of the firm-specificity of human capital, the coefficient on tenure in
our regressions will be attenuated.
49. In a widely cited study, Oskamp [1965] documents that pyschologists’ confidence in their clinical decisions
increased with more information, but accuracy did not. Long tenure is likely to be correlated with a positive
opinion about the prospects of France Télécom, which is then reinforced through the illusion of knowledge.
50. In reality, Disponix and Simplix have different number of free shares, purchase discounts, and holding period
tradeoffs, that we do not adequately capture in our simple model. We make this simplification in order to
concentrate on the longer-lived assets and to make the model more tractable.
51. For simplicity, we ignore tax considerations and subsidized financing.
52. The rules under which the discounts, bonuses and free shares are granted as well as the relevant constraints
are described in detail in the body of the paper.
53. Were employees able to sell stock short, they would have immediately purchased infinite amounts of the
discounted asset, shorted them and earned arbitrage profits by “monetizing” the discount.
54. Because we are trying to model the tradeoff between liquidity and return, we cannot assume that the investor
is maximizing over final wealth, since in that case the portfolio weight on the liquid, low return asset would be
zero.
55. See note 19 in the body of the text for a discussion of the relevant literature.
56. For an in-depth treatment of limited dependent variable models with selectivity, see Lee [1983]. A recent
application of the techniques employed in this section can be found in Maki and Nishiyama [1996].

43

Table I
Description of the France Télécom Privatization Offerings to Employees
This table summarizes the characteristics of the four share programs offered to France
Télécom employees during its privatization.a
Program

Discount

Matching Bonus

Free Shares b

Abondix

20% off of
offer price

8100% for first FF 3000
850% for next FF 6000
825% for next FF 66000

8One for each

Multiplix h

Simplix

Disponix

20% off of
offer price

20% off of
offer price

none

850% for first FF 2000
8Plus 9 x ( personal
contribution and bonus) as a
guaranteed bank loan.
8The investor forgoes
dividends and tax credit
None

share purchased up
to FF 3000
8One for each
four shares
purchased for the
next FF 3860
None

Tax
Treatment
Tax free c

Required Holding
Period
5 years

Guarantees

Limits

8In cash
8In three payments over two

None

PEG limits g

8In cash
8In three payments over two

825 % return over
five years on
personal contribution
8guaranteed
repayment of the
bank loan

8PEG limits g
8Personal

years d
8In 36 monthly payments e
8Through transfer from
company pension plan f
Tax free c

5 years

years d
8In 36 monthly payments e
57

8One for each

Taxable i

2 years/
3 years for free shares

bought share up to
FF 3000
8One for each
four shares
purchased for the
next FF 3860
None

Payment Options

8One for each

8In cash
8In three payments over two

None

5 times the
annual Social
Security limit
(FF 823,200 in
1997)

None

5 times the
annual Social
Security limit)

years

8In 36 monthly payments e

Taxable i

none/
1 year for free shares

three shares bought
up to FF 6860

44

In cash only

contribution less
than FF 9000

Notes:
a. Eligibility: Eligible for all programs are (i) the personnel of France Télécom or of French subsidiaries of which France Télécom owns more than 50% of
capital. To be eligible for access to the group savings plan PEG (Multiplix+Abondix) requires furthermore at least three-month seniority at the time of
subscription. Only current employees can purchase Multiplix and Abondix. Employees with bad credit history are not eligible for participation in Multiplix.
b. The free shares have a global limit of FF 6,860 for all share programs combined. Free share payments will be made to Disponix first, then Simplix, and last,
Abondix. The maximum request for shares cannot exceed 5 times the Social Security limit, or FF 823,200 for 1997.
c. Since the shares are held by the group savings plan (PEG), the bonus, capital gains and paid dividends are tax-free. Social security contributions (CSG/CRDS)
are applicable.
d. The three payments of 30% at delivery, 30% after one year and 40% after two years are interest free.
e. The 36 monthly payments are interest free.
f. Payments made through transfers from the pension plan carry no bonus.
g. The total annual investment in the group savings plan (PEG) cannot be larger than one quarter of the annual salary of the employee. Furthermore, the total
bonus paid into PEG cannot exceed FF 22,500, whereby the Abondix bonus is allocated before the Multiplix bonus.
h. In order to participate in Multiplix, the employee must have bought at least one share in one of the other programs.
i. Under the French tax regime, the first FF 8,000 of dividends for individuals, and the first FF 16,000 for couples are tax free. Above this, dividends are taxed at
regular income rates, which would range from 28% to 37%for the bulk of France Télécom employees. Capital gains are taxed at a 20.9% rate.

45

Table II
Descriptive Statistics of Characteristics of Individuals Eligible
to Participate in France Télécom Employee Share Offerings
The table below shows information about the 205,076 employees eligible to participate in the France Télécom
employee offering scheme in 1997. Panel A reports age and job tenure (date of employment through time of offer.)
Panel B shows the breakdown by type of participant, job category, and gender. Panel C presents the sample by
salary grade. Salary grade code 11 is the lowest and 46 is the highest salary level. Salary grades 11 to 23 indicate
ordinary employees and technicians. In this group the average monthly salary in 1997 was FF 12,562 for men and
FF 11,928 for women. 31 to 33 are middle managers, with an average salary of FF 17,104 for men and FF 16,059
for women. Finally, 41 to 47 are managers, with an average monthly salary of FF 25,445 for men and FF 22,548 for
women. CD stands for cadre dirigeant (executive) while OE, AM and CA refer to employees at subsidiaries and
stand for clerical/technical employee, foremen and manager respectively. IN stands for indeterminate and refers to
employees at both France Télécom and subsidiaries.

Panel A
Age
(years)
44. 5
10.4
200,216

Mean
Standard Deviation
Number of observations

Job tenure
(years)
19.9
10.5
200,606

Panel B
Type of
employee
Current
employee
Former
employee, not
retired
Retiree
Total

Number
174,091
8,628

22,357
205,076

Job category

Number

Sex

Number

Civil servant

14,3781

Male

124,444

Non civil servant

38,010

Female

80,146

Total

181,791

Total

204,590

Panel C
Salary Level
11
12
13
21
22
23
31
32
33
41

Number
1,102
3,066
17,313
41,514
52,000
24,212
4,128
6,559
12,167
4,651

Salary Level
42
43
44
45
46
CD
OE
AM
CA
IN
Total

46

Number
6,981
3,200
1,378
650
161
130
9,207
2,664
7,189
2,650
200,925

Table III
Offering Participation Statistics
Panel A shows participation ratios and total number of eligible employees by class of employee: current, former,
retired, civil servant and non-civil servant. Panel B shows average personal contributions in French Francs of each
employee class, and the personal contribution as a fraction of monthly salary. This table considers only employees
who chose to participate in the offering, thus represents personal contributions conditional on some contribution.
The salary levels are estimated as described in the text. The ratios for retirees and not-retired former employees are
calculated on the basis of their last salary at France Télécom. Panel C shows participation percentages for each type
of the four assets broken down by employee type. The Transfer class corresponds to the purchase of Abondix using
the employee’s existing pension plan assets. Retirees and former employees were not allowed to purchase Abondix
or Multiplix. These percentages need not add up to one as employees could participate in multiple share schemes.

Panel A

Participation
ratio
Eligible number
of individuals

All
potential
investors
62.8%

Current
employees

Currently
employed noncivil servants
73.5%

Retirees

68.0%

Currently
employed civil
servants
66.5%

37.8%

Former
employees
(not retired)
21.6%

205,076

174,091

135,891

38,200

22,357

8,628

Panel B

Average personal
contribution
Average personal
contribution /
monthly salary

All
potential
investors
26,554

Current
employees

Currently
employed noncivil servants
40,404

Retirees

26,337

Currently
employed civil
servants
22,597

25,116

Former
employees
(not retired)
44,253

145%

144%

139%

182%

150%

242%

Current ordinary
employees and
technicians (Grades 1123)

Current middle managers (Grades
31-33)

Current managers
(Grades 41-47)

118%

157%

265%

Average personal
contribution /
monthly salary

Panel C

Abondix
Transfer
(Abondix)
Multiplix
Disponix
Simplix

All potential
investors

Current
employees

Currently
employed noncivil servants
93.6%
9.6%

Retirees

97.2%
10.9%

Currently
employed civil
servants
98.2%
11.2%

n/a
n/a

Former
employees (not
retired)
n/a
n/a

90.4%
10.8%
40.9%
11.5%
21.8%

44.4%
11.0%
16.4%

45.6%
10.9%
15.3%

40.1%
11.1%
20.5%

n/a
16.7%
92.8%

n/a
22.5%
94.5%

47

Table IV
Analysis of participation in France Télécom
employee share offering program
Panel A shows the Probit analysis, while Panel B shows the truncated regression results. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is a dummy variable that equals one if the employee requested any shares under any of the four programs, and
in Panel B the dependent variable is total employee contribution. The independent variables are tenure, age, age
squared, claimant category, salary grade, estimated salary level and job category (not reported). The claimant category
dummies are to be interpreted relative to current employees and the salary grade dummies relative to salary level 11, the
lowest. Salary levels can only be estimated for salary grades 11 to 46, and salary grade dummies are included for
employees at France Telecom subsidiaries. The estimated salary levels and the INSEE wealth measure have been
divided by 10,000.
PANEL A
Probit Regression
Probit Regression
Coefficient
t-stat
Coefficient
t-stat
-0.9184
-14.68
-1.9554
-38.69
Constant
Tenure
0.0043
5.50
0.0110
14.84
current civil servants
-0.0026
-2.14
-0.0002
-0.21
current non-civil servants
0.0163
9.34
0.0227
13.06
former
employees
-0.0104
-14.22
-0.0164
-23.47
Age
-0.0001
-2.27
-0.0000
-0.81
Age squared
-0.2201
-10.75
-0.1482
-7.53
Civil servant dummy
0.1484
20.36
0.2551
35.35
Female dummy
-0.8422
-14.03
-0.8636
-14.40
Retiree dummy
-1.7318
-47.79
-1.7955
-49.43
Former employee dummy
0.0317
6.69
0.0353
7.47
INSEE wealth measure
-0.0007
-6.08
-0.0008
-6.92
INSEE wealth measure squared
0.1126
92.28
Salary levels (estimated)
Salary grades (FT)
11 (lowest)
12
0.6182
11.32
13
0.6285
12.59
21
0.9463
19.33
22
1.1008
22.34
23
1.4327
28.63
31
1.6064
29.72
32
1.7504
33.29
33
1.6859
33.10
41
2.1134
37.79
42
1.8977
36.66
43
2.0452
35.71
44
2.4434
32.03
45
2.1619
25.01
46 (highest)
2.7471
13.82
Clerical/Technical
0.7598
15.40
1.6469
51.93
…at subsidiaries*
Foreman
1.3774
24.70
2.2997
54.54
Manager
1.7225
33.35
2.6663
72.53
Indeterminate
2.0927
27.30
2.9338
45.13
N
167,064
167,064
* The lettered salary grade codes are for employees at majority owned subsidiaries of France Télécom. Indeterminate
refers to employees at both France Telecom and subsidiaries.

48

PANEL B
Constant
Tenure
current civil servants
current non-civil servants
former employees
Age
Age squared
Civil servant dummy
Female dummy
Retiree dummy
Former employee dummy
INSEE wealth measure
INSEE wealth measure squared
Salary levels (estimates)
Salary grades (FT)
11 (lowest)
12
13

Truncated regression Truncated regression
Coefficient
t-stat Coefficient
t-stat
22324
4.57
-34240
-11.83
-267
-460
-411
198
-9
-1586
-5490
5970

-5.75
-6.93
-2.84
4.37
-3.51
-1.49
-13.02
1.14

-435
-402
-439
372
-8
-1066
-976
2144

-9.63
-6.06
-3.04
8.43
-3.18
-1.01
-2.28
0.41

7722
-1172
61

2.31
-4.25
8.69

9139
-1326
68
3993

2.73
-4.79
9.57
72.16

1662
2262

0.35
0.52

21
5152
1.20
22
9009
2.10
23
10996
2.54
31
11808
2.66
32
14681
3.35
33
21473
4.95
41
25980
5.91
42
44893
10.36
43
64107
14.47
44
90171
19.37
45
119537
23.09
46 (highest)
165104
22.97
Clerical/Technical
7985
1.83
64196
36.55
…at subsidiaries*
Foreman
16446
3.62
72963
33.19
Manager
61855
14.20
117945
64.84
Indeterminate
28679
6.00
85252
33.73
N
111,912
111,912
* The lettered salary grade codes are for employees at majority owned subsidiaries
of France Télécom. Indeterminate refers to employees at both France Télécom and
subsidiaries.

49

Table V
Threshold Levels of Investment and Foregone Benefits
Panel A shows the threshold level estimates for different subsets of individuals. A value of FF 18,749
for the reference group of currently employed male non-civil servants implies that individuals of this
group have not participated if their desired (latent) investment is smaller than this threshold. The
incremental thresholds for women, civil servants, former employees and retirees are to be added to this
baseline threshold. Appendix B describes the methodology used to calculate these thresholds. Panel B
uses the thresholds to calculate the monetary value (in bonuses, discounts and free shares) an investor
whose latent demand is just below the threshold has foregone. For current employees, the salary-based
constraint on the investment into the two long-lived assets has to be taken into account. The threshold
levels are calculated for three different gross salary levels, corresponding to the averages for ordinary
employees/technicians, middle managers and managers. The free benefits for retirees and former
employees are calculated from the two short-lived assets only, and no salary-based constraints apply.
Panel A: Thresholds below which the latent demand would not be observed
Employee characteristic
Threshold
Reference group:
18,749 FF
Currently employed male non-civil servant
Incremental effects:
- 6,117 FF
Female
- 549 FF
Civil servant
+ 8,110 FF
Retiree
+ 13,060 FF
Former employee

Panel B: The amount of free benefits corresponding to the thresholds
Employee characteristic
Total threshold
Corresponding free benefits foregone by
representative employees (annual salary)
Average
Average
Average
Ordinary
Middle
Manager
Employee
Manager
(288,000 FF)
and
(198,000 FF)
Technician
(147,000 FF)
18,749 FF
26,213 FF
29,401 FF
34,921 FF
Currently employed male
non-civil servant
Currently employed
female non-civil servant

12,632 FF

24,551 FF

27,657 FF

32,055 FF

Currently employed male
civil servant

18,201 FF

26,215 FF

29,403 FF

34,923 FF

Retiree and male non-civil
servant
Former employee and male
non-civil servant

26,860 FF

15,182 FF

31,809 FF

16,421 FF

50

Table VI
Holding Period and Downside Protection Measures as a Function of Employee
Characteristics
Two-sided censored Tobit regressions for holding period and downside protection as a function of
employee characteristics. The dependent variable in the first column is the average contributionweighted ex ante holding period, in years. The dependent variable in the second column is the fraction of
the employee’s personal contribution invested in Multiplix (protected by puts). This analysis is
conducted only for employees who chose to contribute and is limited to current employees (former
employees and retirees were not eligible for long-term plans, including Multiplix). The independent
variables are tenure, age, age squared, claimant category, the INSEE wealth measure, salary grade, and
job category (not reported). The claimant category dummies are to be interpreted relative to current
employees and the salary grade dummies relative to salary level 11, the lowest. The INSEE wealth
measure has been divided by 10,000.
Holding Period
Coefficient
t-stat
6.4627
33.88

Constant
Tenure
current civil servants
current non-civil
servants
Age
Age squared
Civil servant dummy
Female dummy
INSEE wealth measure
Salary grades (FT)

…at subsidiaries*

11 (lowest)
12
13
21
22
23
31
32
33
41
42
43
44
45
46 (highest)
Clerical/Technical
Foreman
Manager
Indeterminate
N

Downside Protection
Coefficient
t-stat
-0.1075
-4.90

0.0024
0.0200

1.26
7.47

0.0004
0.0010

1.79
3.33

0.0037
-0.0001
0.1483
0.3688
-0.0156

1.93
-0.71
3.48
20.95
-5.75

-0.0019
-0.0002
0.0239
-0.0230
-0.0012

-9.05
-14.96
5.01
-12.25
-4.05

0.5870
0.3042
0.2137
-0.1678
-0.3072
-0.3792
-0.5830
-0.8007
-0.9521
-1.1036
-1.3364
-1.5382
-1.8023
-2.1007
0.3663
0.0667
-0.7257
-1.1357
108298

2.80
1.58
1.13
-0.89
-1.61
-1.95
-3.04
-4.20
-4.96
-5.81
-6.94
-7.73
-8.37
-7.38
1.90
0.33
-3.80
-5.48

0.0244
0.0151
0.0401
0.0773
0.1023
0.1078
0.1268
0.1248
0.1355
0.1350
0.1425
0.1546
0.1485
0.1167
0.0695
0.1195
0.1281
0.0543
108298

1.03
0.68
1.84
3.55
4.68
4.84
5.75
5.69
6.13
6.17
6.42
6.72
5.91
3.40
3.14
5.26
5.82
2.22

* The lettered salary grade codes are for employees at majority owned subsidiaries of France Télécom.
Indeterminate refers to employees at both France Télécom and subsidiaries.

51

Figure I
Payoff to Abondix and Multiplix (FF 9,000 Personal Contribution)
250,000
Abondix
Multiplix

Portfolio Value

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 420 440 460 480 500
Value of FT in Five Years

Payoff of Multiplix vs. Abondix for the maximum allowed Multiplix investment amount
Final portfolio value after five years of an initial FF 9,000 investment in either Abondix or
Multiplix, including all bonuses and free shares, assuming that the dividend plus tax credit yield
on France Télécom is 3.6%. The participation rate is given as a fraction of eligible participants
of that job type (retirees, former employees, etc.) Higher salary grades correspond to higher
salary levels.

52

