NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES DISTANCE STILL MATTER? THE INFORMATION
REVOLUTION IN SMALL BUSINESS LENDING

Mitchell A. Petersen
Raghuram G. Rajan

Working Paper 7685
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7685
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000

Petersen thanks the Banking Research Center at Northwestern University’s Kellogg School while Rajan
thanks the Center for Research in Security Prices and the Center for the Study of the State and the Economy
at the University of Chicago, as well as the National Science Foundation for support. The research assistance
of Spencer Chen is greatly appreciated. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2000 by Mitchell A. Petersen and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Does Distance Still Matter? The Information Revolution in Small Business Lending
Mitchell A. Petersen and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 7685
May 2000
JEL No. G20, G21, E50, E58
ABSTRACT

The distance between small firms and their lenders in the United States is increasing. Not
only are firms choosing more distant lenders, they are also communicating with them in more
impersonal ways. After documenting these systematic changes, we demonstrate that they do not stem
from small firms locating differently, from simple consolidation in the banking industry, or from
biases in the sample. Instead, they seem correlated with improvements in bank productivity. We
conjecture that greater, and more timely, availability of borrower credit records, as well as the greater
ease of processing these may explain the increased lending at a distance. Consistent with such an
explanation, distant firms no longer have to be observably the highest quality credits, suggesting that
a wider cross-section of firms can now obtain funding from a particular lender. These findings, we
believe, are direct evidence that there has been substantial development of the financial sector in the
United States, even in areas such as small business lending that have not been directly influenced
by the growth in public markets. From a policy perspective, that small firms now obtain wider access
to financing suggests the consolidation of banking services may not raise as strong anti-trust
concerns as in the past.

Mitchell A. Petersen
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, Illinois 60208-0814

Raghuram G. Rajan
The University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
1101 E 58th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu

Small business lending has historically been very costly, because of the paucity of information
about small firms and the high costs of the personnel required to obtain even that information. There
has, however, been a strong trend in small business lending; small businesses have been growing
steadily more distant from their lenders. This demonstrates itself in two ways.
First, borrowers are becoming physically more distant from lenders. The distance between
small firms and their lenders has grown from an average of 51 miles for lending relationships that
began in the seventies to 161 miles for relationships that began in the nineties. A similar pattern can
be seen in the medians and seventy-fifth percentiles and across different kinds of lenders (see Table
I). While banks are indeed closer to their clients than other lenders – reflecting the greater
transactions and information intensive nature of bank lending – even banks have been moving away;
from an average of 16 miles for lending relationships that began in the seventies to 68 miles for
relationships that began in the nineties.
A second trend is that the method of transacting business has moved increasingly from
personal contact to using the phone or the mail. This trend is partly a result of the first one, but even
correcting for physical distance, there seems to be a change in the manner of doing business.
What accounts for this trend? We show that changes in the location of small businesses,
consolidation in the banking industry, and sample selection biases, are unlikely explanations. One
possible explanation of the trend, however, is that a variety of infomediaries such as credit bureaus
now exist. They collect information on payment history and defaults that hitherto used to be available
to a lender only after a long relationship. Advances in storage technology and computing allow these
data to be easily retrieved, processed, and communicated quickly. As a result, even distant lenders
have timely information that hitherto used to be soft and unavailable at arm’s length. Not only does
1

this reduce information asymmetries between lender and borrower, but also timely information
enables lenders to react quickly to unanticipated contingencies, minimizing the loss from borrower
malfeasance or incompetence. Consistent with this conjecture, we show that the increase in distance
is strongly positively correlated with measures of bank productivity, suggesting that reductions in the
cost of gathering and analyzing information may indeed explain the results.
If greater, and timely, availability of information about credit history is indeed part of the
explanation for why loans can now be made at a distance, we should find that distance is no longer
such a strong predictor of credit quality as in the past. Intuitively, in the past only unimpeachable
borrowers would have obtained credit at a distance because the costs of detecting potential borrower
distress or malfeasance, and resolving it, would have been prohibitively high for a distant lender. But
if these costs have fallen, then riskier credits should now be obtaining finance at a distance.
We do find that even though lender distance is a good indicator of creditworthiness, it is less
important a measure now than in the past. This suggests weaker credits are obtaining loans at a
distance. Consistent with our argument that lenders are better able to monitor and control these
credits, we do not find a commensurate increase in lender loan losses over our sample period. We
therefore conclude the evidence is consistent with greater information availability being responsible
for the increasing distance between lender and borrower.
Small business lending is indeed the final frontier in financial development. That even this
frontier is being breached is suggestive of the dramatic effects of technology. The implications of the
breach can be large indeed. Small businesses are important, in part because most businesses start this
way, in part because they have traditionally been associated with innovation, and in part because,
increasingly, more of the employment in the United States is concentrated in this sector (see Davis
2

and Haltiwanger (1989)). In the long run, if the trend continues, the increased access of small business
to finance may lead to more competition, greater efficiency, and greater growth.
There has been a debate about whether institutional lending, especially bank lending, is in
secular decline because of the greater availability of information to arm’s length financial markets
today (see Boyd and Gertler (1994) and Gorton and Rosen (1995) for two contrasting views). Our
evidence suggests that institutional lending also seems to have benefitted from the greater availability
of information. This has enabled institutions to lend to riskier clients whom they would have shunned
in the past. Thus instead of driving financial institutions such as banks out of the business,
technological change may also create new sources of comparative advantage for them (as conjectured
by Merton (1995)).
Our evidence may also better establish the sources of comparative advantage among different
types of institutional lenders. The theoretical literature in banking (e.g., Diamond (1984)) has
emphasized the role of banks as “close” lenders serving informationally opaque credits. Empirical
work has typically focused on firm characteristics such as low firm age and small size as measures of
opaqueness, and found that banks do indeed lend proportionately more to such firms (see, for
example, Petersen and Rajan (1994) and Berger and Udell (1995)). But evidence that banks are close
has been more anecdotal than systematic. Our metrics of closeness, physical distance and the method
of interaction, provide confirmation that banks are close, even after we account for natural reasons
for closeness such as the greater frequency of transactions implied by the existence of deposit
accounts. Moreover, the firms that on average stay closest to lenders seem to be informationally
opaque ones. Thus the new metrics we focus on are consistent with the theoretical conjecture of the
role of banks, and could be useful in further empirical work.
3

Our findings also have policy implications. A significant focus of anti-trust policy in banking
has been on the consequences of bank mergers on local competition, and hence on small business
lending. While our evidence indicates that small businesses continue to use their local banks for
deposit transactions, the effective size of the credit markets faced by small firms is continuously
expanding. Anti-trust policy should optimally take into account the expansion in competition as a
result of changes in technology while defining the size of the relevant market.1 The increased
availability of finance to small firms could also have an influence on macroeconomic policy. For
example, Gertler and Gilchrist (1994) suggest that small firms account for a disproportionate share
of the manufacturing decline that follows monetary tightening. If the access of small firms to credit
has improved, then it may well be that monetary policy may have much less effect than in the past.
Finally, there is an ongoing debate about whether the effects of the improvements in
information technology result in improvements in productivity (see Gordon (1999), for example). Our
evidence, while not directly addressing this issue, suggests that at least in the financial sector, the
nature of transactions is changing in a direction consistent with greater information availability and
reduced costs of processing it. When combined with evidence that these changes are correlated with
improvements in bank productivity, this should strengthen our belief that information technology does
indeed increase productivity.
The rest of the paper is as follows. After a brief discussion of the issues, we document the
growing distance between borrowers and lenders in section III. In section IV, we examine possible

1

There may already be political changes resulting from technological development. Kroszner
and Strahan (1999) argue that technological innovation reduced the value of geographical restrictions
on banking to their traditional beneficiaries (the small banks, for example), and permitted the
deregulation that started in the 1970s.
4

causes of the changes we document. In section V, we examine the consequences of these changes by
asking if these changes had differential effects on the price of capital or access to capital. We
conclude in section VI.
II.

The Kinds of Information Available in Small Business Lending.
A.

The Market.

Unlike for large firms, the information available about small and private firms has historically
been limited and difficult to access. With the exception of some in high growth industries – which are
a very small portion of our sample – analysts do not follow these firms. Since these firms do not raise
capital in public markets, they are not required to disclose much information. The firm’s lenders
clearly know about the firms, but these lenders are few in number and did not readily share
information in the past. Since information about the firm was not compiled, stored, and distributed
by a central bureau, but instead resided in the minds of the firm’s bankers, much of it tended to be soft
– whether the firm generally maintained adequate balances, for example, rather than hard information
specifying when and to whom it had, or had not, made payments in the past.
B.

Information Technology and Small Business Lending.

The use of information and communications technology, by which we mean everything from
hardware like computers and phones to software like credit scoring and client profitability programs,
has transformed the financial sector over the last three decades ( Mishkin and Strahan, 1999). Three
aspects are particularly significant to us. First, the ability to collect, store, process, and communicate
large amounts of information has expanded tremendously. Second, this has resulted in the expansion
of the activities of infomediaries whose sole purpose is to collect, organize, and make available this
information to paying customers. Third, the availability of hard, processed information lends itself to
5

cost effective credit appraisal and monitoring techniques. Since the first aspect is fairly
uncontroversial, let us examine the latter two in more detail.
1.

Expansion of the Activities of Infomediaries.

Technological change has resulted in the expansion of the activities of infomediaries such as
rating agencies and credit bureaus. Consider, for example, Dun and Bradstreet. It was founded as far
back as1841, with the aim of establishing a network of correspondents that would function as a
source of reliable, consistent and objective credit information.2 Big changes in its procedures came
in the 1960s and the 1970s. In 1963, the introduction of the Data Universal Numbering System used
to identify businesses numerically for data-processing purposes revolutionized the collation and
distribution of business information. In the 1970s, a new "Advanced Office System" fully
computerized D&B’s data-collection operations, giving it the ability to link and analyze categories
of information in entirely new ways, and to deliver information to customers faster and more
economically. The pace of these changes have accelerated with the coming of the Internet (an era that
post-dates our sample).
Over our sample period, the number of firms on which they have records has grown at 6.3
percent per year, a rate over two and a half times the real growth of the economy. Hundreds of
millions of pieces of data, ranging from trade experiences to financial statements, are integrated every
day into one file. D&B collects information from millions of on-site and telephone contacts with
business owners and managers, as well as from all federal bankruptcy filing locations, from millions
of trade and bank experiences, from public utilities, from over 2,500 state filing locations, and from

2

The information on Dun and Bradstreet in this section is obtained from their web site and
conversations with their staff.
6

daily newspapers, publications and electronic news services. The data that is entered is automatically
checked, and also subject to random verification. Finally, D&B alerts its customers to increases in a
business’s risk profile so as to prevent unnecessary losses.
Specialized infomediaries like D&B can save on duplication, and amortize the costs of
information collection over a larger number of customers than could lenders in the past. As a result,
they can distribute more information than ever available to lenders in the past.
2.

More Efficient Appraisal and Monitoring.

The increased availability of systematic reliable information has allowed loan officers to cut
down on their own monitoring. Moreover, the information can now be automatically processed,
eliminating many tedious and costly transactions. For example, Automatic Loan Machines (ALM)
now offer loans on the spot to individuals who have a reasonable credit history, regardless of who
they banked with in the past (see Rajan (1996)). In an ALM, the process of taking the client’s
information, checking records, evaluating the expected profitability of the loan, and then making the
actual loan has been completely automated.
Credit scoring – a process by which a loan applicant’s credit history and characteristics are
summarized in a credit score which forms the basis for approval or rejection of most applications –
is increasingly used by large banks such as Wells Fargo to make lending decisions even for small
businesses (Mishkin and Strahan, 1999). By using financial histories, credit reports, and scoring
methods, the banks can dramatically lower the time their loan officers spend on a given application
and thus the cost (Padhi, Srinivasan, and Woosley, 1999, Mester, 1997).
Small firms gain substantially by a lowering of the fixed costs in the lending process (Frame,
Srinivasan, and Woosley, 1999). The median loan in our sample is for $18,000. Firms in our sample
7

were asked the total fee (not including interest) that they paid to obtain their loan. The level of the
fee is uncorrelated with the size of the loan across the sample (correlation = 0.001). Thus, fees as a
fraction of the loan size declined with the size of the loan. Every ten percent increase in the loan size,
lowered the fees as a percent of the loan amount by 4.8 percent (t=13.4). Given that they are largely
fixed, reductions in the cost of loan origination and information collection could therefore produce
the largest gain for smallest firms. Additionally, if transactions costs drop sufficiently, the number of
lenders that are willing to lend may expand. This has the possibility of not only expanding the supply
of finance to small firms, but also reducing the cost of financing to the extent that geographically
larger markets are more competitive. We explore this issue in Section V.
If in addition to being available at low cost, information is timely, the lender reduces the
potential loss from borrower moral hazard. If a borrower, either because of incompetence, or because
of malevolence, takes improper actions, the lender can act quickly to stop further lending and can
demand repayment. By contrast, if the lender acquires information after a long lag, he may have
thrown good money after bad, the borrower’s assets may have deteriorated under poor management,
and other lenders may have seized anything of value. Thus timely information thus reduces the costs
of lending.
There is a potential downside, however, to information technology. The literature on small
firms has stressed the importance of relationship lending for small firms (see the survey by Berger et
al. (1998) for references). Historically, part of the incentive for a lender to develop a relationship with
a borrower, even if initial loans were not cost effective, was the knowledge that, if successful, the firm
would be locked in to a long term relationship because the lender would have monopoly access to
information about the borrower. The cost of the initial loan could be amortized over the longer
8

relationship (see Greenbaum, Kanatas and Venezias (1989)). However, when information is widely
shared, the credit market becomes more competitive, which could reduce the availability of credit (see
Petersen and Rajan (1995) for theory and evidence). Another potential problem is that soft
information is difficult if not impossible to incorporate when credit decisions are made by computer
models and credit reports. Thus a concern is that small firms who are truly good credit risks – but on
paper look like bad credit risks – will find capital more difficult to obtain. As the relative costs of
funding such firms rise with advances in information technology, lenders may simply ignore them,
preferring to focus attention on the transparent.3 We will attempt to sort out these explanations in the
rest of the paper.

III. Changes in the Small Business Lending Market: Empirical Results.
A.

Description of the Data.

Our data sample is drawn from the 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finance
(NSSBF). This is a stratified random sample of small firms which was collected by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Small Business Administration. In addition to
financial information about the firm (balance sheet and income statement information for 1992), the
data contains a thorough documentation of the firm’s relationship with financial institutions. To be
in the sample, the firm must be a for-profit firm with fewer than 500 employees. Consequently the
firms in our sample are small. The firms have a mean 1992 sales revenue of $3.6M (median $
3

“(W)e should not lose sight of the exceptional economic value of ...old-fashioned face-toface interpersonal banking. The newer technologies may be awesome but human nature does not
change – we still appreciate a face across the desk more than a computer screen.” Alan Greenspan,
“Challenges Facing Community Banks,” speech before the Independent Community Bankers of
America, March 8, 2000.
9

400,000) and a mean book value of asset of $1.7M (median $ 153,000). For a more complete
description of the data see Cole and Wolken (1996).
Firms in the survey were asked for an exhaustive list of the financial institutions with which
they have a business relationship. The relationship can be a credit relationship (they borrow from the
institution), a service relationship (they purchase financial services from the institution), or a deposit
relationship (they have a checking or savings account with the institution). From this information, we
can build a picture of how the lending relationship or environment for small firms has changed over
time. For each institution with which the firm has a relationship, the firm is asked how long they have
been doing business with the institution. From this we calculate the calendar year in which the
business relationship between the firm and the lender began.
To examine the change in the small business lending market, we focus on two measures of
how close firms are to their lenders. The firms are asked how far the lending institution is from the
firm. This is the distance measured in miles from the main office of the firm to the office or branch
of the lender that the firm uses most frequently. We also know the predominant way in which the firm
and the lender conduct business (in person, by phone, or by mail). These variables will be the focus
of our analysis.
From the National Survey of Small Business Finance (1993), we generate a data set of lender
borrower pairs. The firms in our data set may borrow from multiple lenders or they may borrow from
a given lender in multiple ways (an uncollateralized line of credit and a collateralized mortgage). Since
the nature of the loan and the lender may affect the nature of the relationship (physical distance and
method of communication), we generate a data set where each observation represents a single lenderborrower pair. There are, on average, just over two lender-borrower pairs per firm.
10

B.

Distance from Lender.

The distance to a firm’s lender is, not surprisingly, a skewed distribution (see Table I). Thus
we use the log of one plus the distance between a firm and its lending institution as our favored
measure. The average log distance to the lender is 2.6 (13.5 miles) with a standard deviation of 1.9
(6.7 miles).4 By taking logs, the distribution moves closer to a symmetric distribution. The median
of the distribution is 2.3. Since distance is related to the cost of collecting and transmitting
information about a potential borrower, we want to examine the factors which determine how far a
firm is from its lender. In particular, firms that are informationally transparent will be cheaper and
easier to evaluate from a distance and thus can borrow from further away. By examining the
correlates of distance, we can explore the factors that might make small firms more or less
informationally transparent.
1.

Loan sources and lender characteristics.

One of the primary functions of banks is their role as a monitor (see Diamond (1984), Fama
(1985), James (1987)). This role includes an initial evaluation of the borrower’s type as well as
continuous monitoring of the actions of the borrower. Given the limited publicly available data on
small/private firms, the role of monitor can be particularly valuable.
Consistent with this intuition, small firms rely more on banks than on other kinds of lenders.
The lenders in our sample can be classified into five basic categories – two internal and three external
sources. Internal sources include loans from the owners (16 percent of debt) and loans from family

4

The mean distance between firm and lender is 115 miles if we do not take logs first. The
median distance is 9 miles (see Table I).
11

and friends (6 percent of debt).5 The remaining 78 percent of debt comes from external sources.
These sources can be divided into banks (69 percent of external debt), non-bank financial lenders (25
percent) and non-financial lenders such as suppliers (5 percent).
The identity of the firm’s lender has a strong correlation with how far away the lender is. Nonbanks are significantly further from the firm than banks – 118% further, on average (see Table II,
column I). This is consistent with banks being more active monitors and monitoring being difficult
across greater distances. Thus firms that want or need monitoring choose close banks. The distance
to non-financial firms in our sample lies in between that of the banks and non-banks.
The frequency with which a firm has to transact with a lender can also determine how close
that lender is. Checking accounts presumably imply more frequent transactions and possibly more
frequent monitoring. Banks that also provide their borrowers with a checking account must be
significantly closer. They are! Based on the results in Table II, the distance doubles with each step
as a firm moves from a bank where it has a checking account, to a bank without a checking account,
and finally to a non-bank.6 Interestingly, not all lenders that provide services are closer. Lenders that
provide services other than checking or savings accounts are in fact further.7 This suggests

5

Government loans comprise a very small fraction of the firms’ borrowing (less than 1
percent). Although this is external debt, we do not include it the following analysis as we want to
focus on the firm’s development of relationships with private, for-profit lenders.
6

In our sample, over ninety-nine percent of checking accounts are provided by banks.

7

We also examined the effect on distance of other services the firm may obtain from the
lender. Firms which obtain additional financial services are further from their lenders on average. The
magnitude of the effect depends upon the type of service: transaction services (such as making
change, processing credit cards, and executing wire transfers) are 11% further away (t=1.7), cash
management services are 43% further away (t=5.3), and credit related services (such as bankers
acceptance and sales financing) are 26% further away (t=3.1).
12

transactions costs cannot be the entire story. A possible explanation is that checking accounts are
special. Fluctuations in the firm’s balance in the account can provide the bank with additional
information (Nakamura (1989), Mester, Nakamura, and Renault, 1998)) and seems to increase the
availability of credit (Petersen and Rajan (1994)). So the existence of a checking account may reflect,
in part, the need for monitoring, which may also explain the closeness. This is also consistent with
our finding that having a saving account (which may not reflect as much information as a checking
account because it can be used less flexibly) moves the firm closer to its lender, but by only 16%
(regression not reported).
Lender type is not independent of other characteristics of the firm’s borrowing. The loans in
our sample are divided into six loan types and these are not distributed evenly across banks and nonbanks.8 However, even when we include controls for loan type and whether the loan is collateralized,
the coefficients in Table II do not change qualitatively (regression not reported).
2.

Systematic changes in the lending market.

Over time the environment in which our firms borrow has changed. To examine the systematic
changes in the borrowing market, we included the year the firm began borrowing from a given lender.
This variable measures systematic changes in the small business lending market independent of the
characteristics of the firms. We find that the distance between the firm and their lenders is growing
at 3.4% per year (t=7.4). Thus holding the firm characteristics constant, a firm that began borrowing
from its bank in 1993 is 34% further away from the bank than an otherwise identical firm that first
borrowed from its bank in 1983 (Table II, column I and Figure I).
8

The firms in our sample borrow through lines of credit, leases, motor vehicle loans,
mortgages, equipment loans, and other loans. Leases, motor vehicle loans, and equipment loans are
collateralized by definition. The other three loan types may or may not be collateralized.
13

The conditional growth rate in the distance between firms reported in Table II, understates
the unconditional growth in distance. If we do not control for lender type and the presence of a
checking account, the estimated growth in distance rises from 3.4 percent per year to 6.9 percent per
year (t=13.3 – regression not reported). This implies that over time, new lending relationships are
moving from banks with checking accounts (which are close) to non-banks without checking
accounts (which are farther away). Although banks are closer to their borrowers on average, both
banks and non-banks have been moving away from their lenders. The distance is growing slightly
faster for non-banks than banks (4.4% versus 3.0% per year), but the difference is not statistically
significant (regression not reported). Thus the factors that are driving this change are affecting all
lenders.
3.

Alternative Explanations For the Increase in Distance.
a.

Changing distribution of firms.

The growing distance between firms and their lenders that we document could arise from
several sources. One possibility is there has been a systematic change in the type of firms that are
beginning a relationship with a lender over time. As a first test of this we included a set of control
variables. Specifically, we include controls for the firm’s industry (two digit SIC) or the census region
in which the firm is located. This does increase the explanatory power of the model. The industry
controls (F(58,5916)=3.0, p<0.01) and the census region control (F=8,5966)=3.1 p<0.01) are both
statistically significant. However, our estimate of the rate at which firms are moving away from their
lenders does not change when we add these controls (see Table II, columns II-III). We also exploit
the panel structure of our data by including a control for each firm. This dramatically raises the
explanatory power of the model (the R2 rises from 0.307 to 0.711). This implies that firm
14

characteristics are an important determinant of distance which we explore below. Adding firm
controls to the regression actually raises the coefficient on the year the relationship began slightly
from 3.4 percent per year to 4.0 percent per year. Whether we estimate the growth in distance based
on within firm variation (variables are defined as deviations from firm means) or based on between
firm variation (variables are defines as the mean for each firm), the estimated coefficient is essentially
the same (see Table II, column IV and V).
It is also possible that the location of firms is changing over time. For example, firms may
now be moving from urban areas to predominantly rural areas where distances between businesses
are larger. Such a change could in theory explain our findings. We know whether the firm is in a
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (urban) or not (rural) and rural firms are 13 percent further
from their lenders. We estimate the year coefficient separately for firms located in rural or urban
areas. The coefficient is not statistically different across the two samples (p=0.23) suggesting that
the possibly changing location of firms cannot explain the findings.
b.

Sample selection bias.

The data set we use is a synthetic panel. Data on the year a firm began a relationship with a
given lender helps us describe a firm’s borrowing patterns over time. However, the data set is
conditioned on the firm existing in 1993. Firms that do not survive will obviously not be included in
our sample. If the selection mechanism is correlated with distance, then our estimated coefficient
would be biased. In addition, to requiring that the firm survives, observations appear in our sample
only if the firm-lender pairs also survive. If the type of pairs that die is correlated with distance, this
will also bias our coefficient.
We first describe each of the possible selection processes that must be at work for a survival

15

bias to generate our results and then examine the empirical evidence to determine their validity. We
examine firm survival first. The literature on relationship lending suggests that close lenders (often
banks) are good at looking into informationally opaque firms and determining which are truly good
firms. They may also be more able and more willing to bail out their good borrowers when they
experience temporary financial difficulties. As lenders migrate further away from firms, bailouts may
become more costly and less common. If firms whose lenders are further away are less likely to be
rescued, they will be less likely to survive. This would imply that surviving firms will be closer on
average than the full sample of firms that begin relationships with lenders. This may be a problem for
our results since the firms that start a relationship in 1991 need survive only 2 years to be in our
sample, however, firms that begin a relationship in 1981 must survive 12. Thus, sample selection will
induce a positive coefficient on the calendar time variable even if there is no change in the distribution
of how far firms go to borrow from their lender.9
To test for the importance of these sample selection biases we supplemented our sample with
data from the 1988 NSSBF. This allows us to directly examine how firm survival affects our
estimates. In the expanded data set, we can examine two firms that both began borrowing from their
first lender in 1985, for example, when they were both five years old. The one from the 1993 sample
had to survive 8 years to be included in the sample while the one in the 1988 sample needed to
survive only 3 years to be included in the sample. If the selection mechanism we described is working,
we will see that controlling for the year the relationship started, observations in the 1993 sample are
closer – as they have had to survive longer to remain in the sample. The results are displayed in
9

If instead, firms that start closer to their lenders are riskier and are more likely to die, then
the coefficient on the calendar year variable is understated and firms are moving away from their
lenders faster than our estimates suggest.
16

column VI of Table II. Firms in the 1993 sample are 10 percent closer and the coefficient is
statistically significant (t=2.0). This is consistent with the sample selection hypothesis, but also with
any other difference between the two samples. Nevertheless, if sample selection is truly responsible
for our results, once we control for it the coefficient on calendar year should fall. Instead, we find the
distance between lenders and borrowers is growing faster over time – 3.8 percent per year (Table II,
column I). Our initial estimate was biased downward.
The second potential selection bias arises if the firms in our sample drop their original lenders
as they age. If firms become more well known as they age and grow, they might expand the
geographic market in which they can borrow. We see this in Table II where subsequent lenders are
further away than the firm’s first lender. A selection problem may arise, however, since we only know
which of the firm’s lenders is first among the ones they have retained. 10 If they drop the early (and
close lenders), this could bias our calendar year coefficient upwards. However, once we include the
firm’s age in the regression, the firm’s age and not calendar year should measure this effect. That the
coefficient on calendar year is still important after including firm age suggests this source of bias is
not significant.
We can also directly test the importance of this bias. First relationships are likely to start soon
after a firm is founded. So if we include only firms whose first relationship begins soon after the firm
was born, we will have a sample that is less subject to the alleged selection bias. When we cut the
sample down to firms whose first observed lending relationship starts during their first five years of
10

We define the firm’s first lender as the lender with whom the firm has been conducting
business the longest. If the firm began its relationship with multiple institutions in that year, we
classify all such lenders as the ‘first’ lender. Financial institutions with which the firm has no
interaction at the time of the survey (credit, deposit, or service) would not appear in our sample
although they may have been the firm’s first lender.
17

life, we lose a third of the observations. Truncating the sample in this way, however, raises, rather
than lowers, the coefficient on calendar year. For the firms for whom we are less likely to miss the
first lending relationship, the distance between firms and their lenders grows at 3.9% per year (Table
II, column VII).
4.

Firm characteristics.

In addition to systematic changes in the lending environment for small firms we are also
interested in the cross sectional variation in the distance between a firm and its lender. Different firms
have varying potential for moral hazard, and thus a different need to be monitored. They have
different degrees of informational transparency. Both of these effects may help explain the cross
sectional variation in how far firms are from their lenders. Additionally, by controlling for firm
characteristics, we have an additional robustness test of our finding that there has been a systematic
increase in distance between lender and borrower. Finally, we will also get a sense of what factors
might reduce the problem of lending at a distance.
Information about a firm accumulates over time. The longer it has operated, the greater the
firm’s track record, and the more the market may know about the firm. To measure this effect we
include in the regression both the firm’s age as well as whether this is the firm’s first lender. Firm age
is measured as of the date the relationship with the institution began. Thus if the firm began business
in 1975 but began a relationship with the lender in 1980, we code firm age as five. Firms that are
older when they start borrowing from an institution do borrow further from home, but the coefficient
is effectively zero (0.001). We do find that as the firm expands its circle of lenders it also increases
the distance to its lender. A firm’s first lender is about 16 percent closer than its subsequent lenders
(see Table II, column I). This coefficient should be interpreted with caution. If we estimate this
18

coefficient using only within firm variation (comparing a firm’s first to later lenders), the coefficient
is zero (Table II, column IV). If we estimate the coefficient using between firm variation (comparing
firms with only a first lender to firms with multiple lenders), we find that the coefficient is significantly
larger (Table II, column V). Thus the firms that have expanded to multiple lenders are further from
their lenders (both first and later) on average than firms who have only a single lender.
Informational transparency, or the ability to evaluate the firm’s credit quality at low cost,
should lower the cost of lending to a firm. To the extent that this has a differential effect on creditors
that are physically further from the firm it will raise the average distance between firms and lenders.
We measure information transparency four ways. First, we identify firms that have a business credit
card. Since these are usually granted based on a credit report, this implies the external market knows
a sufficient amount about the firm to grant it credit based on information in computer files. Thirty-two
percent of the firms in the sample have a business credit card.11 The survey also asks whether the
person answering the income statement and balance sheet questions had records such as tax forms
and/or financial statements to help in answering these questions. The existence of such records
suggests greater transparency to outside investors. The final measures of record keeping we use are
from the governance structure of the firm. We use the fraction of the equity owned by the largest
shareholder as an (inverse) measure of shareholder dispersion. The more dispersed the shareholders,
the greater the need for the firm to systematize their reporting function and make information easily
accessible to outside investors (alternatively, the firm attracts dispersed shareholders only when
reporting is systematic). We also include an indicator of whether the firm is a franchise – a franchise
11

The survey also asks if the owner uses a personal credit card for business expenses. Fiftyfour percent of the firms have either a business credit card or a personal credit card that the owner
uses for business expenses.
19

is likely to have a more systematized reporting structure in order to measure franchise fees.
The expanded regressions with the additional firm characteristics are reported in Table III.
The presence of a credit card has no effect on the distance to the firm’s lenders. This may be because
credit cards are freely available, or because they depend on the personal history of the owner rather
than that of the business. However, the remaining firm characteristics are important. Firms that have
financial records detailing their financials do borrow further from their lenders. The difference is 9
percent and is statistically significant (see Table III, column II).12 The ownership structure has a large
and statistically significant impact on distance. Expanding the largest shareholder’s stake from zero
(a completely diffuse ownership structure) to one hundred percent, lowers the distance to a firm’s
lender by twenty-six percent (t=3.4). We also find firms that are franchises – and are thus expected
to be more transparent – also borrow 29 percent further away (t=3.2).
We examine the characteristics of the manager to determine whether older and more
experienced managers borrow from institutions that are further from the firm. Both the age and years
of business experience are measured in the year the relationship started. Neither variable has a
significant effect on the distance between borrower and lender. Also, whether the firm is managed
by a non-owner does not appear to matter.
The final set of firm characteristics we examine is the sales region of the firm. The larger the
firm’s sales region the more likely distant lenders will know about the firm. In the survey, the firms
are asked if their sales region is local, regional, or national. As the firm’s sales region expands, so

12

If we allow the slope on calendar year to vary by whether the firm had records, we find that
firms with records are not only further away on average, but this distance is growing faster. The
coefficient on calendar year is 2.9 percent per year for firms without records and 3.9 percent per year
for firms with records. The difference is not statistically significant (p=0.25).
20

does the distance between the firm’s headquarters and their lender. Most of the increase, however,
occurs when the firm shifts from a regional sales region to a national sales region. The distance to the
lender increases by 29% in this case (t=4.9).
C.

Method of Communicating with Lender.

Distance can be related to the costs of transmitting information. How this information is
transmitted provides more evidence about the type of information being exchanged. In addition to
knowing how far a lender is from a firm, we also know the most frequent method by which the firm
and the lender conduct business. Firms conduct business with their lender in person (46% of the firmlender pairs), by phone (19%), or by mail (35%). Relationship lending – which is based on the
collection and processing of soft information – is more likely to be based on personal contact. Thus
we would expect that the use of written communication (mail) instead of personal contact to be
correlated with more informationally transparent firms. These firms do not need to rely on personal
contact to provide the lender with the soft information they require. They are more likely to have their
lender rely on the type of hard information that is easily transmitted using technology across greater
distances and at lower cost. As with distance, we find that personal communication between lenders
has declined from 68% for relationships started in the seventies to 34% in the nineties (Table I – Panel
B).
We examine the determinants of the communication method chosen by estimating an ordered
logit model with “in person” being the lowest category and “by mail” being the highest category.
Therefore, positive coefficients indicate variables that raise the probability of communicating by mail
and lower the probability of communicating in person. We expect higher values to be correlated with
more informationally transparent firms. The variables we use to explain the method of communication
21

are the same as we used in the distance regression.
1.

Firm Characteristics: Informational Transparency

The role of banks as a monitor and the use of checking accounts to monitor the firm can be
seen in the estimates (see Table IV). Firms that borrow from a bank are more likely to communicate
in person. If they have a checking account at the bank, this increases the probability of communicating
in person even more. Comparing a firm that borrows from a bank where it has a checking account
to one that borrows from a non-bank where it does not have a checking account, the probability of
communicating in person drops from 74 to 14 percent.13
We also find that firms that we expect to be more informationally transparent, are more likely
to use arm’s length communication (phone and mail) rather than communicating in person. The
probability of communicating in person drops for firms that used records to answer the financial
statement questions in the survey, have diffuse ownership structures, and have a national sales region.
The last finding is particularly interesting. It suggests that firms with a national reach do not borrow
from lenders remote from the head office simply because the firm has local branches near the lender
(see Table III). In fact, lenders do indeed appear far from such firms because the method of
communication is by phone or mail (see Table IV). Rather, a national sales region seems to expand
the pool of lenders the firm can borrow from because the firm has a national image and is therefore
more transparent.
Firms are more likely to use personal communication with their first lender and then move
away from personal communication with later lenders. Thus as firms become better known, they rely
less on personal communication. Such firms are more likely to have a documented track record – just
13

All other variables are set equal to their sample means, when probabilities are calculated.
22

the type of hard information which makes personal communication less necessary. Unlike our distance
regressions, we find an independent role for firm age. Firms that are older when they begin a
relationship with a lender are less likely to communicate in person, although the magnitude of the
effect is small. A firm that is five years old when it begins borrowing from its lender, is one percent
less likely to communicate in person than a start up.
2.

Changes in the Lending Market.

The distance between firms and their lenders have grown systematically over the last two
decades. We would expect the form of communication to mirror these changes. Holding the firm
characteristics constant, relationships that started more recently are less likely to communicate in
person with their lender and more likely to communicate by mail (See Table IV, column I and Figure
II). The probability that a firm will communicate with its lender in person drops from 59 percent for
relationships that started in 1973 to 36 percent for relationships that started in 1993. This coefficient
is statistically significant (t=7.3).
Although the shift from communicating in person to communicating by the mail is related to
the shift to more distant lenders, the two effects are not exactly the same. To test this hypothesis, we
include the distance to a firm’s lender as an explanatory variable in our estimated multinomial logit.
As expected, firms whose lenders are further away are less likely to communicate in person (see Table
IV, column II) because, not surprisingly, distance raises the cost of personal communication. Raising
the log distance from the 25th percentile (1.1) to the 75th percentile (3.8) lowers the probability of
communicating in person from 58 percent to 30 percent (t=23.3). Including distance in our model,
reduces the coefficient on calendar year from the 0.047 to 0.032. The fact that the coefficient on the
year the relationship started is still positive and statistically significant (t=4.7) implies that the
23

systematic change in how firms communicate with their lenders is more than just the effect of
increased physical distance. Holding the distance to a firm’s lender constant, there has still been a
change in the way firm’s communicate – away from face to face communication and toward
communication through the phone or mail. The probability of communicating in person now drops
from 52 percent for a relationship started in 1973 to 37 percent for a relationship started in 1993. The
decline is 67 percent of the earlier estimates when distance is not included, and is still quite large.
An immediate implication is that the reduced necessity to do business in person has increased
the availability of finance. No longer is finance available to only those that have low costs of traveling
to meet the lender in business. “Distance” has effectively been reduced.
To summarize, we find that the distance between firms and lenders is increasing over time.
Firms and lenders appear to be using more impersonal ways of transacting over time, even accounting
for the increase in distance. These changes does not seem to be because of any systematic change in
the characteristics of firms. Could they be because the environment – and not necessarily technology
– has changed? We examine possible causes in the next section.

IV. Systematic Changes in the Lending Environment.
By including a time trend we have been able to characterize the changing environment in
which small firms and their lenders operate. However, we have not directly identified the source of
this change – other than by showing it is not simply a change in the distribution of firm characteristics.
In this section, we explore several changes in the small business lending environment that may explain
our results.
A.

Bank Consolidation.
24

One of the major trends in banking has been the consolidation of the industry. The number
of banks in the U.S. has declined by about 30 percent in the last decade (Berger, Demsetz, and
Strahan, 1999). Much of this decline has been in the form of mergers (Berger, Saunders, Scalise, and
Udell, 1997, Rhoades, 1996). The existence of fewer banks could explain the trend we find toward
greater distance between firms and their lenders.
To control for differences in bank density across regions and across time we include a measure
of bank density in our model. We don’t know the exact location of each firm. We only know which
of nine census regions the firm resides in. Thus our bank density variable (log of banks per 1000
square miles) varies across time (the year a relationship started) and area (the nine census regions).
We also calculate branch density (log of branches per 1000 square miles) since it is the number of
physical locations which most directly affect where and how firms build their lending relationships.
Bank density is correlated with the average distance between firm and lender (see Table V,
column II). Every ten percent increase in the density of banks lowers the average distance by 0.8
percent (t=3.7). The coefficient on branch density is smaller economically and less statistically
significant (t=1.9). Each ten percent increase in branch density lowers distance by 0.4% (regression
not reported). Based on the magnitude of these coefficients, changes in bank or branch density do not
explain the growing distance between firms and their lenders. The increase in distance attributable to
changes in density over time is only 2 percent – a small fraction of the actual increase.
Although there has been a significant loss of banks, the effect on the distance from lender and
method of communication has been minimal. A simple explanation of this finding can be found in
Figure III. The decline in banks has been dramatic, but only starts in the mid eighties. The effects we
document begin much earlier (see Figure I and II). This is why the inclusion of bank density does not
25

change the coefficient on calendar year (see Table V). More importantly, the number of branches –
the physical locations that firms use to conduct their business and the primary determinant of distance
– have not fallen (see Figure III). The number of bank branches has risen about 4 percent per year.
Much of this growth in the last decade has come from banks acquiring savings and loans. Thus
counting both sources, the total number of branches has remained static since the mid eighties (see
Figure III and Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan, 1999). Finally, recall that we even find non-banks are
moving away from firms. Since it is not clear that non-banks are consolidating to the same extent as
banks, we have to find a better explanation.
B.

Growing Use of Information Technology.

If computers and information technology allow lenders to do their job more efficiently, we
should see greater use of the technology as well as a transformation in the way lending is conducted
(Gorton, 1996). As discussed above, computers are very good at processing information using
predefined rules. Our finding that the physical distance between lender and borrower has expanded
and that the interaction between the two has become less personal is consistent with the intuition that
information technology is replacing the traditional role of the loan officer. In this section we try to
connect our results to measures of information technology use.
The use of credit scoring models is an example of the classic substitution of capital for labor.
Previously, loan officers would read the application material from the borrower, talk with the
borrower, maybe interview references and then make a decision – a very labor intensive process – but
the nature of the information upon which the decision was based demanded such time (Mester, 1997).
Credit decisions based on credit reports (computerized data) and analytic decision rules
(computerized logic), however, require less of the loan officer’s time. It is not that personal
26

intervention has been eliminated – it has just been focused on the most marginal decisions. Loan
originations involve fewer people and more computers.
To see if this is what explains our findings, we collected data on bank employment. The ideal
measure would be the number of loan originations per loan officer, as this is a measure of labor
productivity and should rise systematically as information technology supplements the efforts of the
loan officers. In the absence of this data, the empirical challenge is to find the correct normalization.
Bank employment has grown over the last two decades. However, when normalized by either total
lending or the size of the local economy, bank employment is shrinking (see Figures IV-A and IV-B).
To test the hypothesis that changes we find in the lending market are due to the greater use
of information technology, we include in our regressions the log of bank employees in the region
standardized by total loan volume or by the size of the economy (total regional output). The results
are reported in Table V. In both cases, fewer employees are associated with a greater distance
between lender and borrower. However, only when we standardize number of employees by the total
output, is the coefficient statistically significant (t=3.5 – see Table V, column III). In this case, every
ten percent decrease in the number of employees to gross regional product raises the distance to a
firm’s lender by 5.4 percent.14 This explains a large fraction of the increase in distance over the last
two decades. The average ratio of bank employees to gross regional product (in employees per
million dollars) falls from 0.77 to 0.26. Based on the coefficient estimate in Table V (column III), this
implies that distance should have risen by 58 percent.When we include employees standardized by
gross regional product, the coefficient on year the relationship originated drops significantly and is
14

Using total loans and total output in real dollars does not alter our results significantly. For
example, the coefficient on the log of the number of employees to gross regional product in real
dollars is -0.475 opposed to -0.537 when nominal dollars are used. The t-statistic is -3.2.
27

no longer statistically different from zero (t=-0.5, see Table V, column III). Thus increases in bank
productivity correlate strongly with growing distance.
The results for method of communication are qualitatively similar (see Table VI, column III).
As the number of employees standardized by total loan volume or gross regional product has declined
distance has increased. In this model, both variables are statistically significant (t=-4.8 and -2.8). As
with distance, these variables explain a large fraction of shift away from personal communication. The
coefficient on year the relationship originated is again not significant at standard levels (p = 0.21). The
explanatory power of the time trend represented by this variable has been absorbed by the new
variable.
Given the regression results and Figures I and II there may be concern that any trending
variable will explain the shift in distance and method of communication that we document. This is not
correct, as the results in Table V and VI demonstrate. The data are able to distinguish between a
simple time trend (the year variable) and the standardized bank employees variable, with only the
latter being statistically significant. However, to demonstrate our point more strongly, we ran an
additional test. We created a new variable which is the log of bank employees standardized by total
loans and by total output, not for the region in which the firm is located, but for the United States as
a whole. This variable has time series variation, but no cross regional variation, by construction. It
is correlated with the region variable, but not perfectly ('=0.79). When we include both the region
specific employee variables and the aggregate (US) employee variables, the national variables are
statistically insignificant both singly and jointly (see Table V, column IV). The distance between a
firm and its lender depends upon the use of more productive techniques by banks in the firm’s region,

28

not in the country at large. 15

V. Does More Timely Information Explain the Growing Distance.
Lenders may be willing to go further because they expect to get information for the purposes
of monitoring and controlling firms more easily and quickly at a distance than in the past. Credit
reports from centralized bureaus may be one source of this additional information. If new
technologies permit better monitoring and control at a distance, we should see that the ability to
borrow at a distance is no longer such a strong signal of the intrinsic credit quality of the firm. In
other words, in the past only unimpeachable credits could borrow at a distance because there was no
way for a distant lender to anticipate when a weaker borrower would get into trouble, and very costly
to resolve distress at a distance when the borrower was in trouble. More recently, however, lower
quality borrowers should be able to get credit at the same distance because information costs are
lower and timely intervention is now possible.
We have two immediate problems in implementing this test. First, we do not have a measure
of the credit quality of the borrower when the relationship started. However, we do know the rate
on the last loan the firm obtained, as well as whether the firm's last loan application was approved or
rejected. This gives us two measures of recent credit quality.
A second problem is that lender distance is, by itself, not a perfect measure of a firm's intrinsic
ability to tap into a wider pool of lenders. Lenders can be at a distance because information about the
firm’s quality is widespread (i.e., it is informationally transparent). But a firm can also be at a distance

15

This is consistent with Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), who argue that the liberalization of
banking markets in various states over the 1980s did improve the quality and efficiency of lending.
29

from its lenders simply because there are no nearby lenders (firms in rural areas are 13% further from
their lenders – see Table III), or no nearby lender will lend. We can, however, determine the ability
to borrow at a distance that is correlated with public information. This is the estimated distance based
on the regression coefficients in Table III and is a measure of the transparency of the firm.16
If poorer credits can borrow at a distance now, while they could not in the past, predicted
distance from lending relationships which were established in recent years should be a weaker signal
of credit quality than distance from relationships set up in the distant past. In other words, if a firm
could establish a relationship at a distance in the early 1980s, it must have been really high quality,
while if it could establish a relationship at a distance in the early 1990s this may be a positive but a
weaker signal of quality. We examine the effect of predicted distance on the price and availability of
credit in Tables VII and VIII, both by itself and when interacted with time. This allows us to see the
effect on informational transparency on the cost and availability of finance and how this relationship
has changed over our sample period.
In Table VII, we regress the rate a firm obtains on its most recent loan against predicted
distance as well as other controls from Petersen and Rajan (1995). Predicted distance has a negative
and significant effect on the rate (see column I). Raising predicted distance by fifty percent lowers
the cost of borrowing by 25 basis points. This is twice the effect of a fifty percent increase in the size
of the firm. Thus the ability to borrow at a distance, predicted by measures of the firm’s informational

16

We use the coefficient estimates from Table III, column II. However, when we predict
distance, we use only those variables which we think measure the firm’s informational transparency.
These include whether the firm uses records, whether the firm has a business credit card, the
ownership share of the largest shareholder, whether the firm is a corporation, whether the firm is a
franchise, whether the firm is owner managed, the age and experience of the owner, and the sales
region of the firm.
30

transparency, seems to be a good signal about the credit quality of the firm. When coupled with our
finding that banks are physically much closer to clients, this supports the theoretical intuition that
banks focus on informationally opaque clients.
When we include an interaction between the year the relationship started and distance,
however, the coefficient for the interaction is not significantly different from zero (see column II).
Although predicted distance has a large effect on the cost of capital, this effect does not appear to
have changed over time. In column III we estimate standard errors by bootstrapping, and this does
not significantly change the statistical power of our results.17
Instead of predicted distance as a measure of transparency, we can use the predicted method
of dealing with the lender (in person or not). A lender who is willing to deal with a borrower by
phone or mail, rather than in person, should be signaling the credit quality of a borrower. It turns out
that predicted method has exactly the same qualitative effect as predicted distance. If a lender is
willing to accept dealing with the firm by mail or phone, the firm gets a lower rate on its most recent
loan suggesting the firm is lower risk. Again, the coefficient of the interaction between predicted
method and the year the relationship started is insignificant.
The absence of time effects may reflect the fact that the rate for small loans is often
determined by standard boilerplates, based on standard information such as firm size and industry.
This is especially likely when loans are made by branches of large banks (see Brickley, Linck, and
17

The reported standard errors in column II are OLS standard errors. This is a problem since
predicted distance and predicted distance interacted with the year the relationship started are
predicted regressors. We estimated standard errors by bootstrapping the model. A sample with
replacement was drawn. We then estimated the first stage, created the predicted distance variables
given those estimates and then estimated the second stage (the model in Table VII column II). This
gave us a single estimate of the coefficients. This was done 1000 times and the standard error of this
distribution of estimates is reported in column III (Table VII).
31

Smith (2000), Petersen and Rajan (1994), and Stein (2000)). Petersen and Rajan find that while the
rate charged on a loan is not sensitive to measures of the soft information that is generated about a
borrower (such as the duration of the relationship with the lender) the availability of credit is. So if
soft information is more widely available over time, the reduced effectiveness of distance as a signal
of credit quality over time will not be seen in the rate but in the availability of credit. As we will now
argue, this is indeed the case.
A direct measure of whether credit is available for a firm is whether the firm’s last application
for a loan is approved. Of course, a loan can be approved only if it was applied for. The firm will
apply for credit if it needs funds and it thinks approval is sufficiently likely, and not otherwise.
However, those who need funds but do not apply because they think their application will be refused
should also be thought of as rationed. Therefore, a firm is included in the regression below if it either
applied for a loan, or needed financing but did not apply for a loan because it felt it would be denied.18
Firms whose loan application was approved are coded as one, the rest of the sample is coded as zero.
Those who needed funds but did not apply are considered equivalent to those who needed funds and
were rejected.
Together with controls for availability taken from Petersen and Rajan (1995), we include
predicted distance as an explanatory variable in Table VIII. Predicted distance is indeed a measure
of intrinsic credit quality of the firm. Higher predicted distance is strongly positively correlated with
greater availability of funding (column I). Increasing predicted distance from the 25 to the 75
percentile raises the probability a loan will be approved by 21 percentage points. Unlike the results

18

The survey asks firms if there was a time during the last three years that the firm needed
funds but did not apply for a loan because the firm felt they would be turned down.
32

for the interest rate (Table VII), the inclusion of an interaction between the year the relationship was
started and predicted distance has a significant negative coefficient (column II) which persists even
after we compute boot strapped standard errors (column III). This suggests that the distance a firm
is able to borrow at has become less significant in distinguishing the credit quality of a firm in recent
times. The coefficient estimates imply that role of predicted distance on the firms’ access to capital
is approximately 25 percent less in 1993 as compared with 1973. As before, the results are similar
when we use predicted method of transacting instead of predicted distance.
To check the robustness of these results we estimated several alternative specifications. We
do not have a firm’s characteristics at the time the relationship started, but only at the time of the
survey. These characteristics may be very noisy proxies of firm transparency for relationships that
started very early – the longer the lag, the more characteristics have changed. To see how important
this problem is, we include only relationships started after 1983. In the regression explaining whether
the loan is approved, the estimated coefficient of predicted distance is now larger in magnitude
(=1.001 and t=3.2), as is the coefficient of the calender year times predicted distance interaction
(=-0.025 and t=-2.6, regression not reported). Even though the standard errors go up, but the
estimates are still statistically significant. So it does not appear that noise in firm characteristics biases
coefficients in a way to produce our results. We also estimated separate slopes including predicted
distance if the relationship started before 1983, and predicted distance if the relationship started after.
Predicted distance for relationships that started after 1983 is less important in determining whether
a loan is approved.
In summary, firms that are informationally more transparent (have greater predicted distance
and lower probability of personal communication) face less credit rationing and are charged lower
33

interest rates. However, the relation between predicted distance and credit availability is weakening
over time. If predicted distance is no longer such a strong signal of credit quality, the implication is
that riskier credits are being financed at a greater distance. These are the ones that have a greater
propensity to get into trouble and face reduced availability later. But this means that lenders are
willing to make bolder credit decisions at a distance now. One explanation is simply that the credit
standards of lenders have been steadily deteriorating over the last twenty years, and that they are less
interested in monitoring. This does not square with the fact that loan losses have not steadily risen
over this period, and have no strong correlation with distance (see Table V, column V). We are left
to conclude that a more distant, and less creditworthy, set of borrowers have become viable to lenders
because improvements in technology allow cheaper screening, monitoring, and control, at a distance
– our results are consistent with the information and communications revolution making distance less
important.

VI. Conclusions.
We have documented a trend in the distance between small firms and their lenders in the
United States. Firms are choosing further lenders and are also communicating in more impersonal
ways with them. The trend correlates well with the increase in loans per bank employee or total
regional output per bank employee over time, suggesting that the advances in computing and
communications have reduced the human component in lending decisions, allowing more impersonal
and distant lending decisions to be made. Moreover, distant firms are no longer only the highest credit
qualities, suggesting that a wider, and more distant, cross-section of firms can now obtain funding
from a particular lender. By implication, economy wide credit availability, and competition in credit
34

markets, has increased.
The paper makes a number of contributions. For one, it focuses on new metrics for
informational closeness – physical distance and method of communication. Others have used distance
as a proxy for informational asymmetry (for example, see Covals and Moskowitz (1999), Garmaise
and Moskowitz (1999), and Grinblatt and Keloharju (1999)). To the best of our knowledge, however,
we have not seen this correlated with the nature of the institution or with credit availability and price.
Our findings that informationally opaque firms have closer lenders, and that banks are closer than
other lenders, are consistent with the theoretical view that banks are informationally close lenders
making loans to opaque borrowers.
These findings also have policy implications. If information technology can increase the
services provided to, and competition in, the sector that has historically been viewed as the most
informationally sensitive and thus most local, i.e., small business lending, then the relevant size of
the market for anti-trust policy will have to be revised upwards over time. While our paper does not
provide a ready metric for how this should be done, it highlights this as an issue that deserves more
research.
Perhaps most important, however, greater credit availability to small businesses can lead to
greater innovation, more competition, and more opportunity to those without resources. Our work
therefore highlights an effect of technological change that goes against the popular Luddite belief that
technological change serves only to enhance the power of a few while destroying the jobs of many.
Quantifying the effect of greater credit availability is an important task for future work.

35

References.
Berger, Allen, Rebecca Demsetz, and Philip Strahan, 1999, “The Consolidation of the Financial
Services Industry: Cause, Consequences, and Implications for the Future” Journal of Banking and
Finance 23, 137-194.
Berger, Allen, Anthony Saunders, Joseph Scalise, and Gregory Udell, 1998, “The Effect of Bank
Mergers and Acquisition on Small Business Lending”, Journal of Financial Economics, 187-229.
Berger, Allen, Anil Kashyap, and Joseph Scalise, 1995, The Transformation of the U.S. Banking
Industry: What a Long Strange Trip It’s Been, “ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 55-217
Berger, Allen, and Gregory Udell, 1995 "Small Firms, Commercial Lines of Credit, and Collateral"
Journal of Business.
Boyd, J. and M. Gertler, “Are Banks Dead? Or Are the Reports Greatly Exaggerated?”, Quarterly Review of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (Summer 1994), 2-23.

Brickley, J., J. Linck, and C. Smith, 2000, “Boundaries of the firm: Evidence from the Banking
Industry”, working paper, University of Rochester.
Cole, Rebel and John Wolken, 1996, “Bank and Nonbank Competition for Small Business Credit:
Evidence from the 1987 and 1993 National Surveys of Small Business Finances”, Federal Reserve
Bulletin, 983-995.
Coval, Joshua, and Tobias Moskowitz, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in Domestic
Portfolios”, 1999, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Davis, Steve, and John Haltiwanger, “The Distribution of Employees by Establishment Size: Patterns
of Change and Comovement in the United States: 1962-1985", Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Diamond, Douglas, 1984, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of Economic
Studies LI, 393-414.
Fama, Eugene, 1985, What's different about banks?, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 29-36.
Frame, Scott, Aruna Srinivasan and Lynn Woosley, 1999, “The Effect of Credit Scoring on Small
Business Lending” working paper.
Garmaise, Mark and Tobias Moskowitz, 1999, “Confronting Information Asymmetries: Evidence
from Real Estate Markets”, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist, 1994, "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behavior of
Small Manufacturing Firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 309-341.
36

Gordon, Robert, J. “Has the New Economy Rendered the Productivity Slowdown Obsolete?”
Northwestern University Economics Department working paper.
Gorton, Gary, 1996, “Reputation Formation in Early Bank Note Markets” Journal of Political
Economy 104, 346-397.
Gorton, Gary, and Richard Rosen, 1995, “ Corporate Control, Portfolio Choice, and the Decline of
Banking”, Journal of Finance, 50: (5) 1377-1420 DEC 1995
Greenbaum, Stuart, George Kanatas, and Itzhak Venezia, 1989, Equilibrium loan pricing under the
bank client relationship, Journal of Banking and Finance 13, 221-235.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 1999 “Distance Bias, Language Bias, and Investor
Sophistication: Results from Finland” UCLA working paper.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1996, ``The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
Branch Deregulation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 639-671.
James, Christopher, "Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans," Journal of Financial
Economics, XIX (1987), 217-235.
Kroszner, R. And P. Strahan, 1999, “What drives Deregulation? Economics and Politics of the
Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1437-1467, 114.
Merton, R.,1995, “Financial Innovation and the Management and Regulation of Financial Institutions”,
Journal of Banking and Finance 19, 461-482.

Mester, Loretta, Leonard Nakamura, and Micheline Renault, 1998, “Checking Accounts and Bank
Monitoring” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia working paper
Mester, Loretta, 1997, “What’s the Point of Credit Scoring” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Business Review 3-16.
Mishkin, Frederic S. and Philip E. Strahan, 1999, “What Will Technology Do to Financial Structure?”
Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, 249-287.
Nakamura, Leonard, 1988, “A Loan Workouts and Commercial Bank Information: Why banks Are
Special,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia working paper.
Nocera, Joseph, 1994, A Piece of the Action: How the Middle Class Joined the Moneyed Class,
(Simon and Schuster: New York).
Padhi, Michael, Aruna Srinivasan, and Lynn Woosley, 1999, “Credit Scoring and Small Business
Lending in Low and Moderate Income Communities” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta working
37

paper.
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: “ Journal
of Finance ,
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram G. Rajan, 1995, “The Effect of Credit Market Competition on FirmCreditor Relationships," Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 407-443.
Rajan, Raghuram G, 1996, “Why Banking Has a Future: Towards a New Theory of Banking,”
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
Rhoades, Stephen, 1996, “Bank Mergers and Industrywide Structure 1980-1994", Federal Reserve
Board, Staff Study 169.
Stein, Jeremy, 2000, “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized vs Hierarchical
Firms”, mimeo, Harvard University.

38

Table I: Firm’s Lending Relationship
Panel A: Distance to a Firm’s Lender by Lender Type and Time
Lender Type

Year Lending Relationship Began
1973-79

1980-89

1990-93

Total

15.8
2.0
6.0

34.0
4.0
12.0

67.8
5.0
20.0

42.5
4.0
14.0

Non-Banks

235.9
15.5
71.0

222.1
42.0
215.5

280.5
54.0
332.0

251.6
45.0
255.0

Non-Financial Firms

117.3
17.5
60.0

165.9
29.0
141.5

209.2
32.0
235.0

182.5
30.5
164.0

51.2
3.0
10.0

92.6
7.0
33.0

161.3
15.0
91.5

114.7
9.0
42.0

Banks

Total

Panel B: Method of Communication to a Firm’s Lender by Lender Type and Time
Lender Type

Year Lending Relationship Began
1973-79

1980-89

1990-93

Total

Banks

0.77
1.3

0.67
1.5

0.54
1.7

0.64
1.5

Non-Banks

0.27
2.2

0.12
2.5

0.09
2.6

0.11
2.6

Non-Financial Firms

0.35
2.2

0.20
2.4

0.18
2.4

0.20
2.4

Total

0.68
1.5

0.49
1.8

0.34
2.1

0.45
1.9

39

Note:
Panel A contains the average distance between a firm and its lender classified by lender type and the year the
relationship began. Non-banks include finance companies, insurance companies, brokerage firms, leasing companies,
mortgage banks, and venture capitalists. The first entry in each cell is the mean distance, the second entry is the
median distance, and the third entry is the 75 percentile distance. The far right column contains the sample average
for lender types, and the bottom row contains the sample average for each decade. The sample contains 5981 firm
lender pairs which were begun between 1973 and 1993.
Panel B contains data on the predominant method of communication between the firm and its lender. The
communication can be in person (1), by phone (2) or by mail (3). The first number is the fraction of firm-lender pairs
that communicate predominantly in person. The second number is the average value of the method variable. Higher
values are associated with less personal communication and more communication by mail.

40

Table II: Determinants of Distance to the Firm’s Lenders
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

III

Firm’s age

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

Year relation started

0.0341
(0.005)

0.0331
(0.005)

0.0331
(0.005)

Lender is bank

-1.1781
(0.062)

-1.1661
(0.062)

Lender is a non-financial firm

-0.3761
(0.096)

Lender provides a
checking account
Lender is firm’s first lender

IV

V

VI

VII

0.000
(0.002)

0.00310
(0.001)

-0.01110
(0.006)

0.0401
(0.011)

0.0351
(0.006)

0.0381
(0.004)

0.0391
(0.006)

-1.1731
(0.062)

-1.1221
(0.085)

-1.1031
(0.088)

-1.1861
(0.050)

-1.1991
(0.076)

-0.3321
(0.096)

-0.3731
(0.096)

-0.1251
(0.132)

-0.4751
(0.139)

-0.3691
(0.077)

-0.4161
(0.113)

-1.0691
(0.059)

-1.0811
(0.059)

-1.0641
(0.059)

-1.0641
(0.082)

-1.1191
(0.080)

-1.0021
(0.047)

-1.1151
(0.074)

-0.1641
(0.049)

-0.1431
(0.048)

-0.1611
(0.048)

-0.026
(0.077)

-0.2591
(0.085)

-0.2041
(0.039)

-0.1595
(0.072)

-0.0985
(0.039)

Observation from 1993 sample

Industry controls (59)
F-statistics (p-value)

3.02
(0.000)

Region controls (9)

3.09
(0.002)

Firm controls (2878)

1.50
(0.000)

R2

0.307

0.327

0.310

0.711

0.297

0.296

0.316

Number of Observations

5981

5981

5981

5981

2878

9385

4094

41

Note:
The table contains regressions of the log of one plus the distance to the firm’s lender. The sample includes only
relationships beginning since 1973. Dummy variables are included for whether the lender is a bank or a non-financial firm.
The missing category is non-bank financial lenders. Each observation represents a firm-lender pair. In some cases, firms
began borrowing from more than one lender at the same time. In these cases, there is more than one observation for each
firm.
Model Description:
II:
Industry controls. The regression includes dummy variables to control for differences across the 59 two digit
industries in the sample.
III:
Census region controls. The regression includes dummy variables to control for differences across the 9 two
census regions in which the firms are located.
IV:
Within estimates. A dummy variable is included for every firm. Thus the coefficients are estimated based on
variation from firm specific means. The R2 includes the firm controls. Without including the explanatory power
of the firm effects, the R2 would be 0.302.
V:
Between estimates. The coefficients are estimated based on variation between firm specific means. Each
observation represents the mean value for a given firm.
VI:
Sample includes observations from the 1993 and the 1987 National Survey of Small Business Finance.
VII:

Sample includes observations where the first reported lending relationship is within five years of the firm’s
founding.

42

Table III: Determinants of Distance to the Firm’s Lenders
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

Firm’s age

0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

Year relation started

0.0331
(0.005)

0.0371
(0.005)

Lender is bank

-1.1781
(0.062)

-1.1561
(0.062)

Lender is a non-financial firm

-0.3761
(0.096)

-0.3781
(0.096)

Lender provides a checking acct

-1.0691
(0.059)

-1.1111
(0.059)

Lender is firm’s first lender

-0.1641
(0.049)

-0.1341
(0.049)

Firm had records for filling out survey

0.0915
(0.042)

Firm has credit card

-0.003
(0.043)

Ownership share of largest owner (%)

-0.2551
(0.076)

Corporation (1=yes)

0.069
(0.052)

Franchise (1=yes)

0.2921
(0.091)

Owner managed

-0.044
(0.050)

Owner’s age
when relation began

0.000
(0.003)

Owner’s experience
when relation began

-0.003
(0.003)

43

Sales area regional (1=yes)

0.073
(0.047)

Sales area national (1=yes)

0.3601
(0.060)

Firm in MSA (1=yes)

-0.1295
(0.055)

Herfindahl Index > 1800

0.046
(0.045)

R2

0.307

0.318

Number of Observations

5981

5974

Note:
The table contains regressions of the log of one plus the distance to the firm’s lender. The sample includes only
relationships beginning since 1973. Dummy variables are included for whether the lender is a bank or a non-financial firm.
The missing category is non-bank financial lenders. Each observation represents a firm-lender pair. In some cases, firms
began borrowing from more than one lender at the same time. In these cases, there is more than one observation for each
firm.
Model Description:
I.
This is the regression from Table II, column I. It is reported here for comparison.
II.
This model includes additional controls for information about the firm.

44

Table IV: Determinants of the Method Used to Communicate with Lender
In Person, By Phone, or By Mail
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

III

Firm’s age

0.0055
(0.002)

0.0055
(0.002)

0.0065
(0.003)

Year relation started

0.0471
(0.007)

0.0321
(0.007)

0.0441
(0.007)

Lender is bank

-1.2431
(0.079)

-0.8931
(0.082)

-1.6001
(0.098)

Lender is a non-financial firm

-0.4591
(0.121)

-0.3311
(0.126)

-0.6521
(0.160)

Lender provides a checking acct

-1.6601
(0.077)

-1.2651
(0.080)

-1.4261
(0.082)

Lender is firm’s first lender

-0.2181
(0.064)

-0.1881
(0.066)

-0.2931
(0.075)

Firm had records for filling out survey

0.087
(0.057)

0.051
(0.059)

0.11510
(0.066)

Firm has credit card

0.048
(0.057)

0.033
(0.059)

0.12710
(0.066)

Ownership share of largest owner (%)

-0.2155
(0.101)

-0.108
(0.105)

-0.5071
(0.119)

Corporation (1=yes)

0.109
(0.071)

0.094
(0.074)

0.1885
(0.081)

Franchise (1=yes)

-0.017
(0.120)

-0.178
(0.127)

0.088
(0.142)

Owner managed

-0.017
(0.067)

0.007
(0.069)

-0.13310
(0.079)

Owner’s age
when relation began

0.004
(0.004)

0.005
(0.004)

0.005
(0.004)

Owner’s experience
when relation began

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.005
(0.004)

45

Sales area regional (1=yes)

-0.023
(0.064)

-0.061
(0.066)

0.090
(0.073)

Sales area national (1=yes)

0.3851
(0.079)

0.2061
(0.082)

0.7431
(0.094)

Firm in MSA (1=yes)

0.2961
(0.076)

0.4331
(0.080)

0.3101
(0.086)

Herfindahl index > 1800

-0.077
(0.060)

-0.097
(0.062)

-0.1635
(0.070)

0.4361
(0.019)

Log (1 + Distance from lender)

1

92.9441
(12.956)

63.163
(13.357)

2

93.9451
(12.958)

64.479
(13.358)

Pseudo R2

0.215

0.263

0.283

Number of Observations

5945

5945

5945

85.6761
(14.448)

Note:
The dependent variable denotes the predominant method for communicating with lender (1 = in person, 2 = by
phone, 3 = by mail). The coefficients are estimated as an ordered logit model. The sample includes only relationships
beginning since 1973. Dummy variables are included for whether the lender is a bank or a non-financial firm. The missing
category is non-bank financial lenders. Each observation represents a firm-lender pair. In some cases, firms began
borrowing from more than one lender at the same time. In these cases, there is more than one observation for each firm.

46

Table V: Determinants of Distance to the Firm’s Lenders
Includes Changes in the Lending Environment
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

III

IV

Log(Bank Employees/Loans)

-0.157
(0.115)

-0.171
(0.122)

Log(Bank Employees/GDP)

-0.5371
(0.153)

-0.5381
(0.157)

V

-0.0831
(0.023)

Log(Banks/1000 Square Miles)

Log(Bank Employees)
Log(Total Loans)
Log(GDP)
Log(Bank Employees/Total Loans)
(based on national numbers)

0.408
(0.470)

Log(Bank Employees/GDP)
(based on national numbers)

-1.383
(1.608)

Log(Loan Losses/Total Loans)

0.011
(0.050)

Firm’s age

0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

Year relation started

0.0371
(0.005)

0.0361
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.015)

-0.076
(0.092)

0.0361
(0.007)

Lender is bank

-1.1561
(0.062)

-1.1431
(0.062)

-1.1121
(0.063)

-1.1121
(0.063)

-1.1551
(0.062)

Lender is a non-financial firm

-0.3781
(0.096)

-0.3761
(0.096)

-0.3691
(0.098)

-0.3691
(0.098)

-0.3781
(0.096)

Lender provides a checking acct

-1.1111
(0.059)

-1.1111
(0.059)

-1.1601
(0.061)

-1.1571
(0.061)

-1.1111
(0.059)

Lender is firm’s first lender

-0.1341
(0.049)

-0.1331
(0.049)

-0.1411
(0.050)

-0.1371
(0.050)

-0.1341
(0.049)

47

Firm had records for filling out
survey

0.0915
(0.042)

0.0865
(0.042)

0.0975
(0.044)

0.0975
(0.044)

0.0915
(0.042)

Firm has credit card

-0.003
(0.043)

-0.015
(0.043)

-0.012
(0.044)

-0.011
(0.044)

-0.003
(0.043)

Ownership share of largest owner
(%)

-0.2551
(0.076)

-0.2551
(0.076)

-0.2831
(0.078)

-0.2841
(0.078)

-0.2551
(0.076)

Corporation (1=yes)

0.069
(0.052)

0.08810
(0.052)

0.076
(0.054)

0.077
(0.054)

0.069
(0.052)

Franchise (1=yes)

0.2921
(0.091)

0.3051
(0.091)

0.3161
(0.093)

0.3181
(0.093)

0.2931
(0.091)

Owner Managed

-0.044
(0.050)

-0.046
(0.050)

-0.049
(0.052)

-0.051
(0.052)

-0.044
(0.050)

Owner’s age
when relation began

0.000
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.003)

-0.000
(0.003)

0.000
(0.003)

0.000
(0.003)

Owner’s experience
when relation began

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.003)

Sales Area Regional (1=yes)

0.073
(0.047)

0.072
(0.047)

0.051
(0.048)

0.051
(0.049)

0.074
(0.047)

Sales Area National (1=yes)

0.3601
(0.060)

0.3671
(0.060)

0.3351
(0.061)

0.3371
(0.062)

0.3611
(0.060)

Firm in MSA (1=yes)

-0.1295
(0.055)

-0.1551
(0.056)

-0.1475
(0.058)

-0.1501
(0.058)

-0.1295
(0.056)

Herfindahl Index > 1800

0.046
(0.045)

0.017
(0.045)

0.042
(0.046)

0.043
(0.046)

0.046
(0.045)

R2

0.318

0.319

0.314

0.314

0.318

Number of Observations

5974

5974

5662

5662

5974

48

Note:
The table contains regressions of the log of one plus the distance to the firm’s lender. The sample includes only
relationships beginning since 1973. Dummy variables are included for whether the lender is a bank or a non-financial firm.
The missing category is non-bank financial lenders. Each observation represents a firm-lender pair. In some cases, firms
began borrowing from more than one lender at the same time. In these cases, there is more than one observation for each
firm. The estimates in column I are the estimates from Table III, column II, and are reported here only for comparison.
The other columns contain controls for changes in the lending environment over the sample period. In most cases, the
variables vary across both time and census region. Both total loan amounts and GDP are reported in real dollars.

49

Table VI: Determinants of the Method Used to Communicate with Lender
Includes Changes in the Lending Environment
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

III

IV

Log(Bank Employees/Total Loans)

-0.7441
(0.156)

-0.7791
(0.165)

Log(Bank Employees/GDP)

-0.5631
(0.204)

-0.6011
(0.209)

Log(Banks/1000 Square Miles)

V

-0.045
(0.031)

Log(Bank Employees)
Log(Total Loans)
Log(GDP)
Log(Bank Employees/Total Loans)
(based on national numbers)

-0.066
(0.654)

Log(Bank Employees/GDP)
(based on national numbers)

1.859
(2.198)

Log(Loan Losses/Total Loans)

0.004
(0.068)

Firm’s age

0.0055
(0.002)

0.0055
(0.002)

0.0055
(0.002)

0.00510
(0.002)

0.0055
(0.002)

Year relation started

0.0471
(0.007)

0.0471
(0.007)

-0.025
(0.020)

0.090
(0.125)

0.0471
(0.009)

Lender is bank

-1.2431
(0.079)

-1.2361
(0.079)

-1.2261
(0.080)

-1.2261
(0.080)

-1.2431
(0.079)

Lender is a non-financial firm

-0.4591
(0.121)

-0.4561
(0.121)

-0.4641
(0.124)

-0.4711
(0.124)

-0.4581
(0.121)

Lender provides a checking acct

-1.6601
(0.077)

-1.6611
(0.077)

-1.7041
(0.079)

-1.7061
(0.079)

-1.6601
(0.077)

Lender is firm’s first lender

-0.2181
(0.064)

-0.2171
(0.064)

-0.2211
(0.065)

-0.2211
(0.065)

-0.2181
(0.064)

50

Firm had records for filling out
financial part of survey

0.087
(0.057)

0.083
(0.057)

0.082
(0.059)

0.083
(0.059)

0.087
(0.057)

Firm has a credit card

0.048
(0.057)

0.042
(0.057)

0.060
(0.059)

0.059
(0.059)

0.048
(0.057)

Ownership Share of largest owner
(%)

-0.2155
(0.101)

-0.2155
(0.101)

-0.2405
0.104

-0.2395
0.104

-0.2155
0.101

Corporation (1=yes)

0.109
(0.071)

0.12010
(0.072)

0.12910
(0.074)

0.12910
0.074

Franchise (1=yes)

-0.017
(0.120)

-0.011
(0.120)

0.002
(0.124)

0.001
(0.124)

-0.017
(0.120)

Owner Managed

-0.017
(0.067)

-0.018
(0.067)

-0.024
(0.069)

-0.023
(0.069)

-0.017
(0.067)

Owner’s age
when relation began

0.004
(0.004)

0.004
(0.004)

0.003
(0.004)

0.003
(0.004)

0.004
(0.004)

Owner’s experience
when relation began

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.004)

Sales Area Regional (1=yes)

-0.023
(0.064)

-0.023
(0.064)

-0.049
(0.065)

-0.048
(0.065)

-0.023
(0.064)

Sales Area National (1=yes)

0.3851
(0.079)

0.3881
(0.079)

0.3261
(0.081)

0.3251
(0.081)

0.3851
(0.079)

Firm in MSA (1=yes)

0.2961
(0.076)

0.2821
(0.077)

0.2171
(0.080)

0.2151
(0.080)

0.2961
(0.076)

Herfindahl Index > 1800

-0.077
(0.060)

-0.093
(0.061)

-0.098
(0.062)

-0.103
(0.062)

-0.077
(0.060)

1

92.0611
(12.956)

91.3581
(12.973)

-46.467
(39.654)

181.12
(248.46)

91.968
(18.226)

2

93.2561
(12.958)

92.5531
(12.975)

-45.269
(39.654)

182.32
(248.46)

93.163
(18.227)

R2

0.215

0.215

0.218

0.218

0.215

Number of Observations

5945

5945

5633

5633

5945

51

0.109
0.071

Note:
The table contains regressions of the log of one plus the distance to the firm’s lender. The sample includes only
relationships beginning since 1973. Dummy variables are included for whether the lender is a bank or a non-financial firm.
The missing category is non-bank financial lenders. Each observation represents a firm-lender pair. In some cases, firms
began borrowing from more than one lender at the same time. In these cases, there is more than one observation for each
firm. The estimates in column I are the estimates from Table IV, column I, and are reported here only for comparison.
The other columns contain controls for changes in the lending environment over the sample period. In most cases, the
variables vary across both time and census region.

52

Table VII: Determinants of Interest Rate on Firm’s Most Recent Loan
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Maturity matched treasury rate

0.3671
(0.029)

0.3671
(0.029)

0.3671
(0.029)

0.3691
(0.029)

0.3701
(0.029)

0.3701
(0.029)

Log(Firm’s assets)

-0.2431
(0.021)

-0.2431
(0.021)

-0.2431
(0.021)

-0.2421
(0.021)

-0.2421
(0.021)

-0.2421
(0.022)

Outside debt/assets

-0.107
(0.067)

-0.107
(0.067)

-0.107
(0.080)

-0.104
(0.067)

-0.103
(0.067)

-0.104
(0.079)

Corporation (1=yes)

-0.3851
(0.086)

-0.3841
(0.086)

-0.3841
(0.099)

-0.3761
(0.086)

-0.3761
(0.086)

-0.3761
(0.100)

Log(1+firm age)

-0.024
(0.044)

-0.032
(0.048)

-0.032
(0.049)

-0.015
(0.044)

-0.012
(0.047)

-0.012
(0.050)

Loan has floating rate (1=yes)

0.030
(0.074)

0.030
(0.075)

0.030
(0.071)

0.032
(0.075)

0.032
(0.075)

0.032
(0.072)

Loan is collateralized

0.091
(0.075)

0.091
(0.074)

0.091
(0.070)

0.088
(0.074)

0.087
(0.074)

0.087
(0.071)

Lender is a bank (1=yes)

-0.5651
(0.099)

-0.5671
(0.099)

-0.5671
(0.148)

-0.5571
(0.099)

-0.5561
(0.099)

-0.5561
(0.150)

Lender is nonfinancial firm

-0.4605
(0.230)

-0.4595
(0.230)

-0.459
(0.485)

-0.4435
(0.230)

-0.4445
(0.230)

-0.444
(0.484)

Owner has had delinquency

0.4571
(0.114)

0.4571
(0.114)

0.4571
(0.146)

0.4631
(0.114)

0.4631
(0.114)

0.4635
(0.150)

Firm has had delinquency

0.3481
(0.078)

0.3501
(0.079)

0.3501
(0.079)

0.3511
(0.079)

0.3511
(0.079)

0.3511
(0.078)

Number of financial lenders

0.0751
(0.021)

0.0761
(0.021)

0.0761
(0.018)

0.0731
(0.021)

0.0731
(0.021)

0.0731
(0.018)

Predicted distance from Lender

-0.5461
(0.179)

-0.5281
(0.184)

-0.5285
(0.217)

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.003)

Predicted distance *
Year relation started

53

-1.3281
(0.418)

Predicted method used to
communicate with lender
Predicted method *
Year relation started
R2
Number of observations

-1.3981
(0.542)

-1.3981
(0.546)

0.005
(0.024)

0.005
(0.021)

0.174

0.175

0.175

0.175

0.175

0.175

3523

3523

3523

3523

3523

3523

Note:
The dependent variable is the rate on the most recent loan. The average loan rate is 8.4%. The estimates in
columns III and VI are identical to those in columns II and V, except that the standard errors have been estimated by
the bootstrapping technique (1000 repetitions).

54

Table VIII: Probability of Loan Approval on Most Recent Loan
Independent Variables

Models
I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Log(Firm’s assets)

0.3501
(0.026)

0.3491
(0.026)

0.3491
(0.026)

0.3521
(0.026)

0.3491
(0.026)

0.3491
(0.025)

Return on assets (profits/assets)

0.3751
(0.080)

0.3861
(0.080)

0.3861
(0.080)

0.3821
(0.079)

0.3811
(0.080)

0.3811
(0.080)

Outside debt/assets

0.005
(0.015)

0.005
(0.015)

0.005
(0.020)

0.004
(0.015)

0.004
(0.015)

0.004
(0.021)

Corporation (1=yes)

-0.034
(0.104)

-0.028
(0.104)

-0.028
(0.115)

-0.037
(0.105)

-0.036
(0.105)

-0.036
(0.111)

Firm age

0.008
(0.006)

0.008
(0.006)

0.008
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

Length of longest relationship

0.012
(0.009)

0.004
(0.010)

0.004
(0.010)

0.012
(0.009)

0.004
(0.010)

0.004
(0.010)

Debt from financial service provider
(%)

1.5901
(0.107)

1.5631
(0.108)

1.5631
(0.115)

1.5841
(0.107)

1.5541
(0.108)

1.5541
(0.113)

Number of financial lenders

0.021
(0.029)

0.028
(0.029)

0.028
(0.029)

0.020
(0.029)

0.029
(0.029)

0.029
(0.030)

Herfindahl index > 1800

0.1875
(0.080)

0.1845
(0.080)

0.1845
(0.078)

0.1915
(0.080)

0.1875
(0.080)

0.1875
(0.079)

Predicted distance from lender

0.6801
(0.257)

0.8241
(0.269)

0.8241
(0.297)

-0.01010
(0.006)

-0.01010
(0.006)
1.6141
(0.638)

2.9271
(0.928)

2.9271
(0.967)

-0.0845
(0.024)

-0.0845
(0.043)

Predicted distance *
Year relation started
Predicted method used to
communicate with lender
Predicted method *
Year relation started
Pseudo R2
Number of observations
Note:

0.172

0.173

0.173

0.172

0.173

0.173

4548

4548

4548

4548

4548

4548

55

The independent variable is 1 if the firm was approved for a loan and zero otherwise. The sample include both
those firms that applied for a loan as well as those firms that did not apply for a loan because they expected to be turned
down. The last group is coded as being turned down for a loan. Only loans which were applied for (or considered) in
the last three years are included. The estimates in columns III and VI are identical to those in columns II and V, but the
standard errors have been estimated by the bootstrapping technique (1000 repetitions).

56

Figure I: Changes in the Distance to Lender over Time.

0.5

Log(distance)

89
84 85

0

77

83

81

75
73

80

86

87 88

90 91
92

93

82

78 79
74

-0.5

76
-1
73

78

83

88

93

Year

Note:
This is the estimated distance between a firm and its lender based on the estimates from Table III. All variables
except the year in which the relationship began is set equal to the sample mean. In the regression, the year variable is
replaced by a set of year dummy variables. This allows the functional form of the relationship between distance and year
have any form.

57

Figure II: Changes in the Method of Communicating with Lender over Time

0.7

89 90 91

85

74

86

73
0.5

77

92

87

83

0.6

88

80 81 82

75

84

79
78

0.4

76

0.3
73

78

83

88

93

Year

Note:
The estimated probability of using mail or phone as the most frequent method of communicating with a lender
as a function of the year the lending relationship started. The alternative method of communication is in person. The
probability is calculated for a new firm which was borrowing and had a checking account from a bank. The probabilities
are based on multinomial logit (as in Table IV) except the variable Year relationship was started was replaced with a
series of year dummy variables.

58

15000

90000

14000

80000
70000

13000

60000
12000

50000

11000

40000

10000

30000
73

78

83

88

Number of Branches

Number of Banks

Figure III: Number of Banks and Bank Branches

93

Year
Banks

Bank Branches

Total Branches

Note:
The number of banks and bank offices is from taken from the FDIC web site. The number of banks are graphed
along the left axis as a line and are stable until 1984 when they begin to decline. The number of offices are graphed along
the right axis. The graph contains both the number of bank offices and the number of bank plus S&L offices. The data
on S&L offices is available only since 1984.

59

Figure IV: Total Bank Employment
A: Relative to Total Bank Lending

-5.5

-6.0

-6.5

-7.0

-7.5
1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

B: Relative to Gross Region Product

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0
1973

1978
1

1983
2

3

4

60

5

1988
6

7

8

9

1993

Note:
Figure IV-A is the graph by census region (1-9) of the log of total bank employment divided by total bank lending
(in $1000s). Both numbers are from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) web site.19 Both number are
reported by state. Figure IV-B is the graph by census region of the log of total bank employment divided by total gross
region product. Gross state product data was collected from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Commerce
Department web.20 Gross state product is only available starting in 1977 site and is reported in millions of dollars.
Regional numbers are the sum of the numbers for each state in the region.

19

http://www2.fdic.gov/hsob/

20

http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/regional/gsp/gsplist.htm
61

