                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               YOUTHS AT NUTRITIONAL RISK:
                             MALNOURISHED OR MISNOURISHED?


                                            Jay Bhattachaiya
                                              Janet Currie


                                          Working Paper 7686
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7686

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000




The authors thank Jon Gruber, Sara McLanahan, Don Kenkel and participants in the "Risky Behaviors"
project for helpful comments. Currie is grateful for support from the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research, from NIH, and from NSF. Matthew Neidell provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

   2000 by Jay Bhattacharya and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.
Youths at Nutritional Risk: Malnourished or Misnourished?
Jay Bhattacharya and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 7686
May 2000
JELNo. 112, H51

                                            ABSTRACT

       We use data from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to examine
the prevalence and determinants of poor nutritional outcomes among American youths. One strength
of our analysis is that we focus on an array of nutritional outcomes, and we find in fact that the
determinants of these outcomes vary considerably form outcome to outcome. We interpret our
results using a model in which investments in health capital are affected by both resource constraints
and a human capital production function that summarizes available nutrition information. We find
that although many youths suffer from nutrient deficiencies, these conditions are not generally
sensitive to measures of resource constraints, and hence are unlikely to be due solely to a shortage
of food. Conversely, we find that our proxies for information matter. Our results suggest that broad-
based policies designed to alter the composition of the diet may hold the greatest promise for
addressing the nutritional problems of American youths.




Jay Bhattacharya                                              Janet Currie
RAND                                                          UCLA
 1700 Main Street                                             Department of Economics
Santa Monica, CA 90403                                        Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
jay@rand.org                                                  and NBER
                                                              currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu
1.     Introduction

       The words "youth malnutrition conjure up images of gaunt, starving waifs. Fortunately,

such extreme nutritional deprivation is rare in the United States and in other developed countries.

Nevertheless, as we will show, there are many American youths who are "misnourished". The

nutritional problems prevalent in the West are generally due to the composition of the diet—many

youths under-consume important nutrients while over-consuming calories and high-fat foods. This

pattem is linked to the increasing prevalence of obesity, which has important long-term health

consequences. Poor diet quality (e.g. over-consumption of fats and under-consumption of foods

such as fruits and vegetables) has also been increasingly linked to the development of leading killers

such as cancer and heart disease in later life.

        Standard human capital theory suggests that youths (or their parents) choose diets in order to

maximize utility, subject to two sets of constraints. The first constraint, is the information that they

have available about the link between food inputs and health outcomes that they care about. The

second constraint is the household budget. This formulation leads naturally to the question of

whether misnourished youths lack information about the relationship between nutrition and health,

or whether they lack resources (which would imply that nutritional problems were heavily

concentrated among the poor)?

        U.S. public policies concerning nutrition are generally predicated on the notion that resource

constraints are of paramount importance. In order to assess this hypothesis we focus on an array of

outcome measures including various nutritional deficiencies, obesity and high cholesterol, measures

of overall dietary quality, and food insecurity.
       Food insecurity is the most commonly used measure of nutritional status. It can bethought

of as uncertainty about where ones next meal is coming from. We find that while poor youth ARE

more likely to suffer from food insecurity, they are also more likely to be obese than other youths.

Yet they are no more likely to suffer vitamin deficiencies, and the overall quality of their diets is no

worse than that of other youths.

       Thus, resource constraints alone cannot explain the patterns we see. On the other hand,

proxies for information are very important. Youths in households with more educated heads are less

likely to be obese, eat healthier diets, and are less likely to suffer from food insufficiency, other

things being equal. We also fmd that school meals programs have positive effects on the quality of

the diet, which is likely due to the fact that they are mandated to follow particular meal patterns.

        These findings all suggest that policies designed to alter the composition of the diet are likely

to more effectively address the nutritional problems of American youth than those policies (like

Food Stamps) that merely seek to increase the quantity of food consumed.

        The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In Section I, we discuss important background

information related to the measures of nutritional status that we examine. In Section II, we provide

an overview of the human capital theory underlying our approach. Section III provides an overview

of the data, while Section IV presents our main results. Conclusions follow in Section V.



2.      Background

2.1    Measures of Nutritional Status

        As discussed above, measures of nutritional status can be grouped into four broad categories:




                                                   2
Food insecurity, dietary quality (measured using dietary intake surveys), and measures of nutritional

deficiency and obesity that are based on physical examinations. This section discusses the pros and

cons of the different measures.

2 11   Fond Tnseciirily

       The most commonly used measure of nutritional status in the U.S. is "Food Insecurity"

which is often defmed as missing a meal because there was no food in the house, or because there

was no money to buy food. More simply, respondents may be asked if there is "enough food to eat,

sometimes not enough to eat, or often not enough to eat", as they are in the NIHANES III. A recent

USDA report (Nord, Jemison and Bickel, 1999) found that 1 in 10 U.S. children suffered from food

insecurity.1 This estimate is almost double our estimate for adolescents of 5.5%.

        The link between food insecurity and actual nutritional deficiencies is however, unclear. In

the USDA study, only 3.5% of households had food insecurity severe enough that one or more

household members were hungry at some point during the year. Rose and Oliveira (1997) use data

from the longitudinal 1989-1991 Continuing Survey of Food Intake by Individuals and fmd a

negative relationship between food insecurity and nutrient intakes among young women and the

elderly, but not among children. Wilde (1997) and Wilde and Raimey (1997) use data from the

Consumer Expenditure Survey and find that while adults in families using Food Stamps frequently

eat less during the fourth week of the month (the benefits are issued monthly), children do not.

These findings suggest that parents are largely successful in shielding their children from the



 The definition used in this study included those who answered yes to questions ranging from: "We worried
whether our food would run out before we got money to buy more" to "In the last 12 months did any of the children
ever not eat for a whole day because there wasn't enough money for food?"
nutritional effects of food insecurity, though such insecurity could well have negative psycho-social

consequences. As we will show below, we also find lime relationship between food insecurity and

measures of nutritional deficiencies.2

7 1 7 Dietary Recall

        A second common source of information about nutrition is dietary recall data. Respondents

are typically asked to keep a food diary for lengths of time varying from 1 or 2 days, up to one week.

In the NI-lANES III, respondents were asked how many times they ate various foods in the past

month. Nutrient values are then calculated based on the respondent's account of the types of foods

and amounts that were eaten. Since food intakes vary a great deal from day to day, food intakes

measured over longer periods are considered more accurate (see Beaton et al. 1997).

        Because dietary recalls are self-reported, there is a possibility of systematic bias. For

example, Briefel et al. (1997) compare the self-reported energy intake information derived from

NI-LANES Ill with a measure of basal metabolic rate for sedentary individuals derived from

fundamental principles of energy physiology (Goldberg et al., 1991). They fmd that 18% of men

and 28% of women under-report theft consumption of energy. Under-reporting is greatest among

overweight individuals and among those trying to lose weight.

        Nevertheless, food frequency questionnaires provide useful information for researchers.


2
 Still, some would dispute this assessment. For example, Neuhaser et al. (1995) estimate that 2 million children in
California alone go hungry because their parents do not have the resources to buy food. They obtain this estimate
by comparing estimates of total family income less other necessities with the amount necessary to purchase an
adequate diet. However, their estimates are much higher than those obtained from surveys of the poor, probably
because they underestimate the total resources available to households. Frank et al. (1996) show that the fraction of
emergency room visits accounted for by children who are small for their age rises during the winter months in a
Boston hospital. They attribute this to a "heat or eat" effect, but it could also be due to selection if small children
are more susceptible to illness.




                                                          4
Studies generally report moderate to high correlations between the dietary information gleaned from

food frequency questionnaires and methods that rely on direct observation (ci Rockett and Colditz,

1997).      Since extensive food diaries and direct observation place considerable burdens on

researchers and subjects, and since the act of observation may by itself alter the diets of subjects,

food frequency questionnaires are an indispensable tool for nutrition researchers.

          We have adopted USDA's Healthy Eating Index (HEI) as a way of summarizing the food

diary information available in the NTIANES Ill (Kennedy et al., 1995)? The USDA uses the HEI to

assess overall diet quality. The index has 10 components, and each component is scored between 0

and 10. The components and the scoring algorithms are shown in Chart 1. Intakes that fall between

the criteria for scores of 0 and 10 are scored proportionally.

                                            Chart 1: Components of the lIE!

                            Criteria for                        Criteria for
Component                   score of 10                         score of 0
1. Grains                   6-11 servings'                      0 servings
2. Vegetables               3-5 servings                        0 servings
3. Fruits                   2-4 servings                        0 servings
4. Milk                     2-3 servings                        0 servings
5. Meat                     2-3 servings                        0 servings
6. Total fat                <31% calories from fat              >46% calories from fat
7. Saturated fat            <10% calories from s.f.             >14% calories from s.f
8. Cholesterol              <300mg                              >449 mg
9. Sodium                   <2,400 mg                           >4,800mg
10. Variety                 >16 different categories            <7 different categories

* These   criteria refer to the number of servings consumed daily. Recommended numbers of servings vary with the energy
needs of the individual.




  We ise a slightly modified version of the HEI. Kennedy et al. (1995) define the "variety" component of the IIEI
using a survey that asks about food intake over the past several days, whereas the NHANES asks about intake over
the past month. We redefined the top and bottom "variety" criteria such that the same proportion of people received
a score of 0 and 10 in the NHANES as Kennedy et al. (1995) report for their sample. The cutoffs we use are >33
different food items (for a score of 10) and <14 different food items (for a score of 0).




                                                           5
        Perhaps surprisingly, the index does not penalize those with a high sugar intake, which could

well contribute to the consumption of excessive numbers of calories. Hence, we will look separately

at the determinants of high sweets consumption, where 'high sweets" is a variable set equal to one if

the person consumed more than 30 sweets per month.

7 1 3 Measures Bnsed on Phvsica1 ExHminatinns

        Measures     based on physical examinations are likely to be the most accurate of the three

types of measures, though their interpretation is not without controversy. Tn what follows, we focus

on measures based on Body Mass Index (BMII) (obesity),4 and on measures of blood cholesterol, and

of vitant and iron deficiencies based on blood and urine samples.

         BMJ is defined as: weight in grams/(height in meters)2. Adults with a BMI over 30 are

considered to be obese. Defining obesity among adolescents is complicated by the fact that

adolescents undergo growth spurts which change their weights and heights disproportionately. One

comnionly used measure (c.f. Hues and Dietz, 1994) is BMI over the 85th percentile for sex and

half-year of age. This measure results in fewer false positives than alternatives based on measures

such as skin-fold fat or waist-hip ratios. However, a conceptual difficulty that arises with this

definition is that in any given data set, 15% of adolescents would always be found obese. A second

problem is that the NHANES surveys used to calculate the cutoffs yield relatively small sample

 sizes, and cutoffs that bounce around from one age to the next. For example, rather than being

 smooth, the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) growth curves which are based on


  In an earlier version of this paper, we also considered determinants of anorexia. We defmed a person as anorexic
 using a BMI cutoff of the 15th percentile for the person's age and gender, in addition to indicators of negative body
 image (they considered themselves to be overweight, or were frying to lose weight), However, in samples of this
 size, few people are anorexic and we had little success in modeling the prevalence of this condition.




                                                          6
NUANES I and two earlier surveys, show 90th percentile cutoffs which rise from 21.9 to 23

between the ages of 13.75 and 14.25, and then fall again to 22.4 by age 14.75 (U.S. Dept of Health,

Education and Welfare, 1977). These cutoffs are old, and are due to be updated by NCHS in the

very near future.

           In this paper we use a fixed cutoff for obesity which is BMI over 27.3 for females and BMI

over 27.8 for males. These cutoffs are the 85th percentiles of BMI for young adults between 20 and

29, calculated from NRANES H, which was fielded between 1976 and 1980. While one would

expect young adults to be heavier than teens (i.e. that these are conservative cutoffs to use for a

sample of teens), we will see below that in the NHANES ifi, 10% of the teens still exceed these

cutoffs.

           Blood or urine tests are used to assess the existence and extent of specific micro-nutrient

deficiencies, such as essential vitamins and minerals. The relationship between micro-nutrient

intake and blood levels of these nutrients is complicated. Because the body can store some vitamins

and minerals for a long time, it is not anomalous to find a respondent who has not recently

consumed the recommended amount of some vitamin, and yet does not have a deficiency in that

vitamin according to blood tests. For example, it can take between three to six years for a deficiency

in vitamin B12 to become clinically evident (Middleman et al., 1996). Nevertheless, blood tests can

provide solid objective evidence of micro-nutrient malnutrition, when properly interpreted.

           Appendix Table 1 presents the cutoff values we use to determine vitamin and mineral

deficiencies in this paper. These cutoffs, which are taken from a pediatrics textbook (DeAngelis et

al., 1999), typically represent blood levels below which the nutrient deficiencies manifest




                                                    7
themselves clinically. When possible, the cutoffs used are specific for adolescents.

        In addition to providing the information necessary to assess the extent of anemia, the

Nil-lANES   III allows us to assess the determinants of shortages of essential vitamins A, C, and B.5
We will focus on a measure that is equal to one if the person is short any of these vitamins, and zero

otherwise. Finally, we can examine the level of cholesterol in the blood (serum cholesterol levels).

This measure is linked to obesity, and provides an alternative to measuring this important threat to

health using BMII.



2.2     Long Term Effects ofFoor Nutrition in Adolescents

        The nutritional habits of adolescents are important for at least two reasons. First, poor

nutritional habits are hard to unlearn as an adult (as the model of O'Donahue and Rabin, in this

volume, would predict). Second, poor nutrition can immediately damage a young persons health

and the effects can persist into adulthood. The literature on the long term effects of poor nutrition is

large, and a comprehensive review is beyond the scope of this paper. Hence, we will focus on some

of the most important health consequences of adolescent obesity, high cholesterol, and micro-

nutrient deficiencies below. It is not known whether food insecurity has any negative long-term

effects, other things being equal.

        The long-term effects of obesity among children are relatively well documented. While the

majority of obese adults were not obese children, obese children are much more likely to become

obese adults. For example, Chamey et al. (1976) followed children born between 1945 and 1955


 We found lift le evidence of any shortages of vitamin   or of calcium, so we do not examine these outcomes.
and found that of the children who were at the 90th percentile of the weight distribution for their sex

and age, 36% became obese adults compared to only 14% of average or lighter weight children.

Obese adults are known to be at increased risk of many diseases such as diabetes and heart disease.

Moreover, the negative effects of childhood obesity may persist even in adults who are no longer

obese. Layer, Lee, and Clark (1987) found in a sample of Iowan children that childhood obesity was

linked to an increased risk of high cholesterol as an adult.6

        The long-term effects of micro-nutrient deficiencies vary considerably depending on the

vitamin or mineral in question. Interested readers can find a good review from a clinical perspective

in any standard pediatrics text, like DeAngelis et al. (1999). hon deficiency anemia is a particularly

pernicious condition, since it can have devastating effects on the school outcomes of children and

youths. Even mild iron deficiency is associated with fatigue, shortened attention span, decreased

work capacity, reduced resistance to infection, and impaired intellectual performance (U.S. CDC,

1996). About 8% of black Americans carry the sickle cell trait, which places them at much higher

risk of anemia than they would face otherwise (Wilson, et aL, 1991).

        Recently, attention has been focused on the possibly beneficial effects of diets rich in micro-

nutrients found in fruits and vegetables rather than on the harmful effects of deficiencies.

Epidemiological evidence links diets rich in fruits and vegetables to reductions in risk of stroke,

cardio-vascular disease, asthma, osteoporosis, and many specific types of cancer (c.f. Joshipura et

al., 1999; Lampe, 1999; Butland, 1999; Palace et al., 1999; Tucker et al., 1999). While the

6
  Anorexia can also have severe long-term consequences on the health of patients, even if they receive appropriate
care. The most severe consequence is death (usually due to starvation or suicide) which occurs in 6% of patients.
Long-term follow-up studies of surviving anorexics find that about half of the patients reach normal weight, 20%
remain underweight, 20% continue to be anorexic, and about 5%become obese (Foster, 1991).




                                                         9
mechanisms for these effects are not well understood, there are many plausible biological reasons

for fruits and vegetables to have positive effects. These include stimulation of the immune system,

reduction of platelet aggregation, modulation of cholesterol synthesis and hormone metabolism,

reduction of blood pressure, and antioxidant, antibacterial, and antiviral effects (Lampe, 1999).



2.3     Trends Over Time in the US.

        A number of authors have documented an increase in the proportion of U.S. children and

adolescents who are obese, though the exact trends depend on the defmition of obesity used.' Figure

1 shows our analysis of trends in obesity using data from the NHANES I, H and Ill. NHANES I

covers the period 1971 to 1974, N}TANES II covers the period 1976-1980, while NHANES Ill

covers the period from 1988-1994. For both boys and girls (aged 12-16), the proportion with high

BMI decreased slightly between NHANES I and II, but increased greatly between NHANES H and

III. Figures 2 and 3 show changes in obesity by race for boys and girls respectively. The time

trends are similar for all six race and gender groups, but the much higher incidence of obesity among

hispanic men is striking, as is the increasing divergence between whites and either blacks or

hispanics.

        One interesting hypothesis is that an increase in television watching is behind the increase in

obesity among young people (Gortmaker et al., 1996)S More generally, Philipson and Posner


  Gortmaker et a!. (1987) compare measurements of skin fold thicknesses (a standard measure of the amount of
body fat) in the NHANES I and NHANES II. They report a 39% increase in the proportion of obese children over
the interval of time spanned by these two data sets (1971 to 1980). Ogden et al. (1997) compare data from
NIHANES I and NHANES IH and find that the proportion of obese preschoolers grew from 5 to 10%. The National
Center for Health Statistics reports a similar finding for older children (U.S. CDC, 1999).
'The prevalence of anorexia has also been increasing over time (U.S. CDC, 1996) but remains low at .5 to 1% of




                                                     10
(2000) conjecture that technological change is responsible for the increase in obesity. They argue

that the number of calories consumed has been relatively constant over time, but that technology has

led to a reduction in the number of calories expended. Philipson and Posner dismiss the role of

information in combating obesity, arguing that "everyone knows how to lose weight". Thus, it will

be interesting to ask whether such proxies for information as the education and age of the household

head have an effect independent of income in the models of obesity estimated below.

        There are relatively few studies that attempt to examine trends in vitamin deficiencies,

primarily because relatively few American adolescents suffer from them (c.f. Devaney, Gordon, and

Burghardt, 1995). For example, one recent study (Middleman et al., 1996) found only one reported

case of vitamin B12 deficiency due to inadequate dietary intakes among adolescents (that of a 14-

year-old female on a strict vegetarian diet). On avenge, U.S. adolescents consume more than the

U.S. recommended daily allowances of all vitamins. Nevertheless, as we will show below, there are

significant numbers of U.S. adolescents who suffer from deficiencies of vitamins A, C, and/orE.9

        A second reason for the paucity of information about trends in nutritional deficiencies is that

the NHANES surveys, which are the main U.S. source of information about nutritional status, have

changed the laboratory methods used to track deficiencies. For example, the methods used to

evaluate white and red cell counts, serum folate, and serum vitamin C levels were updated in

NHANES ifi, so it is difficult to infer time trends from these surveys (c.f. Raiten and Fisher, 1995

and Wright et al., 1998).


adolescent girls.
'Researchers have also noted declines in calcium intakes among adolescents which are associated with decreases in
the consumption of milk (cf. Albertson et al., 1997 who examine changes between 1980 and 1992). These declines
are of concern given that most adolescent girls consume less than 100% of the U.S. recommended daily allowance




                                                       11
        Data from other sources suggest that iron deficiency anemia has declined significantly since

the late 1 960s when several studies found that large number of Americans (especially infants and

young females) were iron deficient (c.f. Committee on Iron Deficiency, 1968 and Stockman, 1987).

However, Looker et al. (1997) conduct a careflul assessment of trends in anemia using data from

NIHANES 11(1976 to 1980) and NEANES III (1988 to 1994), adjusting for differences in the way

anemia was measured in these two surveys, and find no change in the incidence of anemia. This

study suggests that even trained observers may have difficulty using the NHANES surveys to detect

trends in many outcomes.

        Data on nutrient intakes and food insufficiency has not been collected consistently either.1°

In view of these data problems, we will confme our own analysis of trends to an examination of

obesity which can be measured in the same way using data from NHANES I, NHANES H, and

N}IANES III.



2.4     US. Public Policy and Nutrition

24 1    Food and Niifriticrn Proc'rams

        The U.S. government operates a wide variety of food and nutrition programs (FANPs)

including the Food Stamp Program (FSP), the National School Lunch Program (NSLP), and the



of calcium. However, we found little evidence of inadequate blood calcium levels in our NHANES III sample.
'° In NHANES Ill, youths were asked about how many times they had consumed a particular type of food (e.g.
broccoli) in the past month. InNHANES II, youths were asked about more general categories of food intakes (e.g.
fmits and vegetables), and could report consumption in the last day, week, or month (however the person chose to
respond). One might expect that asking about detailed categories of foods would lead to higher reported
consumption, while asking about foods consumed over the past month would lead to lower reported consumption.
Hence, it is not clear a priori how the reported food intakes would be expected to differ between the two surveys.




                                                       12
School Breakfast Program (SBP) among others.'1 Most FANPs were developed with the goal of

increasing food consumption among populations who are deemed likely to lack food. For example,

the NSLP was established in 1946 in response to nutrition deficiency-related health problems

identified among young men being drafted during World War II.

       The FSP provides coupons that can be redeemed for food to households with incomes less

than 130% of the federal poverty line. There are few restrictions on the types of foods which can be

purchased. The NLSP and SBP programs provide free or reduced price meals to children with

incomes less than 130% or 185% of poverty, respectively. Meals are designed to offer one-third of

the U.S. Recommended Daily Allowances of specified nutrients.

       However, as we have discussed, the nature of nutritional risk has changed in the U.S. from a

situation in which significant numbers of people suffered food shortages to one in which obesity is

prevalent even among the homeless--Luder et al. (1990) examined a sample of homeless shelter

users in New York City and found that 39% were obese. This observation raises the question of

whether supplying meals (or food coupons) is the most effective way to address the nutritional risks

facing the majority of FANP recipients.

       In particular, school nutrition programs were roundly criticized in the early 1990s for

providing meals that were high in fat and sodium, and low in carbohydrate relative to the

recommendations included in the T)iethry Guidelines for Americans (USDA and USDHHS, 1995)

(c.f. Gordon, Devaney, and Burghardt, 1995). These criticisms led to the Healthy Meals for Healthy

Americans Act in November, 1994, which mandated implementation of the Dietary Guidelines in


 See Ciirrie (2001) for an overview ofU.S. FANPs.




                                                    11
school nutrition programs. Unfortunately, the data available do not allow us to assess the effects of

these changes, though NHAJIES P1 (which is currently in the field) will allow such analyses.

       Whether or not FANPs improve the quality of the diet, one would expect the availability of

these programs to reduce the probability of suffering from food insufficiency.          Yet, to our

knowledge no studies have been conducted of this issue. We will attempt to fill this gap in the

literature in our analyses below.

247    F,cliieationnl Intervertinns

        Several studies have looked directly at the question of whether the provision of information

through education programs can affect eating patterns. The existing evidence suggests that a wide

variety of interventions can be successful in improving young children's eating patterns. For

example, Harrell et al. (1998) find that both classroom and individual nutritional education had

positive effects on 3rd and 4th grade children in terms of reducing blood cholesterol levels. Glenny

et al. (1997) report similar results for family therapy and other interventions aimed at lifestyle

modification.

        Evaluations of the federal Nutrition Education and Training Program (NET), which provides

grants to states who implement nutrition education programs in their schools, have found that it is

much easier to improve nutrition knowledge than it is to affect behavior. However, some

evaluations of school based programs have shown that children's willingness to try new foods

offered in school lunch and the quality of snacks chosen away from home improved, and that

children were more likely to consume fruits, vegetables, protein foods, and foods with vitamin A.

Poor children have been shown to be more likely to consume diary products and foods with vitamin




                                                  '4
C, as a result of school nutrition education programs. Longer programs (e.g. 50 classroom hours or

more) have been found to have larger effects on behavior (Contento et al., 1992).

       The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 beefed up

the nutrition education component of the FSP considerably. Between fiscal year 1997 and 1999,

nutrition education spending increased from $32.7 million to a projected $75. million in fiscal year

1999. In response to the Healthy Meals for Healthy Americans Act mentioned above, the USDA

has also implemented the School Meals Initiative for Healthy Children to provide nutrition

education to both children and food service staff (Hamilton and Fox, 1999).

       Thus, public investments in nutrition education have grown considerably in the past few

years, and it would be useful to know whether these investments can be expected to "pay off' in the

form of improved eating habits. These investments can be contrasted with alternative approaches

designed to promote the provision of nutrition information by the private sector.

       A number of studies by Pauline Ippolito and Alan Mathios (1990, 1995, 1996) have

examined the effects of attempts by both government and advertisers to inform the public about the

health benefits of diets low in fat and high in fiber. They argue that government efforts to get this

message out during the 1 970s were relatively unsuccessful (perhaps because they were

underfunded?). But in the mid-1980s, the Federal Trade Commission and the Food and Drug

Administration relaxed rules that had prevented food manufacturers from making health claims for

their products. Ippolito and Mathios show that after declining very slowly between 1977 and 1985,

the consumption of fats and cholesterol fell dramatically between 1985 and 1990, while the

consumption of cereals rich in fiber increased. The Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 is




                                                  15
apparently also influencing consumer choices (Ippolito and Mathios, 1993).



2.5    International Comparisons

       The evidence on the negative long-term effects of obesity is international in scope. For

example, Massberg (1989) reports the results of a forty year follow-up of a sample of Swedes who

were obese as children. Forty-seven percent of this sample remained obese. Power, Lake and Cole

(1997) provide an overview of similar evidence for the United Kingdom. Both studies also find an

elevated mortality risk among adults who were obese as children, even among those who later

slimmed down. Similarly, Post et al. (1997) report that Dutch children with a high fat diet were

more likely to develop high cholesterol as adults, regardless of whether they remained obese.

Gonzalez-Requejo et al. (1995) report that in a sample of Spanish children, those with high fat diets

had higher blood cholesterol and lipid levels, which themselves can cause heart damage over time.

       Similarly, the available evidence suggests that the increase in the prevalence of obesity over

time is not an exclusively U.S. phenomena. Similar findings have been reported in England,

particularly in the 27-year-old National Study of Health and Growth (Rona, 1995). For example,

Hughes et al. (1997) report that triceps skin-fold measurements from samples of 5 to 11 year old

English and Scottish children increased by 7%-8% between 1972 and 1994. This problem is

especially acute for minority populations within England, except for Caribbean blacks (Chinn et al.,

1998). As in the United States, there is concern that adolescents eat too much junk food: "The

avenge 11-12 year old consumes three portions of crisps, six cans of sofi drink, seven bars of

chocolate or other biscuits and seven puddings every week," (Shepard and Dennison, 1996).




                                                 16
        Other countries have similar problems with increasing trends in child obesity. Barth et al.

(1997) report that between 1985 and 1995, the 90th percentile of BMI for children taken from a

sample of German pediatric hospitals increased by 5 kg/rn2 for males and 2.5 kg/rn2 for females, a

dramatic rise. Seidell (1995) reports that increasing obesity is a problem throughout Europe, but

especially in the Southern and Eastern European countries. Even in China, where the trend has been

toward improving nutritional status of children, there have been recent increases in obesity

prevalence among adolescents (Wang et al., 1991).

        As in the U.S., it is rare to fmd vitamin deficiencies in most European countries. For

example, de Bree et al. (1997) review studies of vitamin B12 and folate deficiency in Europe and

fmd that mean intake levels of these nutrients meets or exceeds recommended levels in most

European countries. However, just as in the U.S. there is some concern that some pregnant women

may not be getting enough extra folate (found in green leafS' vegetables) to prevent neural tube

defects in their babies.

        In Europe, as in the U.S., there is evidence that a substantial number of women may be iron

deficient. Hallberg (1995) reviews the literature on iron deficiency status of Europeans. He reports

that in Europe, estimates of the prevalence of iron deficiency among menstruating females range

between 11% and 45%, depending on the country and also on the particular measure of iron

deficiency status used in the study. In genera', studies that focus on younger age groups tend to find


12 Anorexia nervosa is apparently less prevalent in Europe than it is in the United States. For example, using the
British General Practice Research Database, Turnbull et al. (1996) estimate that the prevalence of anorexia in
England is 4.2 cases per 100,000 population. In a study of nearly 2,500 Austrian, German, and Hungarian college
students, Szabo and Tury (1995) report that not one person met the DSM-III-R criteria (the predecessor to the
DSM-IV) for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa. Not surprisingly then, anorexia nervosa has not enjoyed the
scholarly interest in Europe that it has enjoyed in the United States.




                                                        17
higher prevalence rates. If these studies are accurate, they indicate that iron deficiency is a much

greater problem in Europe than it is in the United States.'3

3.      Nutrition as an Investment in Human Capital Formation

        Grossman (1972) offers a model of health as a form of human capital which is "produced"

by investing in certain activities. Health is treated as a durable stock variable which depreciates with

age, and which can be improved by investing in health producing activities such as adopting a

healthy diet. In his model, a consumer's utility depends on the stock of health rather than on the

consumption of any of the investment goods per se. However, this restriction can easily be relaxed

to allow consumers to obtain utility from the consumption of "investment" goods (e.g. hamburgers)

as well as from health outcomes.

        Consumers choose a stream of health investments with the aim of maximizing lifetime

utility. In making these choices they are constrained both by what they know about the production

of health capital (the human capital production function), and by their budget constraints. The key

equilibrium condition in Grossman's model is that consumers choose their stream of investments to

equate the marginal cost of the investment (which includes the lost utility from choosing carrots over

cookies) with the present value of the marginal benefit of that investment.

        Grossman's model generates an important prediction about patterns of health stocks and

investments over the life cycle. If the rate of depreciation of health stocks increases with age, then

health investments will increase with age, as long as the elasticity of the marginal efficiency of

' However, Hallberg points out that some of the prevalence studies are methodologically flawed because they do
not account for the fact that measurements of iron deficiency spuriously rise if the subjects have a cold (or other
insults to the immune system). Accounting for this in one of the studies he reviews reduces the prevalence estimate
by half.
health investment is less than               Since children and adolescents have the highest stock of health

capital and the lowest rates of depreciation, the model predicts that conditional on the resources and

information available to them, they will be less likely than adults to choose a healthy diet. As a

practical matter, the food choices of young children may be determined largely by what their parents

provide for them to eat. Thus, one might well expect adolescents, who enjoy increasing autonomy

from their parents, to make the worst food choices.

           Of course poor food choices in adolescents are a matter of concern largely because they may

forecast a lifetime of poor eating habits. An explanation for the persistence of poor eating habits that

is consistent with the Grossman model is that food choices are determined largely by informational

and resource constraints rather than by health depreciation rates, and that these constraints show

persistence over the lifecycle (that is, the children of the poor and uneducated are more likely to be

poor and uneducated). A second possible explanation (c.f. O'Donahue and Rabin, this volume) is

that teenagers rationally decide that they can afford to subsist on hamburgers and french fries for the

moment, but underestimate how difficult it will be to lose their taste for these foods later on.

           These considerations suggest estimation of an input demand function, or health outcome

function of the following form:



(1) OUTCOME = a0 + a1Th4FO + a2RESOURCE + a3X + e,



where INFO represents variables that affect the information available to the decision maker,


L4
     That is, a 10% increase in health investment improves health by less than 10%.




                                                           19
RESOURCE is a vector of variables affecting resource constraints, Xis a variable of other variables

that may affect the outcome in question (such as gender), and e is an error term that is assumed to be

uncorrelated with the other right hand side variables in the model.



4.        Data

          Our main source of data is the N}{ANES III. This nationally representative survey was

conducted between October 1988 and October 1994, and oversampled blacks and Mexican-

Americans. The NHAINES is unique in that it combines demographic information, data from a

standard clinical exam conducted by doctors (including blood and urine tests), questions about

dietary intakes, information about participation in the FSP, NLSP, and SBP, and questions on food

insecurity. Our sample includes all those who were aged 12 to 16 at the time of the survey, and who

had non-missing explanatory variables.'5 These restrictions yield a sample of 1358 youths.

          Means of the outcome variables we consider are given in Table 1, for everyone, and by

gender, race, and ethnicity. Precise defmitions of these variables are given in Appendix Table 1.

These means indicate that, as discussed above, anemia is rare, and is found primarily among black

girls. However, vitamin deficiencies are surprisingly common, affecting 9% of the sample. It is

interesting that hispanics are less likely than blacks or whites to suffer from these deficiencies. High

BMI (obesity) is also common, especially among blacks and hispanics. In the table we show 100

minus the Healthy Eating Index (so that high numbers for any of our outcomes are always "bad").


s
    Unfortunately, older adolescents were asked somewhat different questions (they completed the adult
questionnaire rather than the youth questionnaire), and it proved impossible to integrate them into the sample. For
example, questions about food frequencies were asked only to the 12 to 16 year old sample.




                                                         20
This measure of the composition of the diet indicates that blacks have worse diets than whites or

hispanics on average, but that the differences are not large. Blacks are also more likely than whites

to have high sweets consumption, while hispanics are less likely. Finally, blacks and hispanics are

much more likely than whites to report that they suffer from food insecurity: The fractions are 4, 12,

and 9% for whites, blacks and hispanics, respectively.

       The second half of Table 1 examines the relationships between these variables. If for

example, it was true that those with vitamin deficiencies also usually suffered from food insecurity,

then it would not be necessary to examine the two measures separately. Instead Table 1 shows that

while there are nutritional problems that tend to be found together, our measures of nutritional

quality do seem to measure different dimensions of "misnutrition". Moreover, measures of

deficiencies and food insecurity are often related to over-consumption of calories and sweets. For

example, among those who are short vitamins, 4% are anemic and 6% are food insecure, but 10%

have high BMI and a surprising 28% consume too many sweets. Thus, for many youths, being

vitamin deficient is less a matter of consuming too little food than a matter of consuming thewrong

types of food. The results for food insecurity are also striking. Of youths suffering from food

insecurity, 10% have high blood cholesterol levels, 18% have high BMI, and 30% consume too

many sweets. Thus, although these youths do not always know where their next meal is coming

from, on avenge they are consuming too much sugar and fat, and too many calories overall.

       Means of the explanatory variables we consider are shown in Table 2, arranged by whether

or not respondents had one of four types of nutritional problem. Of the potential explanatory

variables that we observe, education of the head is the most obvious indicator of the extent of




                                                 21
nutrition information' that is likely to be available to the household. The age of the head may also

be important if there are cohort effects in the ability of household heads to assimilate new

information and pass it on to their children. Inmuigrant parents may also bring with them different

information about foods than native born parents. Urban residents may have greater exposure to

new information, as well as to a wider array of products.'6

        An additional measure that we consider is the youth's exposure to television, measured by

the number of hours of television he or she watched on the previous thy. While the decision to

watch television is clearly an endogenous choice, it also affects the youth's store of nutrition

information via passive exposure to advertising messages. These messages generally promote the

consumption of sweet, high-fat food and drink. And evidently television watching will reduce the

number of calories expended if it takes the place of less sedentary activities.

        The most natural measure of resources is household income, and an indicator equal to one if

the households income is below 1.3 times the poverty line is included in Table 2. This is the cutoff

for free school meals and for participation in the Food Stamps Program. Additional indicators of

household resources include whether the family is female headed, and indicators for household size.

Participation in food and nutrition programs can also be expected to increase the resources available

to the household. However, because the families who select into these programs are likely to differ


[6
   On the other hand, a large literature on urban food prices argues that people in poor inner-city neighborhoods pay
more for food than those in more affluent neighborhoods. This literature suggests that people in poor urban
neighborhoods may fmd it prohibitive to purchase things like fresh fruit and vegetables. Hayes (1999) reviews this
literature and argues that most of it is flawed by the use of "samples of convenience" rather than random samples.
Using data from a stratified random sample of stores in New York City, he finds no differences in food prices
between inner-city and other areas. The USDA recently reported that 90% of the poverty population lives in an area
with at least one supermarket, and that supermarkets in poor areas do not charge more than those in other areas
(Mantovani, 1997).




                                                        72
from families who do not, one may well find that participation is associated with poorer nutritional

outcomes, even if the programs have positive effects. Finally, we have included maternal BMI as an

indicator of the parent's health status (and thus of the child's endowment) •17

         Table 2 provides an initial look at whether these explanatory variables appear to be related to

nutritional outcomes. Youths with poorer nutritional outcomes come, on average, from households

with poorer, younger, less educated, and often female heads. These differences are particularly large

when we compare youths who suffer from food insecurity with other youths. Misnourished youths

also tend to watch more television than others. For example, youths with high BMI typically

watched almost one hour more of TV in the previous evening than other youths. Youths from

households that use food stamps are more likely to be short vitamins, have higher BMI, and are

twice as likely to suffer food insecurity than other households. However, they do score better on the

RET. The (unconditional) differences in the use of school nutrition programs show similar patterns.

Thus, although participation in food and nutrition programs may narrow gaps between participants

and non-participants in nutritional outcomes, it does not appear to close them.



5.       Results

5.1      Baseline Estimates

         Estimates from baseline models of the form (1) appear in Table 3. Increased education of

the head is associated with a reduced incidence of high BIvil, better overall diet quality, and lower


'' In earlier work we also included father's EMIl as well as indicators equal to one if either parent had high blood
pressure, stroke, or diabetes. We found that it was difficult to sort out the separate effects of these variables as they
were all positively correlated. An additional problem was that father's BMI is often missing. Hence, we focus only
on maternal BMI.




                                                           21
sweets consumption, as well as with a reduced probability of food insecurity. The estimates

indicate, for example, that youths in households with college educated heads would be 4 percentage

points less likely to be obese than those with high-school educated heads. There is little evidence of

cohort effects, though older heads are somewhat less likely to be food insecure. Being urban

reduces the probability of being short vitamins, but also increases the probability of having high

BMT Children of immigrants are more likely to have high blood cholesterol, but also have healthier

diets overall, as measured by the HE!.'8

        It is striking that while poverty is associated both with higher blood cholesterol levels, and

higher BMI, it is not a significant determinant of either of our deficiency measures (short vitamins or

anemia). Poverty is associated with food insecurity however, as is female headship, and a larger

household size.      Higher maternal BMI is associated with higher adolescent BMI, a higher

probability of being short vitamins and poorer overall diet quality, as one might expect. However, it

may be surprising to see that youths with mothers who have high BIvil consume fewer sweets,

perhaps in an attempt to avoid obesity themselves.

        There are also some significant differences by race, gender, and ethnicity which are

generally consistent with the differences shown in Table 1. Males have worse overall diet quality

than females and are more likely to report food insecurity. However, females are more likely to

suffer from anemia, high blood cholesterol and high BMI. There are many potential explanations

for these differences, including differences in teenage metabolism between boys and girls, and

 IS
   The finding on immigrant status complements the conclusions of a recent National Research Council/Institute of
Medicine (1998) report on the health status of immigrant children which concluded that despite poorer economic
status, the health of immigrant children tends to be better than that of native born children, and to decline with
assimilation.




                                                        24
differences in socioeconomic status. Blacks have poorer quality diets and consume more sweets.

Hispanics have better diet quality and are less likely to be short vitamins. They also consume fewer

sweets. These racial and ethnic differences are explored in further detail in Table 6 below.

        In summary, if we group our dependent variables into those representing deprivation,

obesity, and overall diet quality, Table 3 supports the following generalizations: First, both

education and income have important effects on our outcome measures. The effects of education are

always positive (where they are significant), while effects of poverty are always negative. Second,

education affects some outcomes which do not seem to be sensitive to income, and vice versa. To

be more specific, measures of household resources are important determinants of food insecurity,

but have little effect on actual nutritional deficiencies such as anemia and vitamin deficiencies.

Information, as proxied by the education of the household head, plays an important role in the

determination of overall diet quality, prevention of obesity, and in the reduction of food insecurity.

Other variables such as urbanicity, immigrant status, and maternal BMI also play significant roles in

the determination of some nutritional outcomes, but it is difficult to determine whether this reflects

information or resource effects, or both.




                                                 25
5.2      Effects of TV and Food and Nutrition Programs

         The estimated effects of two sets of potentially endogenous explanatory variables are shown

in Table 4. Panels A and B report estimates from two separate sets of regression. In the first, the

variables representing hours of television watching were added to models identical to those shown in

Table 3, while in the second panel, variables indicating participation in food and nutrition programs

were added to these models. For the sake of brevity, only the coefficients on the added variables are

shown.

 21      Effects nf'TV

         Excessive TV watching is associated with some very negative effects on diet quality. While

we found no statistically significant effects among youths who reported watching 2 to 4 hours of

television the previous evening, those who had watched 5 or more hours were more likely to be

short vitamins, had poorer overall diet quality, and higher BMI than other youths. On the other

hand, these youths consumed fewer sweets (although this effect is only marginally statistically

significant) and were less likely to report food insecurity.

         These observations are consistent with those of Gortmaker et al. (1996). There are many

ways that TV watching can affect obesity. It is possible that the informational content of the

programming and especially of the advertising plays a role, by enticing people to eat junk food.

Alternatively, one can view advances in TV technology as something that makes this sedentary form

of recreation more attractive than other, more active, ways that people could spend theft leisure

hours.

         Of course, the correlations we find do not prove that television watching causes poor dietary




                                                   76
habits or obesity. It is possible that both are caused by some third, unobserved factor such asa low

value attached to health, or a lack of information about healthy lifestyles. Without an exogenous

source of variation in the data, it will be difficult to demonstrate a causal linkage.



12.2 Effects of Fond nnd Nutrition Prop-rams

        The second panel of Table 4 contains initial estimates of the effects of participation in food

and nutrition programs on nutritional outcomes. These estimates may also be biased by unobserved

variables. For example, if youths in observationally similar non-participating households are

actually less needy, then these estimates may be biased towards finding negative or nil effects of

participation. On the other hand, if youths in observationally similar households do not participate

because they lack information about the programs, or because their parents place less value on good

nutrition, then these estimates will overstate the positive effects of the programs.

        In any case, the estimates suggest that the Food Stamp Program has little effect on measures

of deficiencies, obesity, or dietary quality, although it is associated with reductions in food

insecurity. School lunch is associated with a lower prevalence of anemia, which is encouraging

given that these meals aim to provide iron. School breakfast and lunch are however both associated

with higher cholesterol levels, though school breakfast is also associated with slightly better overall

diet quality.

        Table 5 lays out the results of an attempt to address the endogeneity of school nutrition

program participation using difference-in-differences methods. The identification in Panels A and B

comes from the fact that while children may be income-eligible for school meals year round, the




                                                   27
meals are only provided while the schools are in session.t9 Thus, afier controlling for the main

effects of eligibility and of school being in session, the interaction term can be interpreted as

measuring "exposure to school meals. Panel A measures exposure to free school meals by defining

the eligible as those with incomes less than or equal to 1.3 times the federal poverty line. Panel B

measures exposure to free or reduced price meals by using 1.85 times the federal poverty line as the

income eligibility cutoff

          Panel A suggests that exposure to free school meals improves the overall quality of the diet,

although it has no significant effect on our measures of deficiencies (anemia and being short

vitamins), obesity, or food insufficiency. The magnitude of the improvement is enough to offset the

negative effect of simple eligibility (i.e. poverty) on diet quality. Panel B indicates that in addition

to improving overall diet quality, exposure to free or reduced price school meals reduces blood

cholesterol (which is increased by poverty) and sweets consumption. Since the difference between

Panels A and B is that the latter includes children with incomes between 1.3 and 1.85 times the

federal poverty line in the eligible group, these results suggest that the reduction in cholesterol and

sweets intake is concentrated in this group. These generally positive results of exposure to school

meals suggest that despite the fact that these meals have been found to be high in cholesterol and

sodium, they are healthier than the meals that youths would eat in the absence of school meal

programs.




'   Some youths may participate in The Summer Food Service Program. This program provides meals similar to
those of the NLSP or SBP during the summer months and is often run through schools. However, the caseload is
small relative to the NLSP or SBP. In the summer of 1998, the program served 2.3 million children per day
compared to 14.7 million children per day who participated in the NLSP and 6.8 million who participated in the
5.3     Differences by Race and Ethnicity

        As noted above, we estimated all of our models separately by race and ethnicity. These

estimates are shown in Table 6. Note that since blacks and hispanics were over-sampled in

NIIANES III, we actually have larger samples of these groups than of whites. The effects of

information and resources differ substantially between the three groups. For example, among

whites, education reduces the incidence of obesity and improves the overall quality of the diet.

Among hispanics, education reduces the probability of being short vitamins and of being food

insecure, but has a small positive effect on the incidence of high blood cholesterol. Among blacks,

education of the head has no statistically significant effects. Similarly, we fmd evidence of cohort

effects only for hispanics--for them, increases in the age of the household head are associated with

higher cholesterol and sweets intake, but also with a lower probability of food insecurity. Urban

residence is associated with a higher probability of anemia among blacks, but with lower

probabilities of being short vitamins and higher overall diet quality among hispanics. Being an

inmiigrant is associated with higher quality diets among blacks and hispanics (though hispanic

immigrants are also more likely to have high cholesterol and high BMI), but with vitamin
deficiencies among whites.

        Turning to the effects of resource constraints, poverty increases the probability of high

cholesterol and high BMI among whites, and is associated with worse overall diet quality. Among

hispanics, poverty is also associated with high cholesterol as well as with food insecurity. However,

poverty is actually associated with a lower probability of obesity among hispanics. Remarkably,


SBP during the 1997-98 school year.




                                                29
among blacks, poverty has no effect on any outcome except food insecurity.

        The contrast between the effects of income on BMI            among   whites and hispanics is
suggestive of the Jeffrey et al. (1991) result that obesity tends to rise with income in poor countries,

and to fall with income in rich countries. A possible explanation is that in rich countries, where

most jobs are sedentary, it takes money and leisure to exercise, so thinness becomes a status symbol.

 In poor countries where many people engage in manual labor, fatness is the status symbol. Many

hispanics may have brought this attitude with them from their countries of origin.

        Among both blacks and hispanics, female-headedness is an important predictor of problem

diets--black youths in these households are more likely to be short vitamins and also to have high

BMI. Hispanics in these households are more likely to have high BMI, and high cholesterol, and to

have diets of worse overall quality. Among whites, female-headedness predicts food insecurity, but

is not related to the other outcome measures. Finally, it is interesting that larger white households

are less likely to experience food insecurity, while larger hispanic households are more likely to be

food insecure.

       To summarize, the main conclusion to be drawn from Table 6 is that most of our explanatory

variables have quite different effects on whites, blacks and hispanics. Differences between whites

and hispanics in the effects of education and income are particularly striking. Essentially, education

of the head appears to improve dietary quality and lower BMI only among whites. Among

hispanics, education is associated with less deprivation, but also with less healthy diets. Similarly,

poverty increases BMI among whites, but decreases it among hispanics. Education and income

have no significant effect on deficiencies or quality of diet among blacks, though they do not impact




                                                 10
food security.



5.4     Dfrferences by Gender

        Table 7 shows the results of the regressions similar to those of Table 3, except that they are

estimated separately for boys and girls. There is some evidence that both information and resources

are needed to explain the pattern of outcomes. Increasing education of the household head improves

diet quality for both boys and girls, but reduces the proportion with high BMI among girls only. For

boys, increased education of the household head reduces sweets consumption and food insecurity.

Girls from poor families have higher blood cholesterol, worse dietary quality, and a higher

probability of food insecurity than girls from richer families. Among boys, poverty is associated

with a higher incidence of vitamin deficiencies and high BIvil, but not with worse dietary quality.

Overall, this pattern of results suggests that while there are some differences in the effect of these

covariates for boys and girls, education generally improves nutritional status and poverty decreases

it. Since the covariates do not differ markedly among boys and girls, and the effects of these

covariates on nutritional outcomes also do not differ markedly, the most plausible explanation for

differences in outcomes across gender are biological and metabolic differences in the rate of

maturation in adolescence for boys and girls.



5.5     Determinants of Trends in Obesity over Time

        Using the NHANES I, II, and Ill separately, Table 8 compares coefficients from a regression

of obesity status (high Bivil) on a limited set of covariates that are available in all three data sets. For
all three data sets, increasing education of the household head is correlated with lower obesity

prevalence, but the effect is largest in the NIHIANES ifi, the most recent data set. Urban children are

3 percentage points more likely to be obese in the NIHANES Ill, but not in the other data sets.

Immigrant children are less likely to be obese in the NHANES II and HI, but not in NHANES I.

These patterns on the effect of urbanity and immigration status are likely due to demographic shifts

in these populations across time. Larger households tend to have lower obesity prevalence in all

three data sets, with the largest absolute effect in the N}IANES HI. Children from poor households

are more likely to be obese than children from other household in the NHANES HI, but not in

NHANES I and H. Females are three to four percentage point more likely to be obese than males in

all three data sets, with a one percentage point increase in the gap in the NIHANES IH over the other

two time points. Finally, despite the racial differences present in Figures 2 and 3 in obesity

prevalence, the regressions reveal no significant differences by race, except for hispanics in the

NIHANES II.

        Overall, these results suggest a structural break in the relationship between the covariates

and obesity prevalence occurred between NHANES II and Ill. In particular, the importance of both

information (education of household head) and resources (poverty) in predicting obesity increased in

the NHANES III over the other two data points.



6.     Conclusions

       We find that although many youths suffer from nutrient deficiencies (either anemia or

vitamin deficiencies) these conditions are not generally sensitive to measures of resource constraints,




                                                 12
and hence are unlikely to be due solely to a lack of food. The only exception is in black female-

headed households, where youths are more likely to be vitamin deficient. Hence, as discussed in the

introduction, most U.S. youths who suffer nutritional deficiencies are "misnourished" rather than

malnourished, and in fact often consume too many rather than too few calories.

        These results suggest that programs like Food Stamps which provide additional access to

food but do not attempt to alter the composition of the diet may have smaller effects on important

nutritional outcomes such as overall diet quality than school meal programs which offer specific

types of food. Our differçnce-in-difference estimates do in fact suggest that school nutrition

programs lead to healthier diets than would otherwise be consumed. The recent reforms to the

program are likely to enhance this effect.

       A second noteworthy finding is that the determinants of food insecurity appear to be quite

different than the determinants of nutritional deficiencies, obesity, or dietary quality. In particular,

resource constraints are more strongly linked to food insecurity than to the other nutritional

outcomes that we examine. It is also remarkable that we find little evidence that access to school

nutrition programs relieves food insecurity, at least in our difference-in-difference models. These

fmdings suggest that it is somewhat simplistic to equate food insecurity with hunger, as is often

done. Food insecurity appears to be a more complex problem, with strong relationships to social

phenomena like female-headedness. More generally, our results suggest that it is worthwhile to

examine a range of indicators that capture different aspects of nutritional status.

       Although it is difficult to directly test the hypothesis that infonnation or technology matter,

we find several pieces of evidence consistent with this idea. First, education of the head has a




                                                  In
consistently beneficial effect in models of obesity, diet quality, and food insecurity. It is worth

noting however, that we fmd these effects predominantly among whites. Secondly, the age of the

head matters in hispanic families, with families with older heads having poorer quality diets. This

type of cohort effect is consistent with a slow diffusion of new information about nutrition through

the population over time, with younger heads being more receptive to new ideas than older heads.

Indeed, we fmd that the effect of the household head's education level on obesity prevalence

increases in size in the most recent data set we examine. Third, we fmd that TV viewing has

consistently negative effects on all our outcome measures. This could be due either to the content of

the programming and advertising (i.e. advertisements for soft drinks and potato chips), or to the fact

that TV technology encourages many people to spend their leisure hours in sedentary activity.

       While the preceding summary emphasizes instances in which our explanatory variables have

statistically significant effects, it is striking that in many cases our models have relatively little

explanatory power. This fmding suggests that poor nutrition is a problem for American youths,

regardless of family background. The very pervasiveness of the problem suggests that it is unlikely

to be entirely due to a lack of household resources, and that broad-based policies designed to alter

the composition of the diet, either through the provision of information (e.g. through nutrition

labeling), or through direct provision of healthy food (as in the revised school lunch program),

should be encouraged.




                                                 14
                                           References

Albertson AM; Tobelmann RC; Marquart L. (1997) "Estimated dietary calcium intake and food
sources for adolescent females: 1980-92." Journal of Adolescent Health, 20(1):20-6.

American Psychiatric Association. (1994) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 4th
ed. 1994. Washington, DC : American Psychiatric Association.

Barth N, Ziegler A, Himmehnann GW, Coners H, et al. (1997) "Significant weight gains in a
clinical sample of obese children and adolescents between 1985 and 1995." Tnternational Journal of
Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders, 21(2):122-6.

Beaton   GH, Burema J, and Ritenbaugh C. "Errors in the Interpretation of Dietary Assessmenf'
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 65(suppl):1100S-7S.

Briefel RB, Sempos CT, McDowell MA, Chien SCY, Alaimo K. (1997) "Dietary Methods Research
in the third NHANES: Underreporting of Energy Intake." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
65(suppl): 1203 S-9S.

Butland, BK; Strachan DP; Anderson HR (April, 1999) "Fresh Fruit Intake and Asthma Symptoms
in Young British Adults: Confounding or Effect Modification by Smoking?" European Respiratory
Journal 13(4):744-50.

Charney E; Goodman HC; McBride M; Lyon B; Pratt R. (1976) "Childhood antecedents of adult
obesity. Do chubby infants become obese adults?" New England Journal of Medicine, 295(1):6-9.

Chinn S, Hughes JM, Rona R.J. (1998) "Trends in growth and obesity in ethnic groups in Britain."
Archives of Disease iii Childhood, 78(6):513-7.

Clarkson PM. (1995) "Micronutrients and exercise: anti-oxidants and minerals." Journal of Sports
Sciences, 13(suppl):S1 1-24.

Committee on hon Deficiency. (1968) "hon Deficiency in the United States," Journal of the
American Medical Association 203:119-24.

Contento, T.R., Manning, A.D, and Shannon, B. (1992) "Research Perspectives on School-Based
Nutrition Education", Journal ofNulrition Education, 24(5): 247-260.

Currie, Janet. "U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs", in Robert Moffitt (ed.) ITS Puhlic Assistance
Programs, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press forNBER) forthcoming 2001.

DeAngelis CD, Feigin RD, Warshaw JB, and McMillan JA. (1999) Oski's Pediatrics principlas and
practice 3rd ed. Philadelphia : Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

de Bree A, van Dusseldorp M, Brouwer IA, van het Hof KH, Steegers-Theunissen RPM. (1997)
"Folate Intake in Europe: Recommended, Actual, and Desired Intake" European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 5 1:643-60.

Delange F, Benker G, Caron PH, Eber 0, Ott W, Peter F, Podoba J, Simescu M, Szybinsky Z,
Vertongen F, Vitti P, Wiersinga W, Zamrazil V. (1997) "Thyroid Volume and Urinary Iodine in
European Schoolchildren: Standardization of Values for Assessment of Iodine Deficiency"
European Tol]rnal of Endocrinoloov 136:180-7.

Devaney BL; Gordon AR; Burghardt JA. (1995) "Dietary intakes of students," American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 610 suppl):205S-212S.

Foster DW. (1991) "Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia," In Wilson ID, Braunwald B, Isselbacher U,
Petersdorf RG ci al. (eds.) I-Jarrisnn's Principles of Internal Medicine, 12th edition. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Frank DA; Roos N; Meyers A; Napoleone M et al. (1996) "Seasonal variation in weight-for-age in a
pediatric emergency room." Public Health Reports, 11 l(4):366-7l.

Glenny AM; O'Meara 5; Melville A; Sheldon TA; Wilson C. (1997) "The treatment and prevention
of obesity: a systematic review of the literature," International Journal of Obesity and Related
Metabolic Disorders, 21(9):715-37.

Goldberg GR, Black AE, Jebb SA. (1991) "Critical evaluation of energy intake data using
fimdamental principles of energy physiology: 1. Derivation of cut-off limits to identi& under-
recording." European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 45:569-81.

Gonzalez-Requejo A; Sanchez-Bayle M; Baeza J; Amaiz P; Vila 5; Asensio J; Ruiz-Jarabo C.
(1995) "Relations between nutrient intake and serum lipid and apolipoprotein levels," Journal of
Pediatrics, l27(1):53-7.

Gordon, A.R., Devaney, B.L. and Burghardt, J.A. "Dietary Effects of the National School Lunch
Program and the School Breakfast Programt', American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61 #1(1995)
221s-231s.

Gortmaker SL; Dietz WH Jr; Sobol AM; Wehler CA. (1987) "Increasing pediatric obesity in the
United States," American Journal of Diseases of Children, 141(5):535-40.

Gortmaker SL; Must A; Sobol AM; Peterson K et al. (April, 1996) "Television viewing as a Cause
of Increasing Obesity Among Children in the United States, 1986-1990', Archives of Pexliatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, 150(4):356-362.

Grossman M (1972) "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health," Journal of
Polifical Economy, 80(2):223-55.

Hallberg L (1995) "Results of Surveys to Assess hon Status in Europe," Nutrition Reviews
530 l):3 14-22.

Hamilton, William and Fox, Mary Kay. Nutrition and Health Outcomes Shidy Final Report
(Cambridge MA: Abt Associates), 2000.

Hammer LD; Kraemer HC; Wilson DM; Ritter PL; Dornbusch SM. (1991) "Standardized percentile
curves of body-mass index for children and adolescents," Americcin Journal of fT)iseaces of Children,
145(3):259-63.

Hayes, Lashawn. "Are Prices Higher for the Poor in New York City?', Princeton University
Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #423, Sept. 1999.

Himes JIM; Dietz WH. (1994) "Guidelines for overweight in adolescent preventive services:
recommendations from an expert committee. The Expert Committee on Clinical Guidelines for
Overweight in Adolescent Preventive Services," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 59(2):307-
16.

Hollowell JG, Staeling NW, Hamion WET, Flanders DW, Gunter EW, Maberly GF, Braverman LE,
Pino 5, Miller DT, Garbe PL, DeLozier DM, and Jeckson RJ. (1998) "Iodine Nutrition in the United
States. Trends and Public health Implications: Iodine Excretion Data from the NHANES I and Ili
(1971-1974 and 1988-1994)." Journal of Clinincal Endocrine Metabolism 83: 3401-8.

Hughes JM, Li L, Chinn 5, Rona RI. (1997) "Trends in growth in England and Scotland, 1972 to
1994," Archives of fliseace in flildhoo* 76(3):182-9.

Ippolito, Pauline and Alan Mathios. "Information, Advertising and Health: A Study of the Cereal
Market", Rand Journal of Economics, 1990,21 #3, 459-480.

Ippolito, Pauline and Man Mathios. "Information and Advertising: The Case of Fat Consumption in
the United States", American Economic Review, 1995, 85 #2, 91-95.

Ippolito, Pauline and Alan Mathios. "New Food Labeling Regulations and the Flow of Nutrition
Information to Consumers", Journal of Pithlic Policy and Marketing, 1993, 12, 188-205.

Ippolito, Pauline and Alan Mathios. "Information and Advertising Policy: A Study of Fat and
Cholesterol Consumption in the United States, 1977-1990", Bureau of Economics Staff Report,
Federal Trade Commission, Washington D.C., 1996.

Jeffrey, Robert W., Simone A. French, Jean L. Forster, and Vivian M. Spry. "Socioeconomic Status
Differences in Health Behaviors Related to Obesity: the Healthy Worker Project", International
Journal of Obesity, 15, 1991, 689ff.

Joshipura KJ; Ascherio A; Manson JE; Stampfer MJ et al. (Oct. 6, 1999) "Fruit and Vegetable
Intake in Relation to Risk of Ischemic Stroke", Jcurnial of the American Medical Association,
282(13):! 233-1239.
Kemper HC; Post GB; Twisk JW; van Mechelen W. (1999) "Lifestyle and obesity in adolescence
and young adulthood: results from the Amsterdam Growth And Health Longitudinal Study
(AGAHLS)," International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic DisordeN, 23(Suppl 3):S34-
40.

Kennedy, Eileen, James Ohis, Steven Carlson, and Kathryn Fleming. "The Healthy Eating Index:
Design and Applications", Journal of the American Dietetic Association, October 1995, 95 #10:
1103-1 108.

Kreipe RE. (1995) "Bone mineral density in adolescents," Pediatric Annals, 24(6):308-15.

Lampe, JW (Sept. 1999) "Health Effects of Vegetables and Fruit: Assessing Mechanisms of Action
in Human Experimental Studies", American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 70(3, Suppl):475S-490S.

Lauer RM; Lee J; Clarke WIt (1989) "Predicting adult cholesterol levels from measurements in
childhood and adolescence: the Muscatine Study." Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine,
65(10):1 127-42

Looker AC; Dallman PR; Carroll MD; (hinter EW; Johnson CL. (1997) "Prevalence of iron
deficiency in the United States," Journal of the American Medical Association 26, 277(12):973-6.

Luder, E., Ceysens-Okada, E., Loren-Roth, A., et a!. (1990) "Health and Nutrition Surveys in a
Group of Urban Homeless Adults", Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 90:1387-92.

Middleman AB, Emans SI, and Cox I. (1996) "Nutritional Vit B12 Deficiency and Folate Deficiency
in an Adolescent Patient Presenting with Anemia, Weight Loss, and Poor School Performance."
Journal of Adolescent Health 19:76-9

Mantovani, Richard E., Lynn Daft, Theodore Macaluso, Katherine HofThian. "Food Retailers in the
Food Stamp Program: Characteristics and Service to Participants" (Washington D.C.: Food and
Nutrition Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture), Feb. 1997.

Mossberg HO. (1989) "40-year follow-up of overweight children," Jancet, Aug 26, 2(8661.):491-3.




                                                 lx
National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, From Generation to ('Teneraliolv The Health
and Well-Being of Children in Immigrant Families Donald Hernandez and Evan Charney (eds.)
(Washington D.C.: National Academy Press) 1998.

Neuhauser   L, Disbrow D,     and   Margen 5. (1995) "Hunger and Food Insecurity in California,"
Technical Assistance Program Report. California Policy Seminar, University of California.

Neumark-Sztainer D; Story M; Resnick MD; Blum RW. (1998) "Lessons learned about adolescent
nutrition from the Minnesota Adolescent Health Survey," Journal of the American Dietetic
Association 98(12):1449-56.

Nord, Mark, Kyle Jemison and Gary Bickel. "Prevalence of Food Insecurity and Hunger by State,
1996-1998", Food and Rural Economics Division, Economic Research Service, USDA, Food
Assistance and Nutrition Research Report #2 (Washington D.C.) Sept. 1999.

Nordin BE. (1997) "Calcium and osteoporosis." Nuirilion, 13(7-8):664-86.

Ogden CL; Troiano RP; Briefel BR; Kuczmarski RJ; Flegal KM; Johnson CL. (1997) "Prevalence
of overweight among preschool children in the United States, 1971 through 1994." Pediatrics,
99(4):E1.

Palace VP; Khaper N; Qin Q; Singal PK (March, 1999) "Antioxidant Potentials of Vitamin A and
Carotenoids and theft Relevance to Heart Disease", Free Radical Biology and Medicine 26 (5-
6):746-61.

Philipson, Tomas and Richard Posner. "The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of
Technological Change", NBER Working Paper #7423, November 1999.

Power C; Lake JK; Cole TJ. (1997) "Body mass index and height from childhood to adulthood in
the 1958 British born cohort," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 66(5): 1094-101.

Raiten DJ, Fisher KD (eds.) (1995) Assessment of folate methodology used in the Third National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NIHANES ifi, 1988-1994). Journal of Nutrition 125:
 137 1S-98S.

Rockett HRH and Colditz GA. (1997) "Assessing Diets of Children and Adolescents" American
 Journal of Clinical Nutrition 65(suppl): 11165-225.

Rona RJ. (1995) "The National Study of Health and Growth (NSHG): 23 years on the road,"
International Journal of F.pidemiology, 24(suppl 1):S69-74.
Rose D, Oliveira V. (1997) "Nutrient intakes of individuals from food-insufficient households in the
United States [see comments]." American Journal ofPublic Health, 87(12):1956-61.

Seidell JC. (1995) "Obesity in Europe: scaling an epidemic," International Journal of Obesity and
Related Metabolic Disorders, 19(suppl 3):S1-4.

Shepard Rand Dennison CM. (1996) "Influences on Adolescent Food Choice" Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society 55:345-57.

Stockman JA. (1987) "hon Deficiency Anemia: Have We Come Far Enough?" Journal of the
American Medical Association 258:1645-7.

Strauss RS. (1999) Self-Reported Weight Status and Dieting in a Cross-Sectional Sample of Young
Adolescents: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, 153(7): 741-7.

Szabo P; Tury F. "Prevalence of clinical and subclinical forms of anorexia and buliinia nervosa
among working females and males," Orvosi Hetilap, l36(34):1829-35.

Tumbull 5; Ward A; Treasure J; Jick H; Derby L. (1996) The demand for eating disorder care. An
epidemiological study using the general practice research database," British Journal of Psychiatry,
169(6):705-12.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control, National Health Examination Surveys, Division for Health
Examination Statistics, (1999) "Table 71: Overweight Children and Adolescents 6-17 years of age
according to sex, age, race and hispanic origin: United States, selected years 1963-65 and 1988-94."
Unpublished data (available at http://www.cdc.govlnchs/fastats/pdVhus98t7 1 .pdf)

U.S. Centers for Disease Control, (1996) "Guidelines for School Programs to Promote Lifelong
Healthy Eating," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 45(RR-9).

U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition and
Your HealthS Dietary Guidelines for Americans 4th Edition, Home and Garden Bulletin # 232
(Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office).

U.S. Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare. NCHS Growth Curves for ChildreTv Birth-i X Years
(Hyattsvill MD: Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare) publication #78-1650.

Wang Y, Popkin B, and Zhai F. "The Nutritional Status and Dietary Pattern of Chinese Adolescents,
1991 and 1993." European Journal of Clinical NuSion, 1998 52(12):908-16.

Wilde P. (1997) "A Monthly Cycle in Food Use by Food Stamp Recipients." Paper presented at




                                                 40
research briefing, Board on Children, Youth and Familes, May 19-20, 1997. Cornell University.
Cited in Bridgeman A, Phillips D. (eds.) (1998) New Findings on Child Health Povert, and
Nufritinir Summary of a Research Briefing Washington D.C.: National Academy Press.

Wilde P, Ranney C. (1997) "A Monthly Cycle in Food Expenditure and Intake by Participants in the
U.S. Food Stamp Program. Working Paper 97-04. Department of Agricultural, Resource, and
Managerial Economics, Cornell University.

Wilson ID; Braunwald E; Isselbacher KJ; Petersdorf RG; Martin JB; Fauci AS; Root RK (eds.)
Harrison's Principles of internal Medicine (New York: McGraw-Hill).

Wright ID; Bialostosky K; Gunter EW; Carroll MD; Najjar MF; Bowman BA; Johnson CL. (1998)
"Blood folate and vitamin B12: United States, 1988-94." Vital and Health Statistics Series 1l Data
from the National Health Survey, Dec(243):1-78.




                                               41
                      Appendix Table 1: Definitions of Outcome Variables

S1]ffic,ient Food
When asked whether they had "enough food to eat, sometimes not enough to eat, or often not
enough to eat", respondent answered that they had enough food to eat.

DietAry Tntikes:
Healthy Eating Index described in text.
High Sweets: reported consuming more than 30 sweets per month.

Measures based on Physical Examination and laboratory Measures
Anemia: For age 12, cutoffs were hemoglobin < 11.5 g!dL and hematocrit lt 35%. For> 12, cutoffs
were hemoglobin < 12 g/dL and hematocrit It 37%.
High Blood Cholesterol: Serum cholesterol gt 5.44 nmoL/L.
Short Vitamin C: C 11.4 mmol/L.
Short Vitamin A: C 1.05 umolfL.
Short Vitamin B: <11.6 umol/L.
High BMI: > 27.3 for females and> 27.8 for males.
 Table la: Means of Outcome Variables, and Fraction with.One Problem Who Also Have Another
Panel A: Means               All        Male      Female        White     Black    Hispanic
Anemia                       .035       .005       .069          .019      .122      .019
Short Any Vitamin            .089       .100       .078          .093      .107      .063
  (A, C, E)
High Blood                   .048       .032       .065          .032      .075      .099
  Cholesterol
High BMI                     .089       .066       .113          .075      .134      .146
100 - Healthy Eating         40.3       44.5       35.7         .39.9     43.8      38.8
  Index                     (.420)     (.563)     (.563)        (.780)    (.670)    (.864)
High Sweets                  .243       .239       .248         .232       .324      .147
Food Insecure                .055       .062       .048         .038       .115      .092
# Observations               1358       622         736          371       527       402
Panel B: Fraction with One Problem Who Alen T.LRtrc Znnt-hrsr
                                       Short       High         High                High      Food
                           Anemic    Vitamins     Chol.         BMI      100-HEI   Sweets     Ins.
Anemic                        1         .096       .053         .104       39.4     .241      .089
Short Vitamins               .038        1         .016         .102      43.5      .283      .062

High Blood                   .039       .030        1           .183      39.3      .168      .121
  Cholesterol
High EMI                     .041       .103       .098           1       41.5      .111      .110
HEI c= 25th                  .032       .110       .032         .103      60.9      .235      .083
  percentile
High Sweets                  .035       .104       .033         .040      38.1        1       .069

Food Insecure                .057       .100       .105         .176      43.8      .302       1

# Observations               100        150         81          172       341       353       133
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Means are calculated using sampling weights.
                            Table 2: Means of Explanatory Variables

                      Short Vitamins         High BMI      100-HEI   Food Insecure
                    NO       YES        NO         YES      <25        >75       NO      YES
Education Head     12.6     11.95      12.6        11.1     12.0       12.8     12.6     10.1
                   (.086)   (.217)     (.086)     (.195)   (.144)     (.178)   (.083)    (.282)
Age Head           40.4      39.0      40.4        39.3     39.6      40.9      40.4     37.9
                   (.205)   (.619)     (.203)     (.666)   (.406)     (.363)   (.207)    (.457)
Urban               .486     .347       .470       .515     .394       .554     .473      .484
                   (.014)   (.039)     (.014)     (.038)   (.027)     (.027)   (.014)    (.043)
Immigrant           .149     .127       .148       .137     .148       .170     .147      .142
                   (.102)   (.027)     (.010)     (.026)   (.019)     (.020)   (.010)    (.030)
Income c 1.3*       .288     .382       .276       .498     .333       .241      .266     .811
  Poverty          (.013)   (.040)     (.013)     (.038)   (.026)     (.023)   (.0126)   (.034)
Female Head         .210     .287       .202       .367     .250       .178      .190     .671
                   (.012)   (.037)     (.012)     (.037)   (.023)     (.021)    (.011)   (.041)
Household Size     4.68      4.46      4.68        4.44     4.60      4.80      4.64     4.98
                   (.044)   (.125)     (.044)     (.118)   (.094)     (.077)   (.043)    (.150)
Mother's BMI       25.7      26.9      25.6        28.1     26.3      24.6      25.7     26.5
                   (.160)   (.502)     (.158)     (.522)   (.298)     (.288)   (.160)    (.520)
Hours TV           2.91      3.32      2.87        3.71     3.06      2.55      2.94     3.01
                   (.052)   (.154)     (.053)     (.143)   (.103)     (.098)   (.052)    (.162)
Food Stamps         .158     .209       .148       .312     .163       .121     .152      .341
                   (.010)   (.033)     (.010)     (.035)   (.020)     (.018)   (.010)    (.041)
4$ Times School    3.14      3.56      3.16        3.39     3.56      2.92      3.17     3.42
  Lunch/Week       (.063)   (.167)     (.063)     (.161)   (.114)     (.119)   (.062)    (.177)
# Times School      .484     .508       .451       .840     .533       .419     .462      .895
  Breakfast/Week   (.040)   (.113)     (.039)     (.134)   (.077)     (.069)   (.039)    (.156)
4$ Observations     1208     150       -1186       172       341       340      1225      133

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Means are computed using sample weights.
                                       Table 3: Baseline Estimates

                    (1)          (2)            (3)     (4)           (5)       (6)        (7)
                              Short          High      High                    High     Food In-
                 Anemia     Vitamins        Chol.      BMI          100-HEI   Sweets     secure
Education Head    - .0003    - .004          .002      - .010        - .518   - .013      -.007
                  (.144)    (1.496)         (.761)     (3.48)       (3.39)    (2.801)    (2.93)
Age Head           .001      - .002         - .0002    - .001        - .089   - .0006    - .002
                  (1.395    (1.536)         (.256)     (1.28)       (1.56)    (.385)     (1.85)
Urban              .004      -   .033       -   .002    .036         —2.02    -.024       .006
                  (.418)    (1.994)         (.201)     (2.29)       (2.40)    (.965)     (.486)
Immigrant         -.004          .026           .038   - .031        -2.95     .048      - .029
                  (.203)     (.903)         (1.748)    (1.08)       (1.98)    (1.01)     (1.29)
Incornecl.3*      - .003         .020         .059      .034         1.60     - .047      .071
  Poverty         (.214)     (.939)         (3.804)    (1.65)       (1.49)    (1.49)     (4.45)
Female Head        .004       .013          - .014      .022    •
                                                                     .120     - .011      .113
                  (.278)     (.556)         (.848)     (.976)       (.103)    (.337)     (6.50)
Household Size     .002      -.005          -.007      -.011        -.294      .009       .014
                  (.618)     (.942)         (1.619)    (2.14)       (1.05)    (1.07)     (3.24)
Mother's BMI       .001       .025            .005      .055         2.43     - .064     - .007
                  (.101)     (1.75)         (.434)     (4.01)       (3.37)    (3.02)     (.681)
Male              -.061       .019          - .031     -.046         8.93     - .012      .002
                  (6.22)     (1.20)        (2.726)     (3.02)       (11.24)   (.516)     (1.85)
Black              .098      - .005          .026       .007         2.99      .109       .002
                  (6.46)     (.198)        (1.445)     (.313)       (2.45)    (3.04)     (.090)
Hispanic          - .005     --055           .033       .032        -.420     - .113      .011
                  (.279)     (1.85)        (1.526)     (1.09)       (.278)    (2.57)     (.504)
Other              .018      -.047          -.002      -.032         3.98      .097      -.001
                  (.710)     (1.16)         (.073)     (.808)       (1.95)    (1.61)     (.038)
Constant           .003       .176           .044       .175        41.09      .567       .099
                  (.058)     (2.32)         (.781)     (2.36)       (10.57)   (4.98)     (1.72)
R-squared          .069       .021           .033       .058         .130      .032       .121
Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. Ttiere were 1358 observations in all regressions.
                            Table 4: Effects of TV   and Nutrition   Programs
                    (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)
                                 Short      High       High                  High      Food In-
                   Anemia      Vitamins    Chol.        BMI     100-HEI     Sweets      secure
A: TV Watching
2-4 hours           .008         .007      -.007       .015       .489      -   .001    -.018
  yesterday        (.752)       (.427)     (.549)     (.919)     (.568)     (.043)      (1.38)

over 5 hours       -.014         .077       .001       .086      3.92       -.071       -.051
  yesterday        (.838)       (2.93)     (.026)     (3.36)     (2.92)     (1.79)      (2.58)

It- squared         . 070        .027       .034        066          135        .034     .125
# Observations
B: Food and Nutrition Programs
Food Stamps        .001     - .009          .018       .034      -1.04      - .069      - .064
                   (.059)       (.327)     (.942)     (1.32)     (.770)     (1.73)      (3.18)
School Breakfast   -.021         .036      - .003      .036      -2.98       .025        .033
 1-4 times/week    (.928)       (.984)     (.109)     (1.03)     (1.62)     (.456)      (1.21)
School Breakfast    .015        -.027       .057       .051      -3.48       .044       - .0002
 5 times/week      (.739)       (.843)     (2.39)     (1.61)    (2.10)      (.905)      (.010)
School Lunch       - .045        .007       .039       - .011    -1.42       .015        .007
 1/4 times/week    (3.08)       (.303)     (2.27)     (.464)    (1.20)      (.443)      (.403)
School Lunch       -.020         .013      - .020      - .003    - .581      .007       - .019
 5 times/week      (1.62)       (.669)     (1.34)     (.160)    (.569)      (.236)      (1.29)
It-squared          .077         .023       .047       .051      .136        .034        .131


Notes: T-statistics in parentheses.       All models include all of the variables listed in Table
3, and 1358 Observations.
               Table 5: Difference-in-Difference Evaluations of the Effects of
                                  School Nutrition Programs

                          (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)
                             Short         High      High              High     Food In-
                  Anemia   Vitamins        Chol.
A: Eligible f or Free School Meals
Eligible           - .019    - .004          090      .050     5.82     .019      .086
                  (.847)         (.099)    (.027)    (1.39)   (3.12)   (351)     (3.11)
School in         -       .033    .010     - . 022   -.021     1.83     .086      .006
  Session         (2.39)         (.477)    (1.39)    (.972)   (1.64)   (2.64)    (.352)
Eligible*             -   025     .026     - .038    - .020   -5.94    - .090    - .023
  in Session      (.988)         (.627)    (1.25)    (.496)   (2.86)   (1.47)    (.728)
R- squared            • 073       .020      .038      .061     .133     .037      .122
H! F.iiaihle for Reduced Price School     M1 R
Eligible           -0l0      -.008          .096      .028     2.83     .068      .078
                  (.465)         (.237)    (3.99)    (.857)   (1.70)   (1.40)    (3.16)
School in         - .050          .011     -.010     - .024   1.46      .128      .006
  Session         (1.99)         (.458)    (.535)    (1.03)   (1.18)   (3.54)    (.332)
Eligible*             .011        .015     -.054     -.004    -3.09    -.159     -.014
  in Session      (.472)         (.407)    (1.99)    (.124)   (1.64)   (2.90)    (.515)
R- squared

Notes: See Table 4. These models did not include the indicator for income c 1.3 and poverty
since this is the same as eligibility
   Table 6: Differences in the Effects of Information and   Resources   by Race and Ethnicity
                   (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)
                             Short     High     High                     High    Food In-
White            Anemia    Vitamins   Chol.      BMI        100-HEI     Sweets    secure
Education Head    .002      -.002      .002     -.016        -.950       -.011     -.004
                 (.554)     (.257)    (.431)    (2.97)      (3.14)      (1.22)    (.969)
Age Head          .001      -.004     -.001     -.003        -.137      -.002     -.001
                 (1.08)     (1.46)    (.926)    (1.20)      (1.19)      (.640)    (.810)
Urban            -.012      - .045    - .020     .042        -2.52      - .033     .006
                 (.820)     (1.38)    (1.03)    (1.50)      (1.63)      (.703)    (.319)
Immigrant         .033       .145      .009     - .088       -2.70       .014     - .034
                 (.904)     (1.86)    (.189)    (1.31)      (.729)      (.127)    (.733)
Income c 1.3*     .0002      .048      .045      .119        .372       -.038      .027
  Poverty        (.013)     (1.07)    (1.64)    (3.08)      (1.75)      (.576)    (1.01)
Female Head       .001      - .020    - .010    - .056       -1.22       .019      .209
                 (.041)     (.394)    (.326)    (1.27)      (.507)      (.253)    (6.86)
Household Size    .004      - .012     .005     - .022       - .651      .024     - .020
                 (.685)     (1.02)    (.629)    (2.09)      (1.12)      (1.37)    (2.77)
Mother's SMI     -.001       .002      .000      .006        .268       -.007     -.001
                 (.914)     (.742)    (.086)    (2.26)      (1.90)      (1.63)    (.329)
Male              - .040     .023     - .018    - .057       8.73       - .039     .015
                 (2.79)     (.762)    (.955)    (2.15)      (5.98)      (.864)    (.818)
Constant         - .012      .250      .048      .344       49.72        .577      .010
                 (.165)     (1.61)    (.508)    (2.55)      (6.72)      (2.54)    (.107)
R-squared         .033       .035      .020      .105        .178        .021      .186
Black
Education Head   - .006     -.002     -.0004     .002        -.150      -.015      .001
                 (1.01)     (.369)    (.076)    (.352)      (.490)      (1.61)    (.200)
Age Head          .0004      .002     .0004      .001        - .037      .002     - .001
                 (.252)     (1.27)    (.278)    (.663)      (.480)      (.643)   (-.775)
Urban             .072       .045      .005      .042        .317       -.008     - .016
                 (2.52)     (1.63)    (.198)    (1.41)      (.231)      (.186)    (.574)
Immigrant        - .050     - .027    -.026     -.045       -6.04       -.060      .089
                 (.944)     (.515)    (.576)    (.800)      (2.34)      (.752)    (1.69)
Income c 1.3*     .015       .019      .010     -.042       - .229      - .025     .150
  Poverty        (.489)     (.625)    (.394)    (1.27)      (.152)      (.535)    (4.87)
Female Head       .023       .070     -.032      .065       -2.37       - .002    -.033
                 (.742)     (2.34)    (1.26)    (2.03)      (1.60)      (.037)    (1.09)
Household Size   -.001      - .001    - .005     .007        .066        .001     -.005
                 (.095)     (.129)    (.788)    (.861)      (.166)      (.050)    (.616)
                   (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)      (5)       (6)           (7)
                             Short      High        High                High        Food In-
                 Anemia    Vitamins    (Thai.        BMI     100-HEI   Sweets        secure
Mother's BMI       .001      -.000      .004         .010     .016     - .003         .001
                  (.364)    (.016)     (2.51)       (4.57)   (.164)    (.925)        (.570)
Male              - .166     .022      - .061       - .102    4.58      .055    -     .003
                  (5.98)    (.800)     (2.66)       (3.53)   (3.42)    (1.33)        (.116)
Constant           .188     - .020      .010        - .226   45.72      .511          .073
                  (1.30)    (.142)     (.086)       (1.50)   (6.56)    (2.38)        (.511)
H-squared          .084      .026       .031         .077     .036      .014          .060
                                                .
Hispanics
Education Head    -.003     - .008      .009        -.005     - .025   - .006        - .020
                  (1.61)    (2.03)     (2.00)       (.971)   (.106)    (1.19)        (4.86)
Age Head          - .001    - .002      .006        - .002   - .052     .006         - .004
                  (1.19)    (1.06)     (3.33)       (.772)   (.507)    (2.66)        (2.54)
Urban             - .006     .048       .039         .051    -3.08     -.050          .015
                  (.391)    (1.83)     (1.26)       (1.35)   (1.85)    (1.33)        (.508)
Immigrant         -.019     -.028       .092         .066    -3.92     -.007         -.140
                  (1.22)    (1.04)     (2.84)       (1.69)   (2.27)    (.186)        (.473)
Income c 1.3*     -.017     - .004      .089        - .115    2.09     -.039          .090
  Poverty         (1.08)    (.147)     (2.65)       (2.83)   (1.17)    (.952)        (2.94)
Female Head       - .013    - .011      .089         .172     7.01     - .060         .054
                  (.677)    (.334)     (2.30)       (3.65)   (3.38)    (1.28)        (1.51)
Household Size    .007       .014      - .026       - .005   -1.15      .029          .019
                 (1.35)     (1.64)     (2.53)       (.367)   (2.09)    (2.35)        (2.04)
Motherts BIll     .000       .003      - .002       - .002    .650     -.007         - .005
                 (.004)     (1.54)     (.645)       (.512)   (4.73)    (2.28)        (2.27)
Male             -.031      -.007      -.030         .017    12.30      .080          .137
                 (2.21)     (.265)     (1.03)       (.473)   (7.77)    (2.22)        (5.06)
Constant          .105       .104      - .206        .135    25.06      .045          .467
                 (1.48)     (.827)     (1.38)       (.745)   (3.16)    (.249)        (3.43)
H-squared         .039       .050       .117         .067     .252      .073          .215


Motes: T-statistics in parentheses.   There are 371 whites, 527 blacks, and 402 Hispanics
                 Table 7: Differences in the Effects of Information and Resources by Sex
                                                                                                      I
                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)            (7)
                                Short       High        High                  High         Food In-
Females             Anemia     Vitamins     Chol.        EMI      100-RET    Sweets         secure
Education Head       .0004      -.003        .003       -.016       -.57     -.0010         -.001
                    (.105)      (.836)      (.840)     (3.85)      (2.78)    (1.65)         (.368)
Age Head             .002       —.000        .001      - .002      - .072     .002          — .003
                    (1.68)      (.227)      (.503)     (1.31)      (.937)    (1.05)         (2.44)
Urban                .008       - .008      - .014      .037       —1.06      .028          - .008
                    (.417)      (.395)      (.738)     (1.52)      (.914)    (.834)         (.474)
Immigrant           - .0002     - .016       .081      - .089      -4.55      .027           .008
                    (.004)      (.403)      (2.31)     (1.99)      (2.11)    (.437)         (.268)
Income c 1.3         -.004      - .032       .061      -.013       2.93      - .043          .079
  Poverty           (.158)      (1.21)      (2.53)     (.422)      (1.99)    (1.03)         (3.45)
Female Head          .009        .032       - .053      .041       1.93      - .012          .056
                    (.339)      (1.14)      (2.05)     (1.24)      (1.21)    (.266)         (2.53)
Household Size       .007        .005       - .016     - .015      - .851     .012           .010
                    (1.08)      (.710)      (2.40)     (1.80)      (2.14)    (1.07)         (1.87)
Mother's BMI         .0001       .007       .004        .005        .527     - .011         - .001
                    (.056)      (3.99)      (2.08)     (2.54)      (5.05)    (3.71)         (.409)
Constant             - .090     —.075       - .038      .317       36.24      .507           .099
                    (1.01)      (.781)      (.426)     (2.84)      (6.72)    (3.30)         (1.32)
H-squared            .062        .028       .047        .065        .107      .048           .082

Males
Education Head      - .0001     -.005       .001       - .004      - .465    -.014          - .013
                    (.096)      (.979)      (.520)     (.985)      (2.01)    (2.02)         (3.63)
Age Head            - .0001     - .002      - .001     - .001      - .080    - .003          .000
                    (.339)      (1.40)     (.561)      (.625)      (.963)    (1.32)         (.037)
Urban                .002       - .061      .003        .023       -3.39     —.070           .012
                    (.368)      (2.27)     (1.65)      (1.06)      (2.69)    (1.83)         (.603)
Immigrant           - .007       .085       .008        .010       -1.57      .052          -.071
                    (.645)      (1.92)     (.309)      (.284)     (.752)     (.814)        (2.14)
Income c 1.3k        .002        .069       .046        .089       -.164     -.024          .058
  Poverty           (.265)      (2.07)     (2.34)      (3.24)     (.104)     (.512)        (2.34)
Female Head          .0002      -.007       .027       -.004       2.08      -.005          .170
                    (.019)      (.182)     (1.27)      (.148)     (1.20)     (.096)        (6.21)
Household Size      -.0002      -.015       .003       - .009      .269       .005          .016
                    (.087)      (1.73)     (.543)      (1.24)     (.669)     (.402)        (2.50)
Mother's BMI        —.0000      - .001      -.002       .006       - .029    -.002          — .001
                    (.093)      (.647)     (1.47)      (3.17)     (.284)     (.628)        (.427)
Constant             .0080       .378       .049        .010       53.95      .587          .124
                    (3.84)      (3.13)     (.690)      (.098)     (9.52)     (3.41)        (1.39)
H-squared            .032        .045       .040        .068       .038       .044          .186
Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. Regressions also include race dummies.
Table 8: Trends in EMI Regression Results - NEANES 1,11, and III

                          (1)          (2)          (3)
                 NHANES I NHA.NES II NHANES III
Education Head    - .0036   - .0028    - . 012
                      (3.6)           (1.5)        (4.0)
Age Head          .00024              .0016    -   .0012
                      (.33)           (2.2)        (1.1)
Urban                 -   . 012   -   .0037        .030
                      (.99)           (.28)        (1.9)
Immigrant             .0053       -    .053    -    . 039
                      (.26)           (2.4)        (1.4)
Incomecl ,3*          -   . 014       .013          043
  Poverty             (.92)           (.86)        (2.1)
Female Head               0073        .0021         018
                      (.42)           (.13)        (.81)
Household Size    -       .0066   -    .003    -    . 011
                      (2,2)           (.90)        (2.1)
Male              -       .030    -    . 032   -    . 044
                      (2.7)           (3.0)        (2.9)
Black                     028     .0062             017
                      (1.6)           (.36)        (.73)
Hispanic                               056         .018
                                      (2.2)        (.67)
Constant               .22         .040             .33
                      (4.1)       (.85)            (5.0)
R- squared            .0194        0191        .0445
N                 1,697           1,509        1,358
Notes: T-statistics in parentheses. Non-English language spoken at home is used as a proxy
for immigration status in the NHANES I sample.
•




                     Figure 1: Trends in Obesity by Sex

         12%-
                                                      -
    , 10%
    U)
    28%                                                                 _____
    I- 2%- ________________
         0%-            I         I          I            I



           1970       1975      1980      1985       1990        1995
                                      Year
                  (Data are plotted at midpoint of year range)
r


                   Figure 2: Male Trends in Obesity by Race

          20%

    a,
          15%
    a,
    .0
    a4-                                                                        • Whiten
    C
      10%                                                                -   - -•--. Black
    a,
    a
    I-
    C,    5%                                                             —-a_—HispaJ
    a.

          0%
            1970       1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                       Year
                   (Data are plotted at midpoint of year range)
IT




                Figure 3: Female Trends in Obesity by Race

          20%

     C,
     in
     C,
        15%
     -a
     0— 10/0                                                                • White
                                                                         •--•-- Black
     C)
     e                                                                   — -s- — Hispanic
     .5%
     a-


          0%
            1970       1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                      Year
                   (Data are plotted at midpoint of year range)
