NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FORECASTING CRASHES: TRADING VOLUME, PAST RETURNS
AND CONDITIONAL SKEWNESS IN STOCK PRICES
Joseph Chen
Harrison Hong
Jeremy C. Stein

Working Paper 7687
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7687
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000

We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for research support, and to John Campbell, Kent Daniel,
Ken Froot, Ravi Jagannathan, Chris Lamoreaux, Ken Singleton, an anonymous referee and seminar
participants at Cornell, HBS, Northwestern, Stanford, Arizona, Maryland, Texas and the NBER for helpful
comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Jun Pan for generously sharing her option-pricing software with
us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Joseph Chen, Harrison Hong and Jeremy C. Stein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Forecasting Crashes: Trading Volume, Past Returns
and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices
Joseph Chen, Harrison Hong and Jeremy C. Stein
NBER Working Paper No. 7687
May 2000
JEL No. G12, G14
ABSTRACT
This paper is an investigation into the determinants of asymmetries in stock returns. We
develop a series of cross-sectional regression specifications which attempt to forecast skewness in
the daily returns of individual stocks. Negative skewness is most pronounced in stocks that have
experienced: 1) an increase in trading volume relative to trend over the prior six months; and 2)
positive returns over the prior thirty-six months. The first finding is consistent with the model of
Hong and Stein (1999), which predicts that negative asymmetries are more likely to occur when there
are large differences of opinion among investors. The latter finding fits with a number of theories,
most notably Blanchard and Watson’s (1982) rendition of stock-price bubbles. Analogous results
also obtain when we attempt to forecast the skewness of the aggregate stock market, though our
statistical power in this case is limited.

Joseph Chen
Stanford Business School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
chenjs@leland.stanford.edu

Harrison Hong
Stanford Business School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
hghong@leland.stanford.edu

Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School
Morgan 361
Boston, MA 02163
MIT Sloan School of Management
and NBER
jstein@hbs.edu

I. Introduction
Aggregate stock-market returns are asymmetrically distributed. This asymmetry can be
measured in several ways. First, and most simply, the very largest movements in the market are
usually decreases, rather than increases—that is, the stock market is more prone to melt down
than to melt up. For example, of the ten biggest one-day movements in the S&P 500 since 1947,
nine were declines.1 Second, a large literature documents that market returns exhibit negative
skewness, or a closely related property, “asymmetric volatility”—a tendency for volatility to go
up with negative returns.2

Finally, since the crash of October 1987, the prices of stock-index

options have been strongly indicative of a negative asymmetry in returns, with the implied
volatilities of out-of-the-money puts far exceeding those of out-of-the-money calls; this pattern
has come to be known as the “smirk” in index implied volatilities.3
While the existence of negative asymmetries in market returns is generally not disputed,
it is less clear what underlying economic mechanism these asymmetries reflect. Perhaps the
most venerable theory is based on leverage effects (Black (1976), Christie (1982)), whereby a
drop in prices raises operating and financial leverage, and hence the volatility of subsequent
returns. However, it appears that leverage effects are not of sufficient quantitative importance to
explain the data (Schwert (1989), Bekaert and Wu (1997)). This is especially true if one is
interested in asymmetries at a relatively high frequency, e.g., in daily data. To explain these, one
has to argue that intra-day changes in leverage have a large impact on volatility—that a drop in
1

Moreover, the one increase—of 9.10 percent on October 21, 1987—was right on the heels of the 20.47 percent
decline on October 19, and arguably represented a correction of the microstructural distortions that arose on that
chaotic day, rather than an independent price change.
2
If, in a discrete-time setting, a negative return in period t raises volatility in period t+1 and thereafter, returns
measured over multiple periods will be negatively skewed, even if single-period returns are not. The literature on
these phenomena includes Pindyck (1984), French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell and Hentschel
(1992), Nelson (1991), Engle and Ng (1993), Glosten, Jagannathan and Runkle (1993), Braun, Nelson and Sunier
(1995), Duffee (1995), Bekaert and Wu (1997) and Wu (1997).

1

prices on Monday morning leads to a large increase in leverage and hence in volatility by
Monday afternoon, so that overall, the return for the full day Monday is negatively skewed.
An alternative theory is based on a “volatility feedback” mechanism. As developed by
Pindyck (1984), French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), Campbell and Hentschel (1992) and
others, the idea is as follows: When a large piece of good news arrives, this signals that market
volatility has increased, so the direct positive effect of the good news is partially offset by an
increase in the risk premium. On the other hand, when a large piece of bad news arrives, the
direct effect and the risk-premium effect now go in the same direction, so the impact of the news
is amplified. While the volatility-feedback story is in some ways more attractive than the
leverage-effects story, there are again questions as to whether it has the quantitative kick that is
needed to explain the data. The thrust of the critique, first articulated by Poterba and Summers
(1986), is that shocks to market volatility are for the most part very short-lived, and hence cannot
be expected to have a large impact on risk premia.
A third explanation for asymmetries in stock-market returns comes from stochastic
bubble models of the sort pioneered by Blanchard and Watson (1982). The asymmetry here is
due to the popping of the bubble—a low-probability event that produces large negative returns.
What the leverage-effects, volatility-feedback and bubble theories all have in common is
that they can be cast in a representative-investor framework.4

In contrast, a more recent

explanation of return asymmetries, Hong and Stein (1999), argues that investor heterogeneity is
central to the phenomenon. The Hong-Stein model rests on two key assumptions: 1) there are
differences of opinion among investors as to fundamental value; and 2) some—though not all—
3

See, e.g., Bates (1997), Bakshi, Cao and Chen (1997), and Dumas, Fleming and Whaley (1998).
This is not to say that all bubble models adopt a representative-agent approach—only that their central prediction
of return asymmetries does not require investor heterogeneity. For a more recent bubble model that explicitly

4

2

investors face short-sales constraints. The constrained investors can be thought of as mutual
funds, whose charters typically prohibit them from taking short positions; the unconstrained
investors can be thought of as hedge funds or other arbitrageurs.5
When differences of opinion are initially large, those bearish investors who are subject to
the short-sales constraint will be forced to a corner solution, in which they sell all of their shares
and just sit out of the market. As a consequence of being at a corner, their information is not
fully incorporated into prices. However, if after this information is hidden, other, previouslymore-bullish investors have a change of heart and bail out of the market, the originally-morebearish group may become the marginal “support buyers” and hence more will be learned about
their signals. Thus accumulated hidden information tends to come out during market declines,
which is another way of saying that returns are negatively skewed.
With its focus on differences of opinion, the Hong-Stein model has distinctive empirical
implications that are not shared by the representative-investor theories. In particular, the HongStein model predicts that negative skewness in returns will be most pronounced after periods of
heavy trading volume. This is because—like in many models with differences of opinion—
trading volume proxies for the intensity of disagreement.6 When disagreement (and hence
trading volume) is high, it is more likely that bearish investors will be at a corner, with their
information incompletely revealed in prices. And it is precisely this hiding of information that
sets the stage for negative skewness in subsequent periods, when the arrival of bad news to other,
previously-more bullish investors can force the hidden information to come out.

incorporates heterogeneity, see e.g., Allen, Morris and Postlewaite (1993). In their paper, heterogeneity is motivated
by a desire to generate bubbles in a finite-horizon setting.
5
Brown, Carlson and Chapman (1999) document that roughly 70% of mutual funds explicitly state (in Form N-SAR
that they file with the SEC) that they are not permitted to sell short. This is obviously a lower bound on the fraction
of funds that never take short positions.
6
See Varian (1989), Harris and Raviv (1993), Kandel and Pearson (1995) and Odean (1998a) for other models with
this feature.

3

In this paper, we undertake an empirical investigation that is motivated by this
differences-of-opinion theory. We develop a series of cross-sectional regression specifications
that attempt to forecast skewness in the daily returns to individual stocks.7 One of our key
forecasting variables is the recent deviation of turnover from its trend. For example, at the firm
level, we ask whether the skewness in daily returns measured over a given six-month period (say
July 1-December 31 1998) can be predicted from the detrended level of turnover over the prior
six-month period (January 1-June 30 1998).

It turns out that firms which experience larger

increases in turnover relative to trend are indeed predicted to have more negative skewness;
moreover, the effect of turnover is strongly statistically and economically significant.
In an effort to isolate the effects of turnover, our specifications also include a number of
control variables. These control variables can be divided into two categories. In the first
category are those that, like detrended turnover, capture time-varying influences on skewness.
The most significant variable in this category is past returns. As in recent work by Harvey and
Siddique (2000), we find that when past returns have been high, skewness is forecasted to
become more negative. The predictive power is strongest for returns in the prior six months, but
there is some ability to predict negative skewness based on returns as far back as thirty-six
months. In a similar vein, glamour stocks—those with low ratios of book value to market
value—are also forecasted to have more negative skewness. These results can be rationalized in
a number of ways, but they are perhaps most clearly suggested by models of stochastic bubbles.
In the context of a bubble model, high past returns (or a low value of book-to-market) imply that

7

Thus when we speak of “forecasting crashes” in the title of the paper, we are adopting a narrow and euphemistic
definition of the word “crashes”, associating it solely with the conditional skewness of the return distribution; we
are not in the business of forecasting negative expected returns. This usage follows Bates (1991, 1997), who also
interprets conditional skewness—in his case, inferred from options prices—as a measure of crash expectations.

4

the bubble has been building up for a long time, so that there is a larger drop when it pops and
prices fall back to fundamentals.
The second category of variables that help to explain skewness are those that appear to be
picking up relatively fixed firm characteristics. For example, it has been documented by Harvey
and Siddique (2000) that skewness is more negative on average for large-cap firms—a pattern
that also shows up strongly in our multivariate regressions. We are not aware of any theories
that would have naturally led one to anticipate this finding.8 Rather, for our purposes a variable
like size is best thought of as an atheoretic control—it is included in our regressions to help
ensure that we do not mistakenly attribute explanatory power to turnover when it is actually
proxying for some other firm characteristic. Such a control may be redundant to the extent that
detrending the turnover variable already removes firm effects, but we keep it in to be safe.
In addition to running our cross-sectional regressions with the individual-firm data, we
also experiment briefly with analogous time-series regressions for the U.S. stock market as a
whole. Here, we attempt to forecast the skewness in the daily returns to the market using
detrended market turnover and past market returns. Obviously, this pure time-series approach
entails an enormous loss in statistical power—with data going back to 1962, we have less than
70 independent observations of market skewness measured at six-month intervals—which is why
it is not the main focus of our analysis. Nevertheless, it is comforting to note that the qualitative
results from the aggregate-market regressions closely parallel those from the cross-sectional
regressions: high values of both detrended turnover and past returns also forecast more negative
market skewness. The coefficient estimates continue to imply economically meaningful effects,
although that for detrended turnover is no longer statistically significant.

8

Though one can of course cook up stories after the fact. We offer one such story below.

5

While both the cross-sectional and time-series results for turnover are broadly consistent
with the theory we are interested in, we should stress that we do not at this point view them as a
tight test. There are several reasons why one might wish to remain skeptical. First, beyond the
effects of turnover, we document other strong influences on skewness, such as firm size, that are
not easily rationalized within the context of the Hong-Stein model, and for which there are no
other widely-accepted explanations. Second, even if innovations to trading volume do proxy for
the intensity of disagreement among investors, they likely capture other factors as well—such as
changes in trading costs—that we have not adequately controlled for.

Finally, and most

generally, our efforts to model the determinants of conditional skewness at the firm level are
really quite exploratory in nature.9 Given how early it is in this game, we are naturally reluctant
to declare an unqualified victory for any one theory.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review in more
detail the theoretical work that motivates our empirical specification. In Section III, we discuss
our sample and the construction of our key variables. In Section IV, we present our baseline
cross-sectional regressions, along with a variety of sensitivities and sample splits. In Section V,
we consider the analogous time-series regressions, in which we attempt to forecast the skewness
in aggregate-market returns. In Section VI, we use an option-pricing metric to evaluate the
economic significance of our results. Section VII concludes.

II. Theoretical Background
The model of Hong and Stein (1999), which provides the principal motivation for our

9

By contrast, there is a huge literature on forecasting volatility. And as noted above, many models of conditional
volatility have implications for the average degree of skewness in stock returns. But we aim to understand variation
over time and across stocks in the degree of skewness, which represents different—and more uncharted—territory.

6

empirical tests, begins with the assumption that there are two investors, A and B, each of whom
gets a private signal about a stock’s terminal payoff. As a matter of objective reality, each
investor’s signal contains some useful information. However, A only pays attention to his own
signal, even if that of B is revealed to him, and vice-versa. This deviation from full Bayesian
rationality—which can be thought of as a form of overconfidence—leads to irreducible
differences of opinion about the stock’s value.
In addition to investors A and B, the model also incorporates a class of fully rational,
risk-neutral arbitrageurs. These arbitrageurs recognize that the best estimate of the stock’s true
value is formed by averaging the signals of A and B. However, the arbitrageurs may not always
get to see both of the signals, because A and B face short-sales constraints. Importantly, the
arbitrageurs themselves are not short-sales-constrained, so they can take infinitely large positive
or negative positions. Perhaps the most natural interpretation of these assumptions is not to take
the short-sales constraint literally—as an absolute technological impediment to trade—but rather
to think of investors A and B as institutions like equity mutual funds, many of whom are
precluded by their charters or operating policies from ever taking short positions.10 In contrast,
the arbitrageurs might be thought of as hedge funds who are not subject to such restrictions.
Even though investors A and B can be said to suffer from behavioral biases (i.e.,
overconfidence) the market as a whole is efficient, in the sense of there being no predictability in
returns. This is because of the presence of the risk-neutral, unconstrained arbitrageurs. Hence,
unlike most of the behavioral finance literature, which relies on limited arbitrage, the model’s
only implications are for the higher-order moments of the return distribution.

10

As noted above, Brown, Carlson and Chapman (1999) document that such a restriction is the industry norm.
Moreover, Koski and Pontiff (1999) find that 79% of equity mutual funds make no use whatsoever of derivatives
(either futures or options), suggesting that funds are also not finding synthetic ways to take short positions.

7

There are two trading dates. To see how the model can generate asymmetries, imagine
that at time 1, investor B gets a pessimistic signal, so that his valuation for the stock lies well
below A’s. Because of the short-sales constraint, B will simply sit out of the market, and the
only trade will be between investor A and the arbitrageurs. The arbitrageurs are rational enough
to figure out that B’s signal is below A’s, but they cannot know by how much. Thus the market
price at time 1 impounds A’s prior information, but does not fully reflect B’s time-1 signal.
Next, move to time 2, and suppose that A gets a new positive signal. In this case, A
continues to be the more optimistic of the two, so his new time-2 signal is incorporated into the
price, while B’s time-1 signal remains hidden. On the other hand, if A gets a bad signal at time
2, some of B’s previously-hidden information may come out. This is because as A bails out of
the market at time 2, the arbitrageurs learn something by observing if and at what price B steps
in and starts being willing to buy. In other words, there is information in how B responds to A’s
reduced demand for the stock—in whether or not B gets up off the sidelines and provides buying
support. Thus more information comes out when the stock price is falling at time 2, which
implies that time-2 returns will be negatively skewed.
However, this logic is not sufficient to establish that unconditional returns (i.e., the
average across time 1 and time 2) are negatively skewed. There is a countervailing positiveskewness effect at time 1, since the most negative draws of B’s signal are the ones that get
hidden from the market at this time. When A’s and B’s priors are sufficiently close to one
another, the positive time-1 skewness can actually overwhelm the negative time-2 skewness, so
that returns are on average positively skewed. Nevertheless, Hong and Stein show in their
Proposition 3 that if the ex ante divergence of opinion (i.e. the difference in priors) between A

8

and B is great enough, the time-2 effect dominates, and unconditional returns are negatively
skewed.11
More directly relevant for our purposes is a result (Proposition 5) about the conditional
skewness of time-2 returns. When differences of opinion are particularly pronounced at time 1—
i.e., when B’s signal is much lower than A’s—this is when B’s signal is most likely to remain
hidden, thereby setting the stage for negative skewness at time 2. And large differences of
opinion at time 1 also manifest themselves as unusually large trading volume, with A doing the
buying, and the arbitrageurs doing the selling. Thus high trading volume at time 1 forecasts
more negative skewness at time 2. This conditional statement holds regardless of whether
unconditional skewness is positive or negative, and it forms the basis for our empirical tests.12
In order to isolate this particular theoretical effect, we need to be aware of other
potentially confounding factors. For example, it is well-known that trading volume is correlated
with past returns (Shefrin and Statman (1985), Lakonishok and Smidt (1986), Odean (1998b)).
And, as noted above, past returns might also help predict skewness, if there are stochastic
bubbles of the sort described by Blanchard and Watson (1982).13 Indeed, just such a pattern has
been documented in recent work by Harvey and Siddique (2000). To control for this tendency,
all of our regressions include a number of lags of past returns on the right-hand side.
In a similar vein, one might also worry about skewness being correlated with volatility.

11

It is this unconditional skewness feature—which is driven by the short-sales constraint—that most clearly
distinguishes the model of Hong and Stein from other related models in which pent-up information is revealed
through the trading process (e.g., Grossman (1988), Genotte and Leland (1990) Jacklin et al (1992), and Romer
(1993)). In these other models, returns are on average symmetrically distributed, albeit potentially quite volatile.
12
More precisely, Proposition 5 requires a much weaker restriction on the difference in priors between A and B than
does Proposition 3, although it still assumes that they are not too close together. Thus there is a wide range of
parameter values for which Proposition 5 applies even though unconditional skewness is actually positive.
13
In the model of Coval and Hirshleifer (1998), there is also conditional negative skewness after periods of positive
returns, even though unconditionally, average skewness is zero.

9

There are a number of models which can deliver such a correlation; e.g., in the volatilityfeedback model of Campbell and Hentschel (1992), higher levels of volatility are associated with
more negative skewness. To the extent that such an effect is present in our data, we would like
to know whether turnover is forecasting skewness directly—as it should, according to the HongStein model—or whether it is really just forecasting volatility, which is in turn correlated with
skewness. To address this concern, all of our regressions include some control for volatility, and
we experiment with several ways of doing this control.

III. Data
To construct our variables, we begin with data on daily stock prices and monthly trading
volume for all NYSE and AMEX firms, from the CRSP daily and monthly stock files. Our
sample period begins in July 1962, which is as far back as we can get the trading volume data.
We do not include NASDAQ firms. This is because we want to have a uniform and accurate
measure of trading volume, and the dealer nature of the NASDAQ market is likely to render
turnover in its stocks not directly comparable to that of NYSE and AMEX stocks.

We also

follow convention and exclude ADRs, REITs, closed-end funds, primes and scores—i.e., stocks
that do not have a CRSP share type code of 10 or 11.
For most of our analysis, we further truncate the sample by eliminating the very smallest
stocks in the NYSE/AMEX universe—in particular, those with a market capitalization below the
20th percentile NYSE breakpoint. We do so because our goal is to use trading volume as a proxy
for differences of opinion. Theoretical models that relate trading volume to differences of
opinion typically assume that transactions costs are zero. In reality, variations in transactions
costs are likely to be an important driver of trading volume, and more so for very small stocks.

10

By eliminating the smallest stocks, we hope to raise the ratio of signal (differences of opinion) to
noise (transactions costs) in our key explanatory variable. We also report some sensitivities in
which the smallest stocks are analyzed separately (see Table 4 below), and as one would expect
from this discussion, the coefficients on turnover for this subsample are noticeably smaller.
Our baseline measure of skewness, which we denote NCSKEW, for “negative coefficient
of skewness”, is calculated by taking the negative of (the sample analog to) the third moment of
daily returns, and dividing it by (the sample analog to) the standard deviation of daily returns
raised to the third power. Thus for any stock i over any six-month period t, we have:

NCSKEWit = -(n(n-1)3/2E Rit3)/((n-1)(n-2)(E Rit2)3/2 )

(1)

where Rit represents the sequence of demeaned daily returns to stock i during period t, and n is
the number of observations on daily returns during the period.14 These daily “returns” are, more
precisely, actually log changes in price.

We use log changes as opposed to simple daily

percentage returns because they allow for a natural benchmark—if stock returns were
lognormally distributed, then an NCSKEW measure based on log changes should have a mean of
zero. However, we have also redone everything with an NCSKEW measure based instead on
simple daily percentage returns, and none of our main results are affected.15

14

In calculating NCSKEW, as well as any other moments which rely on daily return data, we drop any firm which
has more than five missing observations on daily returns in a given period.
15
Using simple percentage returns instead of log changes does have two (predictable) effects: 1) it makes returns
look more postively skewed on average; and 2) it induces a pronounced correlation between skewness and
contemporaneously measured volatility. However, given that we control for volatility in all of our regression
specifications, using simple percentage returns does not materially alter the coefficients on turnover and past returns.

11

Scaling the raw third moment by the standard deviation cubed allows for comparisons
across stocks with different variances; this is the usual normalization for skewness statistics.16
By putting a minus sign in front of the third moment, we are adopting the convention that an
increase in NCSKEW corresponds to a stock being more “crash prone”—i.e., having a more leftskewed distribution.
For most of our regressions, the daily firm-level returns that go into the calculation of the
NCSKEW variable are market-adjusted returns—the log change in stock i less the log change in
the value-weighted CRSP index for that day. However, we also rerun everything with variations
of NCSKEW based on both: 1) excess returns (the log change in stock i less the T-bill return); as
well as 2) beta-adjusted returns. As will be seen, these variations do not make much difference
to our results with NCSKEW.
In addition to NCSKEW, we also work with a second measure of return asymmetries
which does not involve third moments, and hence is less likely to be overly influenced by a
handful of extreme days. This alternative measure, which we denote by DUVOL, for “down-toup volatility”, is computed as follows. For any stock i over any six-month period t, we separate
all the days with returns below the period mean (“down” days) from those with returns above the
period mean (“up” days), and compute the standard deviation for each of these sub-samples
separately. We then take the log of the ratio of (the sample analog to) the standard deviation on
the down days to (the sample analog to) the standard deviation on the up days. Thus we have:

DUVOLit = log{(nu-1)EDOWN Rit2/((nd-1)EUP Rit2 )}

16

See, e.g., Greene (1993).

12

(2)

where nu and nd are the number of up and down days, respectively. Again, the convention is
that a higher value of this measure corresponds to a more left-skewed distribution. To preview,
our results with NCSKEW and DUVOL are for the most part quite similar, so it does not appear
that they depend on a particular parametric representation of return asymmetries.
In our regressions with firm-level data, we use non-overlapping six-month observations
on skewness. In particular, the NCSKEW and DUVOL measures are calculated using either data
from January 1- June 30, or July 1-December 31 of each calendar year. We could alternatively
use overlapping data—so that we would have a new skewness measure every month—but there
is little payoff to doing so, since, as will become clear shortly, we already have more than
enough statistical power as is.17

When we turn to the time-series regressions with aggregate-

market data, statistical power becomes a real issue, and we use overlapping observations.
The choice of a six-month horizon for measuring skewness is admittedly somewhat
arbitrary. In principle, the effects that we are interested in could be playing themselves out over
a shorter horizon, so that trading volume on Monday forecasts skewness for the rest of the week,
but has little predictive power beyond that. Unfortunately, the model of Hong and Stein (1999)
does not give us much guidance in this regard. Lacking this theoretical guidance, our choice to
use six months’ worth of daily returns to estimate skewness is driven more by measurement
concerns. For example, if we estimated skewness using only one month’s worth of data, we
would presumably have more measurement error; this is particularly relevant given that a higherorder moment like skewness is strongly influenced by outliers in the data. The important point
to note, however, is that to the extent that our measurement horizon does not correspond well to

17

We have, however, checked our results by re-running everything using different non-overlapping intervals—e.g.,
February 1-July 31 and August 1-January 31; March 1-August 31 and September 1-February 28, etc. In all cases,
the results are essentially identical.

13

the underlying theory, this should simply blur our ability to find what the theory predicts—i.e., it
should make our tests too conservative.
Besides the skewness measures, the other variables that we use are very familiar and do
not merit much discussion.

SIGMAit is the standard deviation of stock i’s daily returns,

measured over the six-month period t. RETit is the cumulative return on stock i, also measured
over the six-month period t.18 LOGSIZEit is the log of firm i’s stock-market capitalization at the
end of period t. BK/MKTit is firm i’s book-to-market ratio at the end of period t. LOGCOVERit
is the log of one plus the number of analysts (from the I/B/E/S database) covering firm i at the
end of period t. TURNOVERit is the average monthly share turnover in stock i—defined as
shares traded divided by shares outstanding—over period t. In our baseline specification, we
work with detrended turnover, which we denote DTURNOVER. The detrending is done very
simply, by subtracting from the TURNOVER variable a moving average of its value over the
prior eighteen months. Again, the rationale for doing this detrending is that, as a matter of
conservatism, we want to eliminate any component of turnover that can be thought of as a
relatively fixed firm characteristic.19
Table 1 presents a variety of summary statistics for our sample. Panel A shows the
means and standard deviations of all of our variables for: 1) the full sample of individual firms;
2) five size-based sub-samples; and 3) the market as a whole, defined as the value-weighted
NYSE/AMEX index.20 Panels B and C look at contemporaneous correlations and
autocorrelations respectively, for the sample of individual firms. In Panels B and C, as in most
18

When NCSKEW or DUVOL is computed using either market-adjusted or beta-adjusted returns, SIGMA and RET
are computed using market-adjusted returns. When NCSKEW or DUVOL is computed using excess returns,
SIGMA and RET are based on excess returns as well.
19
This detrending is roughly analogous to doing a fixed-effects specification in a shorter-lived panel. Since we
have such a long time series, it makes little sense to impose that firm effects are literally constant over the entire
sample period. Instead, the detrending controls for firm characteristics that adjust gradually.
20
When working with the market as a whole, all the variables are based on simple excess returns relative to T-Bills.

14

of our subsequent regression analysis, we restrict the sample to those firms with a market
capitalization above the 20th percentile NYSE breakpoint.
One interesting point that emerges from Panel A is that while there is negative
skewness—i.e., positive mean values of NCSKEW and DUVOL—for the market as a whole, the
opposite is true for individual stocks, which are positively skewed. This discrepancy can in
principle be understood within the strict confines of the Hong-Stein (1999) model, since, as was
noted above, the model allows for either positive or negative unconditional skewness, depending
on the degree of ex-ante investor heterogeneity. In other words, if one is willing to assume that
differences of opinion about the market are on average more pronounced than differences of
opinion about individual stocks, the model can produce negative skewness for the latter and
positive skewness for the former.
However, it is not clear that such an assumption is empirically defensible. An alternative
interpretation of the data in Table 1.A is that even if the Hong-Stein model provides a reasonable
account of skewness in market returns,

it must be missing something when it comes to

explaining the mean skewness of individual stocks. For example, it might be that large positive
events like hostile takeovers—which the theory ignores—impart an added degree of positive
skewness to individual stocks but wash out across the market as a whole. This view does not
imply that we cannot learn something about the theory by looking at firm-level data; the theory
will certainly gain some credence if it does a good job of explaining cross-sectional variation in
skewness, even if it cannot fit the mean skewness at the firm level. Nevertheless, it is worth
emphasizing the caveat that, without further embellishments, the theory may not provide a
convincing rationale for everything that is going on at the individual stock level.

15

The most noteworthy fact in Panel B of Table 1 is the contemporaneous correlation
between our two skewness measures, NCSKEW and DUVOL, which is .88. While these two
measures are quite different in their construction, they appear to be picking up much the same
information. Also worth pointing out is that the correlation between NCSKEW and SIGMA is
less than .01, while that between DUVOL and SIGMA is about -.08; these low correlations lend
some preliminary (and comforting) support to the notion that forecasting either of our skewness
measures is a quite distinct exercise from forecasting volatility. Panel C documents that, unlike
SIGMA—which has an autocorrelation coefficient of .72—neither of our skewness measures has
much persistence. For NCSKEW the autocorrelation is on the order of .05; for DUVOL it is .09.

IV.

Forecasting Skewness in the Cross-Section

A. Baseline Specification
Table 2 presents our baseline cross-sectional regression specification. We pool all the
data (excluding firms with market capitalization below the 20th percentile NYSE breakpoint) and
regress NCSKEWit+1 against: its own lagged value, NCSKEWit; as well as SIGMAit; LOGSIZEit;
DTURNOVERit; and six lags of past returns, RETit …..RETit-5.

We also include dummy

variables for each time period t. The regression can be interpreted as an effort to predict—based
on information available at the end of period t—which firms will have the most negative
skewness in period t+1.
In column 1, we use market-adjusted returns as the basis for computing the NCSKEW
measure. In column 2 we use beta-adjusted returns, and in column 3 we use simple excess
returns. As can be seen, the results are quite similar in all three cases. In particular, the
coefficients on detrended turnover are positive and strongly statistically significant in each of the

16

three columns, albeit somewhat larger (by about 20%) in magnitude when market-adjusted
returns are used.21 The past return terms are also always positive and strongly significant. Thus
stocks that have experienced either a surge in turnover or high past returns are predicted to have
more negative skewness—i.e., to become more crash-prone, all else equal. The coefficient on
size is also positive, suggesting that negative skewness is more likely in large-cap stocks.
As noted above, the findings for past returns and size run broadly parallel to previous
work by Harvey and Siddique (2000). Nevertheless, there are several distinctions between our
results and theirs. To begin, ours are couched in a multivariate regression framework, while
theirs are based on univariate sorts. But more significantly, our measure of skewness is quite
different from theirs, for two reasons. First, we look at daily returns, while they look at monthly
returns. Second, we look individual stocks, while they look at portfolios of stocks.22
We have actually done some detailed comparisons to make these latter points explicit.
For 25 portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market, we have computed both: 1) the skewness of
monthly portfolio returns, as in Harvey and Siddique (2000); and 2) the average skewness of
daily individual-stock returns, a measure analogous to what we use here. We can then ask:
across the 25 portfolios, what is the correlation of the two skewness measures? The answer is
about 0.22, a relatively low, albeit significantly positive correlation. Thus while it might have
been reasonable to conjecture—based on the prior evidence in Harvey and Siddique (2000)—that
our firm-level NCSKEW variable would also be related to past returns and size, such results
were by no means a foregone conclusion.

21

We should expect to get lower coefficient estimates when using simple excess returns as compared to marketadjusted returns—after all, DTURNOVER is a firm-specific variable, so it should have more ability to explain
skewness in the purely idiosyncratic component of stock returns
22
The skewness of a portfolio of stocks is not the same thing as the average skewness of its component stocks,
especially if, as Harvey and Siddique (2000) stress, coskewness varies systematically with firm characteristics.

17

As we have already stressed, the positive coefficient on size is not something one would
have necessarily predicted ex ante based on the Hong-Stein (1999) model. Nevertheless, it is
possible to come up with rationalizations after the fact. Suppose that managers can to some
extent control the rate at which information about their firms gets out. It seems plausible that if
they uncover good news, they will disclose all this good news right away. In contrast, if they are
sitting on bad news, they may try to delay its release, with the result that the bad news dribbles
out slowly. This behavior will tend to impart positive skewness to firm-level returns, and may
explain why returns on individual stocks are on average positively skewed at the same time that
market returns are negatively skewed. Moreover, if one adds the further assumption that it is
easier for managers of small firms to temporarily hide bad news—since they face less scrutiny
from outside analysts than do managers of large firms—the resulting positive skewness will be
more pronounced for small firms. We return to this idea in Section IV.E below, and use it to
develop some additional testable implications.

B. Robustness
In Table 3 we conduct a number of further robustness checks. Everything is a variation
on column 1 of Table 2, and uses an NCSKEW measure based on market-adjusted returns. First,
in column 1 of Table 3, we truncate outliers of the NCSKEW variable, setting all observations
that are more than three standard deviations from the mean in any period t to the three-standarddeviation tail values in that period. As can be seen, this has little impact on the results,
suggesting that they are not driven by a handful of outlier observations.
In column 2, we replace the DTURNOVER variable with its un-detrended analog,
TURNOVER. This means that we are now admitting into consideration differences in turnover

18

across firms that are not merely temporary deviations from trend, but rather, more long-run firm
characteristics. In other words, we are essentially removing our fixed-effect control from the
turnover variable. According to the theory, one might expect that long-run cross-firm variation
in turnover would also predict skewness—some firms might be subject to persistently large
differences in investor opinion, and these too should matter for return asymmetries.

The

coefficient estimate on TURNVOVER in column 2 confirms this notion, roughly doubling in
magnitude from its base-case value.

This implies that our fixed-effect approach of using

DTURNOVER instead of TURNOVER everywhere else in the paper is quite conservative—in
doing so, we are throwing out a dimension of the data that is strongly supportive of the theory.
In columns 3 and 4, we investigate whether our results are somehow tied to the way that
we have controlled for volatility. Recall that the central issue here is whether DTURNOVERit is
really forecasting NCSKEWit+1 directly, or whether it is instead forecasting SIGMAit+1, and
showing up in the regression only because SIGMAit+1 is correlated with NCSKEWit+1. Thus
ideally, we would like to add a period-t control variable to the regression that is a good forecast
of SIGMAit+1, so that we can verify that DTURNOVERit is still significant even after the
inclusion of this control. Our use of SIGMAit in the base-case specification can be motivated on
the grounds that it is probably the best univariate predictor of SIGMAit+1, given the very
pronounced serial correlation in the SIGMA variable.
But of course, just using one past lag is not necessarily the best way to forecast
SIGMAit+1. One can presumably do better by allowing for richer dynamics. In this spirit, we
add in column 3 two further lags of SIGMA (SIGMAit-1 and SIGMAit-2) to the base-case
specification.

These two lags are completely insignificant, and hence our coefficient on

DTURNOVERit, as well as those on the six RET terms, are virtually unchanged.

19

In column 4 we take this logic one step further. We create a fitted value of SIGMAit+1–
which we denote by SIGMAHATit+1—based on the following information set available in period
t: SIGMAit; SIGMAit-1; SIGMAit-2; LOGSIZEit; DTURNOVERit; and RETit …..RETit-5. We
then replace SIGMAit in the base case with this fitted value of future volatility, SIGMAHATit+1.
This is equivalent to an instrumental-variables regression in which future volatility SIGMAit+1 is
included on the right-hand side, but is instrumented for using the information available in period
t. As can be seen, this variation leads to almost exactly the same results as in the base case.
Overall, based on the evidence in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, we conclude that it is
highly unlikely that our base-case success in forecasting NCSKEW with the DTURNOVER and
RET variables arises because these variables are able to forecast SIGMA. In other words, these
variables really appear to be predicting cross-firm differences in the asymmetry of stock returns,
rather than just differences in volatility.
In column 5, we add to the base-case specification BK/MKT, the book-to-market ratio.
This variable attracts a significant negative coefficient, which means that it tells the same story
as the past-return terms: glamour stocks, like those with high past returns, are more crash-prone.
However, the addition of BK/MKT has no impact on the DTURNOVER coefficient.
In column 6, we use the DUVOL measure of return asymmetry as the left-hand-side
variable in place of NCSKEW. Although the difference in units precludes a direct comparison of
the point estimates, the qualitative patterns are generally the same as in the corresponding
specification in column 1 of Table 2. Indeed, the t-statistic on DTURNOVER is now actually a
bit higher (4.35 vs. 3.84) as is the R2 of the regression (6.7% vs. 3.0%).

20

Finally, in an unreported sensitivity, we check to make sure our results are robust to how
we have modeled the effect of the lagged skewness variable, NCSKEWit.23 Instead of estimating
just one coefficient on NCSKEWit, we now allow this effect to be a function of the realization of
NCSKEWit itself. We implement this by interacting NCSKEWit with five dummy variables, one
corresponding to each quintile of NCSKEWit. In other words, we estimate five separate slope
coefficients on lagged skewness, depending on the quintile that lagged skewness falls in. As it
turns out, while there appear to be some modest non-linearities in the effect of lagged skewness,
these non-linearities do not at all impact the coefficients on any of the other variables of interest.

C. Cuts on Firm Size
In Table 4, we disaggregate our base-case analysis by size. We take the specification
from column 1 of Table 2, and run it separately for five size-based sub-samples, corresponding
to quintiles based on NYSE breakpoints. (Recall that in Tables 2 and 3, we omitted the smallest
of these five quintiles from our sample.)

Two conclusions stand out. First, as suspected, the

coefficient on DTURNOVER for the smallest category of firms is noticeably lower than for any
other group, albeit still positive. Again, this is probably because variation in turnover for these
tiny firms is driven in large part by variation in trading costs, whereas our theory requires a good
proxy for differences of opinion. Second, once one moves beyond the smallest quintile, the
coefficients look reasonably stable. There is certainly no hint that the effects that we are
interested in go away for larger firms. Indeed, the highest point estimate for the DTURNOVER
coefficient comes from the next-to-largest quintile.
The fact that the coefficients on DTURNOVER are robust for large firms is not
surprising in light of the underlying theory. As we have emphasized, the model of Hong and
23

We thank the referee for suggesting that we investigate this issue.
21

Stein (1999) is not predicated on impediments to arbitrage—it incorporates a class of fully riskneutral arbitrageurs who can take infinite long or short positions. Thus it does not have the
feature that the key effects diminish as one moves to larger stocks, where arbitrage activity is
presumably more efficient.24 This is in contrast to behavioral models based on limited arbitrage
(e.g., DeLong et al (1990)) whose implications for return predictability are often thought of as
applying more forcefully to small stocks.25

D. Stability Over Sub-Periods
In Table 5, we examine the intertemporal stability of our baseline regression, using a
Fama-MacBeth (1973) approach. Specifically, we now run a separate, purely cross-sectional
variant of the regression in column 1 of Table 2 (without the time dummies, naturally) for every
one of the 66 six-month periods in our sample. We then take simple time-averages of the crosssectional regression coefficients over various sub-periods, and compute the associated t-statistics
based on the time-series properties of the coefficients. In Panel A of Table 5, we display the
coefficient on DTURNOVER from every one of the 66 regressions. In Panel B, we show timeaverages of all the regression coefficients for the full sample and for each of four decade-based
sub-periods: the 1960’s; the 1970’s; the 1980’s; and the 1990’s.
The overriding conclusion that emerges from Table 5 is that our results are remarkably
stable over time. For example, the coefficient on DTURNOVER—which averages .532 over the

24

This is true as long as some investors (other than the arbitrageurs) continue to be short-sales constrained in large
stocks. As noted above, many mutual funds are prohibited by their charters or operating policies from ever taking
short positions. This represents a constraint that is equally binding for any stock, regardless of market cap.
25
Several recent papers find that predictability—based on either “momentum” or “value” strategies—is stronger in
small-cap stocks. See, e.g., Fama (1998), Hong, Lim and Stein (2000), and Griffin and Lemmon (1999).

22

full sample period—reaches a low of .486 in the 1980’s and a high of .592 in the 1970’s.
Moreover, even taken alone, three of the four decade-based subperiods produce a statistically
significant result for DTURNOVER.

E. Why Are Small Stocks More Positively Skewed?
One of the most striking patterns that we—like Harvey and Siddique (2000)—have
documented is that small stocks are more positively skewed than large stocks. Given that this
pattern is not clearly predicted by any existing theories (of which we are aware) we have had to
come up with a new hypothesis after the fact in order to rationalize it. As described above, this
hypothesis begins with the assumption that managers have some discretion over the disclosure of
information, and prefer to announce good news immediately, while allowing bad news to dribble
out slowly. This behavior tends to impart a degree of positive skewness to returns. Moreover, if
there is more scope for such managerial discretion in small firms—say because they face less
scrutiny from security analysts—then the positive-skewness effect will be more pronounced in
small stocks.
The one satisfying thing about this after-the-fact hypothesis is that it gives rise to new
testable predictions.26 Specifically, it suggests that, controlling for size, positive skewness ought
to be greater in firms with fewer analysts. Table 6 investigates this prediction, taking our
baseline specifications for both NCSKEW and DUVOL, and in each case adding LOGCOVER,
the log of one plus the number of analysts covering the stock. (The sample period in Table 6 is

26

By contrast, consider the alternative rationalization that small firms’ technologies are different in such a way—
e.g., more home-run potential—that they naturally produce more postively skewed returns. It is harder to see what
refutable predictions this hypothesis delivers.

23

substantially shorter, since analyst coverage is not available from I/B/E/S prior to December
1976.) The coefficients on LOGCOVER have the predicted positive sign, and are strongly
statistically significant.27 The coefficients on LOGSIZE go down a bit, but remain significant as
well. Nothing else changes noticeably.
We do not mean to cast Table 6 as a definitive test of the discretionary-disclosure
hypothesis; this idea is outside the main scope of the paper, and pursuing it more seriously would
take us too far afield. Nevertheless, it is comforting to know that the most obvious auxiliary
prediction of the hypothesis is borne out in the data, and that as a result, we at least have a
plausible explanation for what would otherwise be a puzzling feature of our data.

V. Forecasting Market Skewness
We now turn to forecasting skewness in the returns to the aggregate market. While this is
in many ways the more interesting exercise from an economic viewpoint, our statistical power is
severely limited. Thus it may be asking too much to expect that the results here will be strongly
statistically significant in their own right; rather one might more reasonably hope that they look
qualitatively similar to those from the cross-sectional regressions.
Our definition of the aggregate market is the value-weighted NYSE-AMEX index, and
all returns are excess returns relative to T-bills. To avoid any temptation to further mine the
data, we use essentially the same specification as in our baseline cross-sectional analysis.
Specifically, we use all the same right-hand-side variables, except for LOGSIZE and the time
dummies. The DTURNOVER variable is constructed exactly as before, by detrending
TURNOVER with its own moving average over the prior 18 months.
27

After developing the discretionary-disclosure hypothesis, and running the regressions in Table 6, we became
aware of a closely related working paper by Damodaran (1987). Using data from 1979-83, he also finds that firms

24

In an effort to get the most out of the little time-series data that we have, we now use
monthly overlapping observations. (The t-statistics we report are adjusted accordingly.) This
yields a total of 401 observations that can be used in the regressions. However, a new concern
that arises with the time-series approach is the extent to which our inferences are dominated by
the enormous daily movements during October 1987.28 To address this concern, we also re-run
our regressions omitting October 1987. This brings us down to 371 observations.29
The results are summarized in Table 7. In columns 1 and 2 we use the NCSKEW
measure of skewness, and run the regressions with and without October 1987, respectively. In
columns 3 and 4 we use the DUVOL measure of skewness, and again run the regression with and
without October 1987. The basic story is the same in all four columns.30 The six past return
terms are always positive, and many are individually statistically significant. In contrast, the
coefficient on DTURNOVER, while it is positive in each of the four regressions, is never
statistically significant. Dropping October 1987 seems to increase the precision of the
DTURNOVER coefficient estimate somewhat, but the highest t-statistic across the four
specifications is only 1.15.
Nevertheless, holding statistical significance aside, the point estimates suggest large
quantitative effects relative to the cross-sectional regressions.

Indeed, the coefficients on

DTURNOVER and the RET terms are now on the order of ten times bigger than they were in the
previous tables. Thus both turnover and past returns may well be very important for forecasting

with fewer analysts have more positively skewed returns.
28
October 1987 should be expected to have less influence on the cross-sectional regressions because they use
market-adjusted returns and time dummies. We have also verified directly that our cross-sectional results do not
change when we omit October 1987 from our sample.
29
The reason that we lose 30 observations is that we do not allow any observation on NCSKEW, DUVOL, SIGMA
or DTURNOVER to enter the regression if it draws on data from October 1987. Because of the detrending, the
DTURNOVER variable in any given month draws on 24 months’ worth of data.
30
We have also experimented with adding further lags of SIGMA to our base-case time-series specifications. As in
the cross-sectional regressions, this does not make any meaningful difference.

25

the skewness of market returns, but we lack the statistical power to assert these conclusions—
particularly that for turnover—with much confidence.31

VI. Economic Significance of the Results: An Option-Pricing Metric
Thus far, we have focused on the statistical significance of our results, and have not
really asked whether they imply magnitudes that are economically meaningful.

Assessing

economic significance in the current context is a bit tricky. The thought experiment that is
typically undertaken is something like this: suppose that the right-hand-side variable of
interest—in this case, DTURNOVER—is shocked by two standard deviations. How much does
the left-hand-side variable—NCSKEW or DUVOL—move? What makes things difficult here is
that most people have little sense for what would constitute an economically interesting change
in NCSKEW or DUVOL.
To help frame things in a way that is hopefully more intuitive, we can translate
statements about NCSKEW into statements about the prices of out-of-the-money put options.
The idea behind our metric can be understood as follows. Imagine that you are pricing an out-ofthe-money put on a stock whose returns you initially believe to be symmetrically distributed—
i.e., a stock for which you believe that NCSKEW is equal to zero. Now the stock experiences a
surge in turnover. As a result, you revise your forecast of NCSKEW, using the DTURNOVER
coefficient estimate from our regressions. Given this new forecast of NCSKEW—but holding
volatility fixed—by how much does the value of the put option increase?
To answer this sort of question precisely, we need to: 1) find an option-pricing model that
admits skewness in returns; and 2) create a mapping from the parameters of this model to our

31

In light of this power problem, a natural thing to do would be to run comparable time-series regressions for other
stock markets outside the U.S. We hope to pursue this in future research.

26

NCSKEW variable. The model we use is the stochastic-volatility model of Das and Sundaram
(1999), in which the dynamics of stock prices are summarized by the following two diffusion
equations:

dpt = "dt + Vt1/2dz1

(3)

dVt = 6(V0 - Vt)dt + 0Vt1/2dz2

(4)

Here pt is the log of the stock price, " is the expected return on the stock, Vt is the current
variance, 6 is the mean reversion parameter for the variance process, V0 is the long-run mean
level of variance and 0 is the volatility of the variance process. The two Wiener processes dz1
and dz2 are instantaneously correlated, with a correlation coefficient of D. The parameter D is the
one of central interest for our purposes, as it governs the skewness of stock returns: when D = 0,
log returns are symmetrically distributed; when D < 0, log returns are negatively skewed.
In order to map the parameters of the option-pricing model into our NCSKEW variable,
we draw on formulas given in Das and Sundaram (1999) that express the skewness in daily log
returns as a function of the diffusion parameters. If we are willing to fix all the other parameters
besides D, these formulas allow us to ask: “to what value of D does a given value of NCSKEW
correspond?” Once we have obtained the implied value of D in this way, we can calculate
options prices and thereby see the impact of a given value of NCSKEW.
Table 8 illustrates the results of this exercise.

Consider first Panel A, where the

parameters are chosen so as to be reasonable for individual stocks: 6 = 1; V0 = 0.16; Vt = 0.16;
and 0 = 0.1. (Setting the variance V to 0.16 corresponds to an annual standard deviation of

27

returns of 40%.) We also set the stock price P = 100, and the riskless rate r = 0. We begin with a
hypothetical Firm 1, which has symmetrically distributed returns—i.e., it has NCSKEW = 0.
This is equivalent to a value of D = 0. Next, we take Firm 2, which is identical to Firm 1, except
that it has a two standard-deviation higher value of DTURNOVER. The standard deviation of
DTURNOVER (for firms above the 20th percentile NYSE breakpoint) is 0.042, and from Table
2, column 1, the coefficient on DTURNOVER is 0.437. Hence the value of NCSKEW for Firm
2 is 0.037 (2 x 0.042 x 0.437 = 0.037). Using equation (21) in Das and Sundaram (1999, page
223) this value of skewness in daily returns for Firm 2 can be shown to imply D = -0.38,
assuming all the other diffusion parameters stay fixed.
Panel A of Table 8 displays the impact of this change in D for the prices of six-month
European put options. That is, it calculates put prices for both Firm 1 (which has NCKSEW = 0
and thus D = 0) and Firm 2 (which has NCSKEW = 0.037 and thus D = -0.38). As can be seen,
the impact on put prices is substantial, particularly if one goes relatively far out-of-the-money.
For example, a put with a strike of 70 is worth 1.20 for Firm 1, but 1.44 for Firm 2, an increase
of 20.14%. Or expressed in a different way, the Firm-1 put has a Black-Scholes (1973) implied
volatility of 40.33%, while the Firm-2 put has an implied volatility of 42.50%.
Panel B undertakes a similar experiment to gauge the significance of our time-series
results. We keep all the diffusion parameters the same as in Panel A, except that we now set V0
= Vt = 0.04, corresponding to an annual standard deviation of returns of 20%. For the market as
a whole, the standard deviation of DTURNOVER is 0.005 (see Table 1.A). Using the coefficient
estimate on DTURNOVER of 6.00 from Table 7, column 1, a two-standard-deviation shock to
DTURNOVER translates into a movement of 0.06 in the NCSKEW variable. Given the other
diffusion parameters, this value of 0.06 for NCSKEW is equivalent to D = -0.33.

28

Panel B then compares the prices of six-month European puts across two regimes, the
first with D = 0, and the second with D = -0.33. Once again, the differences appear to be
meaningful. For example, a put with a strike price of 85 is worth 0.86 in Regime 1, but 1.07 in
Regime 2, an increase of 24.66%. The corresponding implied volatilities are 20.36% and
21.84% respectively. These results reinforce a point made above: while the time-series estimates
may be statistically much weaker than those from the cross-section, they are no less suggestive
of important economic effects.
Although they are not shown in Table 8, we have also done similar calculations to
measure the economic significance of our results for past returns. As it turns out, the quantitative
influence of past returns on skewness is stronger than that of trading volume. With individual
stocks, a shock of 40% to the RET variable in the most recent six-month period (note from Table
1 that 40% is approximately a two-standard deviation shock for a firm in the next-to-largest
quintile) translates into a movement of 0.087 in the NCSKEW variable. This in turn is
equivalent to D going from zero to –0.920, which causes the put with the 70 strike to rise in value
from 1.20 to 1.73, a 44.86% increase.
In the case of the aggregate market, the coefficients on past returns suggest effects on
skewness that are so large that they cannot generally be captured in the context of a pure
diffusion model like that of Das and Sundaram (1999). For example, even if the RET variable
has moved by only 7% in the last six months, one has to adjust D from zero to –0.978 to reflect
the corresponding predicted change in NCSKEW. Given that the standard deviation of RET for
the market is about 11%, this means that we cannot even capture a one-standard deviation shock
to six-month returns without violating the constraint that the absolute value of D not exceed one.
Rather, we are left to conclude that, for the market as a whole, large movements in past returns

29

give rise to conditional negative skewness that is so substantial that it cannot be adequately
represented in terms of a pure diffusion process—one would instead need some type of mixed
jump-diffusion model.

VII. Conclusions
Three robust findings about conditional skewness emerge from our analysis of individual
stocks. In the cross-section, negative skewness is greater in stocks that: 1) have experienced an
increase in trading volume relative to trend over the prior six months; 2) have had positive
returns over the prior thirty-six months; and 3) are larger in terms of market capitalization. The
first two results also have direct analogs in the time-series behavior of the aggregate market,
though the statistical power of our tests in this case (especially with respect to trading volume) is
quite limited.
Let us try to put each of these findings into some perspective. The first, regarding trading
volume, is the most novel, and is the one we were looking for based on a specific theoretical
prediction from the model of Hong and Stein (1999). Clearly, our results here are supportive of
the theory. At the same time, this does not mean that there are not other plausible interpretations.
While we have attempted to control for some of the most obvious alternative stories, no doubt
there are others that can be thought up. This caveat would seem to be particularly relevant given
that there has been so little research to date on conditional skewness at the individual stock level.
The second and third findings, having to do with the effects of past returns and size on
skewness, do not speak directly to predictions made by the Hong-Stein model. Rather, these
variables are included in our regressions because prior work (Harvey and Siddique (2000))

30

suggests that they might enter significantly, and we want to be careful to isolate the effects of
trading volume from other factors.
Having verified the importance of past returns, we have found it helpful to think about it
in terms of models of stochastic bubbles, such as that developed by Blanchard and Watson
(1982). However, we would stop well short of claiming to have strong evidence in favor of the
existence of bubbles. Indeed, there is a large body of research from the 1980’s (see, e.g., West
(1988) and Flood and Hodrick (1990) for reviews) that—focusing on a very different set of
implications of bubble models—tends to come to mostly skeptical conclusions on this question.32
Rather, the more modest statement to be made is that previous research has not examined the
implications of bubble models for conditional skewness, and that on this one score, the bubble
models look pretty good.
With respect to the third finding—that small-cap stocks are more positively skewed than
large-cap stocks—we are not even aware of an existing theory that provides a simple
explanation. Instead, we have developed an informal hypothesis after the fact, based on the ideas
that: 1) managers prefer to disclose good news right away, while dribbling bad news out slowly;
and 2) managers of small companies have more scope for hiding bad news from the market in
this way. This discretionary-disclosure hypothesis in turn yields the further prediction that,
controlling for size, positive skewness ought to be more pronounced in stocks with fewer
analysts—a prediction which is clearly supported in the data.
A fair criticism of this whole line of discussion is that we have three main empirical
results, and a different theoretical story for each: the Hong-Stein (1999) model to explain the
effect of turnover on skewness; stochastic bubbles to explain the effect of past returns; and

32

To oversimplify, the earlier empirical literature on bubbles can be characterized as primarily focusing on the
relationship between prices and measures of fundamentals, such as dividends.

31

discretionary disclosure to explain the effect of size. This lack of unity is unsatisfying, and it
serves to further underscore our previous caveat about the extent to which one should at this
point consider any single theory to be strongly supported by the data. A natural challenge for
future work in this area is to come up with a parsimonious model that captures these three
patterns in a more integrated fashion.

32

References
Allen, Franklin, Morris, Stephen and Postlewaite, Andrew, 1993, “Finite Bubbles with
Short Sales Constraints and Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Economic Theory 61, 206-229.
Bakshi, Gurdip, Cao, Charles and Chen, Zhiwu, 1997, “Empirical Performance of
Alternative Option Pricing Models,” Journal of Finance 52, 2003-49.
Bates, David, 1991, “The Crash of ’87: Was It Expected? The Evidence from Options
Markets,” Journal of Finance 46, 1009-1044.
Bates, David, 1997, “Post-'87 Crash Fears in S&P 500 Futures Options,” NBER Working
Paper 5894.
Bekaert, Geert and Wu, Goujun, 1997, “Asymmetric Volatility and Risk in Equity
Markets,” Stanford Business School Working Paper.
Black, Fischer, 1976, “Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes,” Proceedings of the
1976 Meetings of the American Statistical Association, Business and Economical Statistics
Section, 177-81.
Black, Fischer and Scholes, Myron, 1973, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities,” Journal of Political Economy 81, 637-659.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Watson, Mark W., 1982, “Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and
Financial Markets,” in Paul Wachtel, ed., Crises in Economic and Financial Structure.
Lexington MA: Lexington Books, 295-315.
Braun, Phillip A., Nelson, Daniel B. and Sunier, Alain M., 1995, “Good News, Bad
News, Volatility, and Betas,” Journal of Finance 50, 1575-1603.
Brown, Beth C., Carlson, Murray, and Chapman, David A., 1999, “Why Constrain Your
Mutual Fund Manager?,” University of Texas Working Paper.
Campbell, John Y. and Hentschel, Ludger, 1992, “No News Is Good News: An
Asymmetric Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics
31, 281-318.
Christie, Andrew A., 1982, “The Stochastic Behavior of Common Stock Variances—
Value, Leverage and Interest Rate Effects,” Journal of Financial Economics 10, 407-432.
Coval, Joshua D. and Hirshleifer, David, 1998, “Trading-Generated News, Sidelined
Investors, and Conditional Patterns in Security Returns,” University of Michigan Business
School Working Paper.

33

Damodaran, Aswath, 1987, “Information Bias: Measures and Implications,” NYU
Working Paper.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Shleifer, Andrei, Summers, Lawrence H and Waldmann, Robert J,
1990, “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-38.
Das, Sanjiv R. and Sundaram, Rangarajan K., 1999, “Of Smiles and Smirks: A Term
Structure Perspective,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 211-239.
Duffee, Gregory R., 1995, “Stock Returns and Volatility: A Firm-Level Analysis,”
Journal of Financial Economics 37, 399-420.
Dumas, Bernard, Fleming, Jeff and Whaley, Robert E., 1998, “Implied Volatility
Functions: Empirical Tests,” Journal of Finance 53, 2059-2106.
Engle, Robert F. and Ng, Victor K., 1993, “Measuring and Testing the Impact of News
on Volatility,” Journal of Finance 48, 1749-78.
Fama, Eugene F., 1998, “Market Efficiency, Long-Term Returns and Behavioral
Finance,” Journal of Financial Economics 49, 283-306.
Fama, Eugene F. and MacBeth, James D., 1973, “Risk, Return and Equilibrium:
Empirical Tests,” Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.
Flood, Robert P. and Hodrick, Robert J., 1990, “On Testing for Speculative Bubbles,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 85-101.
French, Kenneth R., Schwert, G. William and Stambaugh, Robert F., 1987, “Expected
Stock Returns and Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3-29.
Genotte, Gerard and Leland, Hayne, 1990, “Market Liquidity, Hedging and Crashes,”
American Economic Review 80, 999-1021.
Glosten, Lawrence, Jagannathan, Ravi and Runkle, David E., 1993, “On the Relation
between the Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks,”
Journal of Finance 48, 1779-1801.
Greene, William H., 1993, Econometric Analysis. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.
Griffin, John M. and Lemmon, Michael L., “Does Book-to-Market Equity Proxy for
Distress Risk or Over-reaction?” Arizona State Working Paper.
Grossman, Sanford J., 1988, “An Analysis of the Implications for Stock and Futures
Price Volatility of Program Trading and Dynamic Hedging Strategies,” Journal of Business 61,
275-98.

34

Harris, Milton and Raviv, Artur, 1993, “Differences of Opinion Make a Horse Race,”
Review of Financial Studies 6, 473-506.
Harvey, Campbell R. and Siddique, Akhtar, 2000, “Conditional Skewness in Asset
Pricing Tests,” Journal of Finance 55, forthcoming.
Hong, Harrison, Lim, Terence, and Stein, Jeremy C., 2000, “Bad News Travels Slowly:
Size, Analyst Coverage and the Profitability of Momentum Strategies,” Journal of Finance 55,
265-295.
Hong, Harrison and Stein, Jeremy C., 1999, “Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage
and Market Crashes,” NBER Working Paper.
Jacklin, Charles J., Kleidon, Allan W. and Pfleiderer, Paul, 1992, “Underestimation of
Portfolio Insurance and the Crash of October 1987,” Review of Financial Studies 5, 35-63.
Kandel, Eugene and Pearson, Neil D., 1995, “Differential Interpretation of Public Signals
and Trade in Speculative Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 103, 831-72.
Koski, Jennifer Lynch and Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1999, “How Are Derivatives Used? Evidence
from the Mutual Fund Industry,” Journal of Finance 54, 791-816.
Lakonishok, Josef and Smidt, Seymour, 1986, “Volume for Winners and Losers:
Taxation and Other Motives for Stock Trading,” Journal of Finance 41, 951-974.
Nelson, Daniel, 1991, “Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New
Approach,” Econometrica 59, 347-370.
Odean, Terrance, 1998a, “Volume, Volatility, Price and Profit When all Traders Are
Above Average,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1887-1934.
Odean, Terrance, 1998b, “Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?,” Journal of
Finance, 53, 1775-1798.
Pindyck, Robert S., 1984, Risk, “Inflation, and the Stock Market,” American Economic
Review 74, 334-351.
Poterba, James M. and Summers, Lawrence H., 1986, “The Persistence of Volatility and
Stock Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review 76, 1142-1151.
Romer, David, 1993, “Rational Asset-Price Movements without News,” American
Economic Review 83, 1112-30.
Schwert, G. William, 1989, “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change over Time?,”
Journal of Finance 44, 1115-1153.

35

Shefrin, Hersh and Statman, Meir, 1985, “The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and
Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 40, 777-790.
Varian, H.R., 1989, Differences of Opinion in Financial Markets,” in Financial Risk:
Theory, Evidence and Implications: Proceedings of the 11-th Annual Economic Policy
Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, ed. by C.C. Stone. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 3-37.
West, Kenneth D., 1988, “Bubbles, Fads and Stock Price Volatility Tests: A Partial
Evaluation,” Journal of Finance 43, 639-656.
Wu, Guojun, 1997, “The Determinants of Asymmetric Volatility,” Stanford Business
School Working Paper.

36

Table 1: Summary Statistics
NCSKEW t is the negative coefficient of (daily) skewness, measured using market-adjusted returns in the
six-month period t. DUVOLt is the log of the ratio of down-day to up-day standard deviation, measured
using market-adjusted returns in the six-month period t. SIGMAt is the standard deviation of (daily)
market-adjusted returns measured in the six-month period t. LOGSIZEt is the log of market
capitalization measured at the end of period t. BK/MKTt is the most recently available observation of
book-to-market ratio at the end of period t. LOGCOVERt is the log of one plus the number of analysts
covering the stock at the end of period t. DTURNOVERt is average monthly turnover in the six-month
period t, detrended by a moving average of turnover in the prior eighteen months. TURNOVERt is the
average monthly turnover measured in the six-month period t. RETt is market-adjusted cumulative return
in the six-month period t.
Panel A: First and Second Moments

Quintile-5
Quintile-1
(Largest) Quintile-4 Quintile-3 Quintile-2 (Smallest)
All Firms
Firms
Firms
Firms
Firms
Firms
NCSKEW t
Mean
Standard Dev.
DUVOLt
Mean
Standard Dev.
SIGMAt
Mean
Standard Dev.
LOGSIZEt
Mean
Standard Dev.
BK/MKTt
Mean
Standard Dev.
LOGCOVERt
Mean
Standard Dev.
DTURNOVERt
Mean
Standard Dev.
TURNOVERt
Mean
Standard Dev.
RETt
Mean
Standard Dev.
No. of Obs.

Market
Portfolio

-0.262
0.939

-0.139
0.806

-0.155
0.904

-0.198
0.923

-0.266
0.994

-0.362
0.964

0.268
0.735

-0.190
0.436

-0.128
0.364

-0.141
0.391

-0.171
0.406

-0.213
0.437

-0.224
0.476

0.172
0.377

0.025
0.018

0.015
0.005

0.017
0.007

0.020
0.008

0.023
0.010

0.034
0.023

0.008
0.003

5.177
2.073

8.249
1.035

6.860
0.653

5.924
0.642

4.984
0.656

3.121
1.108

N/A

0.983
14.036

0.667
0.472

0.782
0.710

0.824
0.870

0.935
1.197

1.275
22.920

N/A

1.991
0.840

3.006
0.431

2.512
0.503

2.030
0.563

1.565
0.564

1.140
0.508

N/A

0.001
0.066

0.000
0.039

0.002
0.040

0.002
0.042

0.001
0.046

-0.000
0.095

0.002
0.005

0.050
0.075

0.051
0.050

0.056
0.055

0.055
0.060

0.054
0.063

0.043
0.098

0.037
0.022

0.003
0.297

0.024
0.164

0.015
0.202

0.021
0.240

0.017
0.288

-0.019
0.372

0.029
0.108

100898

13988

14291

14727

16651

41241

421

37

th

Panel B: Contemporaneous Correlations (Using only firms above 20 percentile in size)

LOGLOGSIZEt BK/MKTt COVERt

DTURNOVERt

TURNOVERt

RETt

0.081

0.007

0.028

-0.302

0.068

0.100

-0.013

-0.042

-0.371

-0.056

-0.238

0.130

0.398

0.034

-0.213

0.729

0.002

0.101

-0.014

-0.026

0.026

0.006

-0.104

-0.013

0.158

-0.080

0.376

0.133

NCSKEW t DUVOLt

SIGMAt

0.875

0.008

0.038

0.311

-0.076

0.045
-0.307

NCSKEW t
DUVOLt
SIGMAt
LOGSIZEt
BK/MKTt
LOGCOVERt
DTURNOVERt
TURNOVERt
RETt

0.061

th

Panel C: Autocorrelations (Using only firms above 20 percentile in size)

NCSKEW t-1 DUVOLt-1 SIGMAt-1

LOGSIZEt-1

BK/
LOG- DTURNMKTt-1 COVERt-1 OVERt-1

TURNOVERt-1

RETt-1

NCSKEW t

0.047

0.059

-0.047

0.063

-0.030

0.056

0.022

0.032

0.043

DUVOLt

0.061

0.090

-0.109

0.068

-0.011

0.066

0.016

-0.024

0.047

SIGMAt

-0.008

-0.071

0.715

-0.292

-0.050

-0.218

0.042

0.318

-0.014

LOGSIZEt

0.049

0.055

-0.342

0.976

-0.182

0.719

0.000

0.093

-0.011

BK/MKTt

0.022

0.047

-0.067

-0.181

0.782

-0.027

0.022

0.017

-0.080

LOGCOVERt
DTURNOVERt
TURNOVERt
RETt

0.079

0.098

-0.257

0.736

-0.035

0.852

0.006

0.166

-0.079

-0.028

-0.028

-0.059

0.009

0.039

0.019

0.381

-0.130

0.119

0.015

-0.052

0.294

0.104

0.029

0.179

0.195

0.781

0.086

-0.002

0.006

-0.032

-0.042

0.051

-0.023

-0.013

-0.064

0.030

38

Table 2: Forecasting Skewness in the Cross-Section: Pooled Regressions
th

The sample includes only those firms with market capitalization above the 20 percentile breakpoint of
NYSE. The dependent variable is NCSKEW t+1 the negative coefficient of (daily) skewness in the sixmonth period t+1. NCSKEW t+1 is computed based on returns that are market-adjusted, beta-adjusted
and simple excess returns in cols 1-3 respectively. SIGMAt is the (daily) standard deviation of returns in
the six-month period t. LOGSIZEt is the log of market capitalization at the end of period t. DTURNOVERt
is average monthly turnover in the six-month period t, detrended by a moving average of turnover in the
prior eighteen months. RETt....RETt-5 are returns in the six-month periods t through t-5 (these past returns
are market adjusted in cols. 1-2 and excess in col. 3). All regressions also contain dummies for each time
period, not shown. t-statistics, which are in parentheses, are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial
correlation.

1. Base Case:
Market-Adjusted 2. Beta-Adjusted
Returns
Returns

3. Excess
Returns

NCSKEW t

0.053
(7.778)

0.051
(7.441)

0.052
(7.920)

SIGMAt

-4.566
(-7.180)

-3.370
(-5.242)

-2.701
(-4.706)

LOGSIZEt

0.037
(11.129)

0.046
(13.465)

0.059
(19.110)

DTURNOVERt

0.437
(3.839)

0.364
(3.175)

0.364
(3.329)

RETt

0.218
(10.701)

0.197
(9.638)

0.221
(11.607)

RETt-1

0.082
(4.296)

0.082
(4.220)

0.109
(6.175)

RETt-2

0.103
(5.497)

0.108
(5.675)

0.089
(5.149)

RETt-3

0.054
(2.830)

0.067
(3.462)

0.053
(3.001)

RETt-4

0.062
(3.403)

0.058
(3.133)

0.041
(2.477)

RETt-5

0.071
(3.759)

0.083
(4.335)

0.092
(5.257)

No. of Obs.

51426

51426

51426

R2

0.030

0.031

0.082

39

Table 3: Forecasting Skewness in the Cross-Section: Robustness Checks
th

The sample includes only those firms with market capitalization above the 20 percentile breakpoint of
NYSE. In columns 1-5, the dependent variable is NCSKEW t+1 the negative coefficient of (daily) skewness
in the six-month period t+1. In column 6, the dependent variable is DUVOLt+1 the log of the ratio of downday to up-day standard deviation in the six-month period t+1. In all columns returns are market-adjusted.
SIGMAt is the standard deviation of (daily) returns in the six-month period t. LOGSIZEt is the log of
market capitalization at the end of period t. BK/MKTt is the most recently available observation of bookto-market ratio at the end of period t. DTURNOVERt is average monthly turnover in the six-month period
t, detrended by a moving average of turnover in the prior eighteen months, except in column 3, where
turnover is not detrended. RETt....RETt-5 are returns in the six-month periods t through t-5. SIGMAHATt+1
is the predicted value of SIGMAt+1 calculated from a regression of SIGMAt+1 on SIGMAt,…,SIGMAt-2,
LOGSIZEt, DTURNOVERt and RETt....RETt-5. All regressions also contain dummies for each time period,
not shown. t-statistics, which are in parentheses, are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial
correlation.
1. Outliers
truncated

2. Turnover
not detrended

NCSKEW t
(DUVOLt in
col. 6)
SIGMAHATt+1

0.050
(8.675)

0.053
(7.837)

SIGMAt

-4.994
(-8.938)

-6.618
(-9.822)

0.035
(12.047)

0.053
(7.663)

0.051
(7.454)

RETt-2
RETt-3
RETt-4
RETt-5
No. of Obs.
R2

0.096
(16.627)

-4.999
(-7.552)

-4.956
(-15.698)

0.014
(9.572)

0.142
(15.810)
0.014
(1.671)
0.045
(5.587)
0.009
(1.131)
0.014
(1.808)
0.014
(1.705)
51426
0.067

0.033
(9.980)

0.034
(9.351)

0.375
(3.729)

0.761
(7.685)

0.411
(3.459)

0.387
(3.410)

0.035
(10.095)
-0.020
(-3.808)
0.455
(3.848)

0.206
(11.787)
0.075
(4.587)
0.100
(6.273)
0.049
(3.030)
0.048
(3.084)
0.057
(3.580)

0.217
(10.887)
0.071
(3.828)
0.088
(4.734)
0.033
(1.727)
0.041
(2.287)
0.054
(2.923)

0.218
(10.761)
0.083
(4.329)
0.104
(5.472)
0.054
(2.819)
0.060
(3.337)
0.072
(3.789)

0.208
(10.249)
0.084
(4.428)
0.106
(5.621)
0.056
(2.943)
0.064
(3.523)
0.073
(3.820)

0.213
(10.071)
0.081
(4.087)
0.098
(5.038)
0.056
(2.816)
0.051
(2.722)
0.066
(3.324)

51426
0.039

52229
0.031

51393
0.030

51426
0.030

48630
0.030

BK/MKTt

RETt-1

0.054
(7.750)

-3.953
(-3.751)
-0.460
(-0.384)
-0.367
(-0.353)
0.037
(10.898)

SIGMAt-2

DTURNOVERt
(TURNOVERt in
col. 2)
RETt

6. Using
DUVOLt+1

-6.178
(-7.180)

SIGMAt-1

LOGSIZEt

3. More lags of 4. Fitted future 5. Book-topast volatility
volatility
market

40

0.202
(4.346)

Table 4: Forecasting Skewness in the Cross-Section: Cuts by Firm Size
The dependent variable in all columns is NCSKEW t+1 the negative coefficient of (daily) skewness in the
six-month period t+1. In all columns, returns are market-adjusted. SIGMAt is the standard deviation of
(daily) returns in the six-month period t. LOGSIZEt is the log of market capitalization at the end of period
t. DTURNOVERt is average monthly turnover in the six-month period t, detrended by a moving average
of turnover in the prior eighteen months. RETt....RETt-5 are returns in the six-month periods t through t-5.
All regressions also contain dummies for each time period, not shown. t-statistics are adjusted for
heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. Firm size cuts based on NYSE breakpoints.

Quintile-5
(Largest)
Firms

Quintile-4
Firms

Quintile-3
Firms

Quintile-2
Firms

Quintile-1
(Smallest)
Firms

NCSKEW t

0.053
(3.758)

0.059
(3.653)

0.054
(4.341)

0.043
(3.690)

0.045
(5.431)

SIGMAt

-3.043
(-1.243)

-4.362
(-2.263)

-4.409
(-3.771)

-4.062
(-4.612)

2.894
(8.793)

LOGSIZEt

0.009
(1.021)

0.057
(1.855)

0.049
(1.590)

0.105
(3.639)

0.066
(8.800)

DTURNOVERt

0.404
(1.812)

0.637
(2.450)

0.551
(2.554)

0.264
(1.391)

0.079
(1.072)

RETt

0.260
(5.637)

0.335
(7.000)

0.215
(5.359)

0.155
(4.682)

0.010
(0.569)

RETt-1

0.047
(1.009)

0.001
(0.024)

0.083
(2.157)

0.134
(4.269)

0.017
(1.076)

RETt-2

0.163
(3.554)

0.165
(3.726)

0.104
(2.651)

0.069
(2.298)

0.014
(0.816)

RETt-3

0.025
(0.535)

0.078
(1.682)

0.093
(2.334)

0.033
(1.112)

0.028
(1.823)

RETt-4

0.162
(3.637)

0.101
(2.540)

0.071
(1.852)

0.006
(0.215)

0.014
(0.864)

RETt-5

0.128
(2.906)

0.089
(1.801)

0.134
(3.503)

0.013
(0.465)

-0.010
(-0.632)

No. of Obs.

12749

12520

12407

13750

29165

R2

0.035

0.030

0.024

0.029

0.028

41

Table 5: Forecasting Skewness in the Cross-Section: Fama-MacBeth Approach
th

The sample includes only those firms with market capitalization above the 20 percentile breakpoint of
NYSE. The dependent variable is NCSKEW t+1 the negative coefficient of (daily) skewness in the sixmonth period t+1. In all cases, returns are market-adjusted. The specification is the same as in col. 1 of
Table 2. SIGMAt is the standard deviation of (daily) returns in the six-month period t. LOGSIZEt is the log
of market capitalization at the end of period t. DTURNOVERt is average monthly turnover in the sixmonth period t, detrended by a moving average of turnover in the prior eighteen months. RETt....RETt-5
are returns in the six-month periods t through t-5. Panel A reports only the coefficient on DTURNOVERt
for each period. Panel B reports the average coefficients for different sub-periods.
Panel A: Period by Period Regressions (12/1965 to 6/1998); Coefficient on Detrended Turnover
Only

1960’s
0.383
12/1965

1970’s
0.129
6/1970

1980’s
1.730
6/1980

6/1990

1990’s
1.780

6/1966

1.053

12/1970

0.973

12/1980

0.707

12/1990

-0.194

12/1966

0.248

6/1971

1.145

6/1981

-0.156

6/1991

1.065

6/1967

-0.081

12/1971

0.269

12/1981

-0.757

12/1991

0.058

12/1967

0.201

6/1972

0.955

6/1982

2.738

6/1992

0.835

6/1968

0.468

12/1972

-0.207

12/1982

0.373

12/1992

0.569

12/1968

1.218

6/1973

0.148

6/1983

2.314

6/1993

0.161

6/1969

1.101

12/1973

-0.904

12/1983

0.334

12/1993

0.803

12/1969

0.498

6/1974

2.257

6/1984

-0.751

6/1994

0.459

12/1974

0.579

12/1984

0.545

12/1994

0.372

6/1975

-0.363

6/1985

2.448

6/1995

1.026

12/1975

-0.083

12/1985

-0.182

12/1995

-0.913

6/1976

0.029

6/1986

-0.686

6/1996

-0.631

12/1976

-0.016

12/1986

0.388

12/1996

1.981

6/1977

0.876

6/1987

0.672

6/1997

0.643

12/1977

1.901

12/1987

0.464

12/1997

0.062

6/1978

0.918

6/1988

0.404

6/1998

0.381

12/1978

1.512

12/1988

-0.941

6/1979

1.506

6/1989

0.121

12/1979

0.210

12/1989

-0.038

42

Panel B: Average Coefficients by Sub-Periods

All
Periods

Late
60’s

70’s

80’s

90’s

NCSKEW t

0.063
(4.880)

0.099
(2.173)

0.079
(4.517)

0.064
(2.707)

0.024
(1.258)

SIGMAt

-5.017
(-2.312)

-11.577
(-2.614)

-9.507
(-3.063)

-3.884
(-1.061)

2.407
(0.288)

LOGSIZEt

0.030
(4.141)

0.005
(0.222)

0.040
(2.216)

0.027
(2.776)

0.032
(4.200)

DTURNOVERt

0.532
(3.981)

0.565
(2.280)

0.592
(2.549)

0.486
(1.372)

0.497
(2.326)

RETt

0.249
(6.614)

0.335
(1.807)

0.234
(3.909)

0.229
(3.663)

0.242
(2.312)

RETt-1

0.099
(3.287)

0.229
(1.684)

0.026
(0.427)

0.085
(1.838)

0.132
(2.711)

RETt-2

0.139
(4.357)

0.100
(1.098)

0.222
(3.452)

0.132
(2.323)

0.071
(1.387)

RETt-3

0.082
(2.555)

0.057
(0.645)

0.139
(2.596)

0.017
(0.341)

0.104
(1.513)

RETt-4

0.081
(2.887)

0.045
(0.390)

0.091
(1.524)

0.044
(0.917)

0.133
(2.453)

RETt-5

0.082
(1.967)

0.139
(1.767)

0.056
(1.014)

0.036
(0.193)

0.136
(1.492)

No. of Obs.

66

9

20

20

17

43

Table 6: Forecasting Skewness in the Cross-Section: Adding Analyst Coverage
The dependent variable in col. 1 is NCSKEW t+1 the negative coefficient of skewness in the six-month
period t+1 and in col. 2 is DUVOLt+1, the log of the ratio of down-day to up-day standard deviation in the
six-month period t+1. SIGMAt is the standard deviation of (daily) returns in the six-month period t.
LOGSIZEt is the log of market capitalization at the end of period t. LOGCOVERt is the log of one plus the
number of analysts covering the stock at the end of period t. DTURNOVERt is average monthly turnover
in the six-month period t, detrended by a moving average of turnover in the prior eighteen months.
RETt....RETt-5 are returns in the six-month periods t through t-5. All regressions also contain dummies for
each time period, not shown. t-statistics are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.

1. Using
NCSKEWt+1
Measure

2. Using
DUVOLt+1
Measure

0.049
(6.649)

0.090
(13.945)

-3.188
(-4.366)

-4.022
(-11.586)

LOGSIZEt

0.032
(7.992)

0.011
(6.665)

DTURNOVERt

0.504
(3.504)

0.207
(3.648)

LOGCOVERt

0.019
(4.059)

0.006
(3.288)

RETt

0.219
(8.767)

0.135
(12.599)

RETt-1

0.085
(3.681)

0.010
(1.044)

RETt-2

0.100
(4.410)

0.040
(4.253)

RETt-3

0.058
(2.564)

0.006
(0.683)

RETt-4

0.065
(3.140)

0.012
(1.290)

RETt-5

0.055
(2.493)

0.006
(0.705)

No. of Obs.

40688

40688

R2

0.025

0.051

NCSKEW t
(DUVOLt in col.2)
SIGMAt

44

Table 7: Forecasting Skewness in the Market: Time-Series Regressions
The sample is based on market returns in excess of the risk-free rate, where the market is defined as the
value weighted portfolio of all NYSE/AMEX stocks. The dependent variable in cols. 1 and 2 is
NCSKEW t+1 the negative coefficient of skewness in the six-month period t+1 and in cols. 3 and 4 is
DUVOLt+1, the log of the ratio of down-day to up-day standard deviation in the six-month period t+1.
SIGMAt is the standard deviation of (daily) market returns in the six-month period t. DTURNOVERt is the
average monthly turnover of the market portfolio in the six-month period t, detrended by a moving
average of turnover in the prior eighteen months. RETt....RETt-5 are returns in the six-month periods t
through t-5. t-statistics, which are in parentheses, are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial
correlation.

2. Dep. Variable
4. Dep. Variable
is DUVOLt+1,
1. Dep. Variable is NCSKEWt+1, 3. Dep. Variable
is DUVOLt+1 Excluding 10/87
is NCSKEWt+1 Excluding 10/87
0.100
(0.855)

0.123
(1.232)

0.221
(1.842)

0.217
(0.844)

18.183
(1.137)

13.708
(0.749)

1.196
(0.156)

-3.574
(-0.300)

DTURNOVERt

6.002
(0.262)

9.349
(0.828)

6.324
(0.704)

9.462
(1.148)

RETt

2.647
(4.147)

1.809
(4.406)

1.484
(4.168)

1.184
(3.398)

RETt-1

1.585
(3.086)

1.077
(2.939)

0.482
(1.481)

0.332
(1.061)

RETt-2

1.473
(2.242)

0.926
(1.922)

0.554
(1.898)

0.386
(1.357)

RETt-3

0.589
(0.602)

0.443
(0.734)

0.126
(0.325)

0.017
(0.049)

RETt-4

1.283
(2.264)

0.680
(1.575)

0.475
(1.726)

0.287
(0.968)

RETt-5

1.187
(2.288)

0.596
(1.930)

0.686
(2.326)

0.470
(1.753)

No. of Obs.

401

371

401

371

R2

0.265

0.264

0.304

0.274

NCSKEW t
(DUVOLt in col.3
and 4)
SIGMAt

45

Table 8: Economic Significance of Trading Volume for Skewness in Stock
Returns: An Option-Pricing Metric
Using the stochastic volatility option pricing model (and notation) of Das and Sundaram (1999) we
consider what a two-standard-deviation shock in detrended trading volume implies for the prices of sixmonth European options.
Panel A: Options on Individual Stocks
The benchmark parameters are as follows: stock price P=100, interest rate r=0, annualized long run
variance V0=.16, current variance V=.16, mean reversion in variance κ=1, volatility of variance η=.4 Firm
1 is assumed to have a value of ρ=0. Firm 2 is assumed to have a value of ρ=-.38. These values of ρ
imply that the difference in daily skewness between Firm 1 and Firm 2 is equivalent to that created by a
two-standard-deviation move in the DTURNOVER variable, using our baseline firm-level sample and
coefficient estimates from Table 2, col.1.

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

6-month
European Put
Price

1.197

3.044

6.287

11.082

17.325

24.748

33.044

B-S Implied
Vol.

40.33%

39.79%

39.50%

39.41%

39.48%

39.67%

39.93%

6-month
European Put
Price

1.438

3.297

6.419

10.994

17.011

24.282

32.525

B-S Implied
Vol.

42.50%

41.16%

40.03%

39.10%

38.35%

37.77%

37.34%

Percent
Increase in Put
Price: Firm 2
vs. Firm1

20.14%

8.30%

2.09%

-0.80%

-1.81%

-1.88%

-1.57%

Firm 1:ρ=0

Firm 2: ρ=-.38

46

Panel B: Options on the Market Portfolio
The benchmark parameters are as follows: stock price P=100, interest rate r=0, annualized long run
variance V0=.04, current variance V=.04, mean reversion in variance κ=1, volatility of variance η=.4.
Regime 1 is assumed to have a value of ρ=0. Regime 2 is assumed to have a value of ρ=-0.33. These
values of ρ imply that the difference in daily skewness between Regime 1 and Regime 2 is equivalent to
that created by a two-standard-deviation move in the market DTURNOVER variable, using our time series
estimates from Table 6, col. 1.

85

90

95

100

105

110

115

6-month
European Put
Price

0.859

1.693

3.121

5.330

8.367

12.093

16.298

B-S Implied Vol.

20.36%

19.61%

19.09%

18.91%

19.07%

19.49%

20.04%

6-month
European Put
Price

1.070

1.912

3.258

5.289

8.134

11.755

15.955

B-S Implied Vol.

21.84%

20.68%

19.63%

18.76%

18.21%

18.01%

18.10%

Percent Increase
in Put Price:
Regime 2 vs.
Regime 1

24.66%

12.91%

4.39%

-0.77%

-2.79%

-2.80%

-2.10%

Regime 1: ρ=0

Regime 2: ρ=-.33

47

