                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DID U.S. BANK SUPERVISORS GET
                       TOUGHER DURING THE CREDIT CRUNCH?
                  DID THEY GET EASIER DURING THE BANKING BOOM?
                         DID IT MATTER TO BANK LENDING?


                                           Allen N. Berger
                                          Margaret K. Kyle
                                          Joseph M. Scalise


                                         Working Paper 7689
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7689

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2000



The opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors, its staff or the NBER.
The authors thank our discussant, Steve Cecchetti, the conference organizer Rick Mishkin, and other
participants at the NBER Conference on “Prudential Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t,” as well
as Bob Avery, Kevin Bertsch, Mark Carey, Sally Davies, Al Gilbert, and Diana Hancock for helpful
comments and Kelly Bryant for outstanding research assistance.

© 2000 by Allen N. Berger, Margaret K. Kyle, and Joseph M. Scalise. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did U.S. Bank Supervisors Get Tougher During the Credit Crunch? Did They Get Easier
During the Banking Boom? Did It Matter to Bank Lending?
Allen N. Berger, Margaret K. Kyle, and Joseph M. Scalise
NBER Working Paper No. 7689
May 2000
JEL No. G21, G28, G38, E44, E58

                                              ABSTRACT

        We test three hypotheses regarding changes in supervisory “toughness” and their effects on bank
lending. The data provide modest support for all three hypotheses — that there was an increase in toughness

during the credit crunch period (1989-1992), that there was a decline in toughness during the boom period
(1993-1998), and that changes in toughness, if they occurred, affected bank lending. However, all of the
measured effects are small, with 1% or less of loans receiving harsher or easier classification, about 3% of
banks receiving better or worse CAMEL ratings, and bank lending being changed by 1% or less of assets.



Allen N. Berger                                                   Margaret K. Kyle
Mail Stop 153                                                     MIT
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System                  50 Memorial Drive
20th and C Streets, NW                                            Cambridge, MA 02142
Washington, DC 20551
and Wharton Financial Institutions Center
aberger@frb.gov

Joseph M. Scalise
Bain & Company
Boston, MA 02116
1. Introduction

        The main goals of bank supervision are generally to act as a delegated monitor on behalf of insured

depositors or other stakeholders, to protect the safety and soundness of the financial system, and to counteract the

moral hazard incentives created by the government safety net. However, changes in supervisory policy also may

have significant effects on macroeconomic or regional economic health if banks respond by altering their lending

behavior. These additional effects may be intended or unintended. For example, supervisors may intend that

some risky institutions reduce their lending. However, if too many institutions reduce their supplies of credit

simultaneously, this may create an unintended credit crunch or recession. Supervisors alternatively may try to

stimulate lending through supervisory easing. We discuss below some reasons to suspect that supervisory changes

over the last decade or so may have had significant effects on the overall lending of the U.S. banking industry.

        The purpose of this research is to investigate this possibility by testing three hypotheses about whether

supervisors changed their policies and whether these policy changes affected bank lending behavior:


H1: U.S. bank supervisors got “tougher” on banks during the “credit crunch period” of 1989-1992, treating banks
of a given financial condition more harshly than in previous years.

H2: U.S. bank supervisors got “easier” on banks during the “boom period” of 1993-1998, treating banks of a
given financial condition less harshly than in prior periods.

H3: Changes in supervisory toughness, if they did occur, changed bank lending behavior in the predicted
directions.


If these hypotheses are true, they may help explain part of the observed wide swings in aggregate bank lending to

business during the 1990s, and may imply a larger role for financial supervision in the performance of the

economy than was previously thought. We test these hypotheses using information on the supervisory process,

confidential data on classified assets and CAMEL ratings from bank examinations, bank balance sheet and income

data, and other variables for the condition of the bank, its state, and its region over the period 1986-1998.

        Although we test these hypotheses separately, they are all intertwined in the overall question of the effects

of changes in supervision. Hypotheses H1 (increase in toughness during the credit crunch) and H3 (it mattered to

bank lending) are both necessary conditions for changes in bank supervision to have played a major role in causing

the decline in lending and recession during credit crunch period. Similarly, H2 (decline in toughness during the

boom) and H3 (it mattered to bank lending) are necessary for changes in bank supervision to have played a major

role in causing the increase in lending and economic expansion during the boom period. Finally, if all three
                                                          2

hypotheses are true, this may imply that supervisory actions have greater effects on the macroeconomy than is

generally recognized.

        To put these issues into context, we note that the period around 1989-1992 is often referred to as a “credit

crunch” in the U.S., in which commercial banks substantially reduced their lending to business customers,

although some researchers choose slightly different dates for the credit crunch period. From 1989 to 1992,

domestic commercial and industrial (C&I) loans held by U.S. banks fell by about 23% in real terms. This decline

may have been particularly difficult for bank-dependent small and medium-sized businesses, which often have few

alternatives for external finance. Rough estimates based on a sample of banks responding to the Federal Reserve’s

Survey of Terms of Bank Lending are consistent with this presumption, suggesting declines in business loans to

borrowers with bank credit less than $1 million on the order of 38% (Berger, Kashyap, and Scalise 1995).

Surveys of small business owners also suggest that it was more difficult for these firms to obtain credit during the

credit crunch period (e.g., Dunkelberg and Dennis 1992, Avery, Bostic, and Samolyk 1998).

        A number of hypotheses for the decline in bank credit during the credit crunch period have been tested —

including changes in bank capital requirements and other regulations - and the results are reviewed below. Here

we test one theory that has been suggested by the popular press, supervisory agencies, and academic researchers

— that a combination of Hypotheses H1 (increase in supervisory toughness) and H3 (this toughness mattered to

lending) may be at least partly responsible for the reduced lending (e.g., Bacon and Bleakley 1991, Syron 1991,

Bizer 1993, Peek and Rosengren 1995a).

        An increase in supervisory toughness could explain a reduction in lending as follows. An unfavorable

examination rating may be burdensome to a bank because supervisors often require poorly rated institutions to take

costly actions to improve their condition (e.g., raising additional equity capital), or because poorly rated banks may

be prohibited from engaging in some profitable activities by prompt corrective action rules or supervisory

discretion. Banks may try to reverse the supervisory burdens of an unfavorable rating by reducing their perceived

risk, and one way to do so is to reduce lending.

        This explanation may be broader than it first appears because it incorporates the changes in capital

requirements and other regulatory changes during the credit crunch period to the extent that they were enforced

through the supervisory process. That is, to the extent that risk-based capital requirements, leverage capital
                                                         3

requirements, and other regulatory changes were enforced through the supervisory process by assigning worse

CAMEL ratings for the same risk-based capital ratios, leverage capital ratios, or other balance sheet or income

ratios, they may be captured by our tests.

        In addition, more classified assets or more serious classifications from an unfavorable examination may

force a bank to shift funds from equity to its allocation for loan and lease losses (ALLL). Since equity counts in

full as Tier 1 equity under risk-based capital guidelines and ALLL counts as only as Tier 2 capital up to 1.25% of

risk-weighted assets, the shift may directly reduce regulatory capital and require the bank to reduce lending or

shrink to comply with capital regulations.

        There may also have been a reduction in supervisory toughness during the banking boom period of 1993-

1998, consistent with Hypothesis H2. In 1993, the main federal supervisors of banks and thrifts (Office of the

Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Reserve Board, and Office of Thrift

Supervision) formally recognized a problem of credit availability and began a joint program directed at dealing

with this problem. The program focused on five areas in which agencies would take actions designed to alleviate

the apparent reluctance of the institutions to lend. The program 1) removed impediments to lending to small and

medium-sized businesses; 2) reduced appraisal requirements for real estate lending; 3) eased the appeals of

examination decisions; 4) streamlined examination processes and procedures; and 5) reduced paperwork and

regulatory burden associated with the supervisory process (Interagency Policy Statement on Credit Availability,

March 10, 1993). As a specific example of the implementation of this program, banks that were well- or adequately-

capitalized with satisfactory CAMEL ratings of 1 or 2 (most banks) were allowed to make and carry some loans to

small- and medium-sized businesses (loans to borrowers with bank credit less than $900,000) with only minimal

documentation, exempt from examiner criticism for doing so up to some limits (e.g., up to 20% of the bank’s capital).

Beyond these limits and for institutions not qualifying because of insufficient capital or CAMEL ratings, deviations

from standard documentation could be made without examiner criticism for loans to some customers with past

experience with the bank (Interagency Policy Statement on Documentation of Loans, March 30, 1993). This policy

may be interpreted as an easing of supervision that may increase lending to relationship-type small and medium-sized

business borrowers. In 1993, bank Call Report forms were also amended to begin collecting data each June on small

business loans.
                                                              4

         From 1993 through the end of our sample in 1998, lending by the U.S. banking industry increased

substantially, and the industry enjoyed record profitability. Total domestic C&I loans rose by about 50% in real

dollars, more than recovering from its 23% drop during the credit crunch period. However, small business loans

may not have recovered quite as well, with business loans to borrowers with bank credit less than $1 million (as

collected on the June Call Reports) rising only about 14% in real terms, and falling as a percentage of bank gross

total assets from about 4.4% to about 3.8%.1

         A number of hypotheses for the improvements in bank profitability during the 1993-1998 boom period

have been advanced, including favorable macroeconomic conditions, exercise of market power in pricing, a

shifting toward higher risk-higher expected return investments, and improvements in the quality of banking

services (Berger and Mester 1999, Berger, Bonime, Covitz, and Hancock 2000). However, little attention has

been paid to the possible role of changes in the supervisory process on bank lending behavior. The increase in

lending may have occurred in part because of the supervisors’ joint program or because supervisors became easier

in their assessments of bank condition in other ways. If banks were assigned more favorable CAMEL examination

ratings and lower classified assets for a given financial condition, this may have encouraged banks to increase their

lending. To our knowledge, Hypotheses H2 (decline in toughness during the boom) and H3 (it mattered to bank

lending) have not previously been tested using data from the boom period. We test these hypotheses below and

also investigate the effects of the supervisory ratings on other measures of bank risk taking.

         To test for changes in supervisory toughness, we control for bank financial condition and other

information that might be used by supervisors. To test H1, we run weighted least squares regression equations for

classified assets and ordered logit equations for CAMEL ratings, and test whether supervisors classified more

assets or assigned worse CAMEL ratings during the credit crunch period for a given bank financial condition and

other factors describing its economic environment. Similarly, to test H2, we test whether supervisors gave better

treatment for given bank condition and other factors during the boom period.

         To perform these tests, it is necessary to understand the supervisory process, particularly the procedures by

which information is gathered and used by examiners. In controlling for bank condition, our econometric models


1
 These numbers may slightly overstate the growth in small business lending. Although we are able to deflate the dollar
values of loans to put them in real terms, the cutoff of bank credit less than $1 million remains in nominal terms on the Call
Report form.
                                                          5

mimic as closely as possible the information used in the supervisory process at the time of the ratings assignment,

including the levels, trends, and peer group percentile ranks of all the key balance sheet and income variables

specified in the off-site and on-site procedures. It is important to include these variables, since if any of important

Call Report items used by supervisors in setting the ratings is excluded from the econometric analysis, the test

results may be biased. For example, if a key balance sheet variable worsened during the credit crunch period and

this were excluded from the ordered logit equations for CAMEL ratings, this may give a false reading of a

toughening of supervisory treatment, since the CAMEL rating may have changed because of the excluded balance

sheet ratio rather than a change in supervisory toughness. This is especially important for the risk-based capital

and leverage capital ratios, given the regulatory changes that apply to these ratios.

        To test whether changes in supervisory toughness, if they occurred, affected bank lending behavior, we

again control for bank conditions and economic environment. To test H3, we run ordinary least squares regression

equations for changes in the proportions of bank assets invested in different types of loans and test whether these

were affected by changes in classified assets and CAMEL ratings. We also include dependent variables for

nonperforming loans, charge-offs, and the total capital ratio to determine whether any possible changes in

supervisory toughness affected bank risk taking in ways other than the change in lending. The regressors include

three years of past changes in classified assets, changes in CAMEL ratings, changes in bank financial conditions,

and changes in other factors.

        By way of preview, we find that the data provides some statistically significant support for all three

hypotheses, as well as supporting the argument that supervisory assessments affect bank risk-taking behavior.

However, our evaluation of economic significance suggests that all of these effects are likely to be quite small.

The data suggest that changes in supervisory toughness likely do not explain much of the dramatic changes in

overall bank lending over the last decade or so.

        Section 2 describes the supervisory process, including descriptions of the classified assets and CAMEL

ratings assigned by supervisors and the off-site and on-site procedures used to arrive at these assessments. Section

3 looks at the raw data from bank examinations, illustrating how supervisory ratings have changed over time, and

pointing out some sample selection issues. Section 4 briefly reviews the literatures on the credit crunch and prior

uses of supervisory data. Section 5 presents the data and methodology employed. Section 6 contains results and
                                                         6

their implications, and Section 7 concludes.

2. The Supervisory Process

        Current supervisory practice based on the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 requires that banks be

examined at least once every 12 months for most banks or at least every 18 months for some small banks in good

condition, although prior practice often resulted in significantly lower frequency (Gilbert 1993, 1994).

Examination frequency is generally higher for troubled banks — those that are perceived to be in poor condition

based on off-site monitoring of their balance sheet ratios, past examination ratings, etc. Supervisors also speed up

the examination schedule when there are indications of fraud, embezzlement, or other criminal activity. Most

examinations are of the full-scope type, an in-depth evaluation of all areas of a bank's operation. A limited-scope

exam is less intensive than a full-scope but reviews the same areas, while a targeted exam focuses on one or two

areas intensively. In most cases, banks receive advance notification so that they can have the necessary documents

and information prepared.

        After the on-site examination, supervisory assessments in the form of CAMEL ratings and classified assets

are determined. However, much of the information used in the evaluation of the bank is gathered in advance off-

site. In this section, we first describe the CAMEL ratings and classified assets, followed by discussions of the off-

site tasks and on-site procedures.

2.1 CAMEL ratings and classified assets

        Based on their assessments of information collected both off-site and on-site, supervisors assign each bank

a composite CAMEL rating, which reflects their overall assessment of bank condition. CAMEL ratings are

integers ranging from 1 to 5, with 1 being the strongest condition and 5 being the weakest. Most banks have

ratings of 1 or 2 and are considered to be in satisfactory condition. Banks with ratings of 3, 4, or 5 are generally

encouraged or required to take actions to improve their conditions. Table 1 gives more complete descriptions of

the composite ratings. The CAMEL ratings are confidential, although some of the research reviewed below

suggests that the information in ratings changes becomes incorporated into market prices.

        For most of our sample, the composite CAMEL rating was based on five components of supervisory

concern, each of which also receive a rating on the 1 to 5 scale. These are capital adequacy (C), asset quality (A),

management (M), earnings (E), and liquidity (L). Since 1997, supervisors have added a component for sensitivity
                                                          7

to market risk (S), and altered the acronym to CAMELS. While we do use the CAMELS rating for the end of our

data set, we continue to refer to the CAMEL acronym throughout for convenience. Table 2 gives some of the

details about these components.

         The other main assessment made by supervisors is the determination of classified assets. In order from

highest quality to lowest quality, C&I and commercial real estate loans are rated as “pass,” “special mention,”

“substandard,” “doubtful,” or “loss.”. Assets in the three most severe categories are often referred to as “classified

assets,” although this term is sometimes meant to include the special mention category. Table 3 gives definitions

of the special mention, substandard, doubtful, and loss categories.

         Examiners use the following formula to determine the minimum required level of the allocation for loan

and lease losses (ALLL), which is based on probability of default for each asset classification:


15%*substandard assets + 50%*doubtful assets + 100%*loss assets + (discretionary %)*(pass + special mention),


where the discretionary percentage the bank is required to hold against nonclassified assets is usually about 1% to

2%. If this minimum level exceeds the bank's actual reserve, the bank must add to its reserve from equity capital.

Thus, the greater the fraction of assets classified as substandard, doubtful, or loss, and the more serious the

classification, the more the bank may have to shift funds from equity to ALLL. This may require the bank to

reduce lending, shrink, or raise capital to comply with capital regulations.

         In our empirical analysis, we use both total classified assets (substandard + doubtful + loss) and weighted

classified assets (15%*substandard assets + 50%*doubtful + 100%*loss). An increase in supervisory toughness

may occur by supervisors shifting loans from pass or special mention to substandard, doubtful, or loss, which

would raise total classified assets. Alternatively, supervisors might get tougher by shifting already-classified assets

into more serious classifications, such as from substandard to doubtful or from doubtful to loss, which would raise

weighted classified assets. We include both measures of classified assets in our analysis to allow for these

possibilities.

2.2 Off-site supervisory tasks

         In general, one individual is named "Examiner-in-Charge" (EIC) responsible for coordinating most

aspects of an exam, and has a number of assistants depending on the size and complexity of the bank. Prior to an
                                                         8

on-site visit, examiners perform several analyses off-site. These include review of past examination reports and

the correspondence file for that bank, as well as its Call Report and Uniform Bank Performance Report (UBPR).

The UBPR, produced for every U.S. commercial bank by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council,

summarizes several years of Call Report data for a bank and presents both dollar amounts and financial ratios for

most areas of bank operations. The UBPR also includes information on the trends of these variables as well as the

peer group average for each variable and the bank's rank within its peer group for that variable. Peer groups are

based on bank asset size, number of offices, and location in a metropolitan or non-metropolitan area. Analysis of

the UBPR provides initial evaluations of the individual components of the CAMEL rating (although no

preliminary rating is given for the management component), which may be changed during the on-site examination

if conditions are not consistent with what was reported or expected (Commercial Bank Examination Manual

1020.1 p.1). Generally, the off-site monitoring is helpful in determining potential problems that examiners should

scrutinize during the on-site visit, allowing on-site resources to be allocated more efficiently. Off-site monitoring

is also useful for identifying troubled banks or those with indications of criminal activity to speed up the

examination schedule for these institutions.

        Our econometric models control for bank condition by proxying for the information used by supervisors

as well as possible. This includes forming the levels, trends, and peer group percentile ranks of the key balance

sheet and income variables specified in the UBPR from the appropriate Call Report quarter. As discussed, failure

to include these variables could bias our tests of Hypotheses H1 or H2 that supervisors got tougher or easier, since

any change in classified assets or CAMEL ratings may reflect changes in the UBPR variables, rather than changes

in supervisory harshness.

2.3 On-site examination procedures

        The most important aspect of the on-site examination is the evaluation of the bank's loan portfolio. This

process begins with a review of the institution's loan policies, which should include a description of the bank's

market, targeted customers, lending guidelines, documentation, and restrictions or requirements on loans to

insiders. Examiners also read the minutes of the bank's loan committee meetings, the credit department's

procedures and files regarding the acquisition of borrower financial information, and internal reports on past due

or problem loans.
                                                         9

        Examiners evaluate a certain proportion of the loan portfolio, depending on the bank's most recent

composite and asset quality ratings. This proportion ranges from 40% for banks with composite ratings of 1 or 2

and an asset quality rating of 1 up to 60% or more for banks with worse ratings or other areas of concern.

        There are several steps in determining the loan sample. Examiners must review all commercial and

industrial (C&I) and commercial real estate (CRE) loans that are past due, nonaccrual, restructured, renegotiated,

made to an insider, internally classified by the bank or classified at the last exam. "Large" loans, those loans

greater than a dollar cutoff determined by the EIC to be appropriate for the bank, must also be reviewed. This set

of C&I and CRE loans is considered the "core" group for review. To achieve the desired coverage of the portfolio

(i.e., the 40% to 60% or more), additional loans are selected for review in a variety of ways. The dollar cutoff for

"large" loans might be lowered; recent loans or specific loan types might be selected; or random sampling or some

other technique may be applied, according to examiner discretion.

        Examiners assign ratings of pass, special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss to each loan sampled.

Examiners may assign distinct classifications to different parts of a loan depending on the likelihood of collection

of each particular part. Examiners may also assign split classifications, such as "substandard/doubtful," in

appropriate circumstances. The loan ratings are checked against the bank’s own internal ratings as a check of how

well bank management is monitoring its own portfolio. Installment loans, residential mortgages, and other

consumer credits are classified based as pass, substandard, or loss based solely on the number of days past due, not

by examiner discretion.

        After the examination, the final supervisory assessments are made. The composite CAMEL rating is

based on all the components of supervisory concern — capital adequacy, asset quality, management, earnings,

liquidity, and (more recently for the CAMELS rating) sensitivity to market risk — and the information

incorporated into the rating comes from the data gathered off-site and on-site. The composite CAMEL rating is

not an unweighted mean of these components — an examiner may use personal judgment as to the importance of

each component for a particular bank. However, quality of the assets in terms of likely future losses and the ability

of the bank’s capital to absorb these losses are usually the most important components. The composite rating is

generally not supposed to be more than one rank better than the capital (C) or asset quality (A) rank.

3. A Look at the Raw Data from Bank Examinations
                                                        10

        Table 4 shows some summary statistics from bank examinations over the entire 1986 to 1998 period.

Panel A shows the number of banks with examination data for each year, the mean ratios of total classified assets

to loans and weighted classified assets to loans, the mean composite CAMEL rating, and the fractions of banks

receiving composite CAMEL ratings of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Panel B of Table 4 summarizes the information for the

pre-crunch, credit crunch, and boom periods. The accompanying figure plots the fractions of banks with the

different CAMEL ratings over time.

        We include exactly one observation for each bank that was examined in each year. Since not every bank

is examined in every year, the total number of banks examined in each year is fewer than the number of banks in

the nation. In the relatively infrequent cases in which more than one examination was made of the same bank in

the same year, we simply include the results of the final examination of the year to avoid double-counting. As will

be seen, changes over time in the sample of banks that were selected by supervisors to be examined are important

in interpreting the data.

        In some respects, the raw data are consistent with expectations, and in other respects, the data are quite

surprising. Consistent with expectations, the supervisory assessments are unambiguously the best during the boom

periodcommonly assumed. As shown in Panel A, in each of the boom period years 1993-1998, the mean total

classified asset ratio, mean weighted classified asset ratio, mean composite CAMEL rating, and fraction of banks

receiving CAMEL 1 ratings (the best rating) were better than the corresponding figures for each of the credit

crunch years 1989-1992, and better than each of the pre-crunch years 1986-1988 as well. The data in Panel B

show that on average during the boom period, the classified asset ratios were on the order of about half, and the

fractions of banks assigned CAMEL 1s were on the order of about double, those in the pre-crunch and credit

crunch periods. The figure shows a steep increase in CAMEL 1 ratings and steep decreases in CAMEL 3,

CAMEL 4, and CAMEL 5 beginning in 1993. These strong improvements in supervisory assessments during the

boom period may reflect the improved condition of banks, any supervisory easing that may have occurred, or a

combination of the two. The multivariate empirical analysis below will try to disentangle these effects.

        Contrary to expectations, the supervisory assessments generally did not deteriorate during the credit

crunch period. As shown in Panel A, in each of the credit crunch years 1989-1992, the mean total classified asset

ratio, mean weighted classified asset ratio, mean composite CAMEL rating, and CAMEL 1 fraction were better
                                                            11

than the corresponding figures for each of the pre-crunch years 1986-1988 (although the figures for 1989 are very

close to those for 1988 and round to the same three digits for the classified asset ratios). The data in Panel B show

that the mean classified asset ratios, mean composite CAMEL, and CAMEL 1 fraction for the credit crunch period

are all closer to the pre-crunch period figures than to the boom period figures, indicating a much smaller

improvement in credit crunch period than in the boom period. This slight improvement in supervisory

assessments or failure to deteriorate is surprising given both the recession of the early 1990s and widespread belief

that supervisors may have become tougher, as formulated in our Hypothesis H1.2

         At first blush, it would seem unlikely that Hypothesis H1 could be supported in our empirical analysis, in

which we include controls for bank financial condition and economic environment. Banking industry condition

did improve slightly during the credit crunch period in terms of capital ratios and problem loans, but it would not

be expected ex ante that controls for bank condition would improve enough to more than offset a substantial

increase in supervisory toughness. As seen next, the improvements in supervisory assessments during the credit

crunch period may largely be an artifact of changes in the selection of banks that were examined.

         Table 5 illustrates the sample selection issue by comparing examined banks with the banking industry as a

whole over time. As shown in Panel A, the fraction of banks with examination data rises each year from 1986 to

1993 and then falls each year thereafter to 1998. The changes are quite dramatic, with the percentage of banks

with recorded examinations nearly doubling from 42.6% to 85.4%, and then dropping to 62.3%. As shown in

Panel B of Table 5, only 49.4% of banks have examination data on average during the pre-crunch years versus

69.5% during the credit crunch years and 75.4% during the boom years. These dramatic changes in the fraction of

banks examined may in part reflect changes in supervisory policy, changes in regulation (such as FDICIA, which

mandates examinations every 12 or 18 months), or changes in bank condition.

         Importantly, a change in the fraction of banks examined may change the quality pool of the banks

examined relative to the industry as a whole. As discussed above, the selection of which banks are examined in a

given year depends in part on the perceived quality of the institutions. Banks that are perceived to be in worse

condition based on off-site monitoring of their balance sheet ratios, past examination ratings, etc., are more likely


2
 The classified assets figures may have been held down temporarily for some banks during the high-bank-failure years in the
late 1980s and early 1990s in order to allow for orderly bank closures, since high classified assets may have reduced capital
to below closure levels for too many banks at the same time.
                                                            12

to be examined in a given year. As a consequence, if the fraction of banks examined rises over time it may be

expected that average quality of the pool of banks that are examined will rise relative to the industry as a whole, as

better-quality institutions are added to the examination pool. That is, there may be no improvement or even a

deterioration in supervisory assessments on average relative to prior examinations, but the addition of better banks

to the examination pool make it appear from the raw data that assessments have improved. This may help explain

why the classified asset ratios and CAMEL ratings of examined banks improved during the credit crunch period.

The substantial expansion in the fraction of banks examined may have added better-quality banks that typically

receive better supervisory assessments, as opposed to improved assessments of the same pool of banks.

         Additional data in Table 5 are designed to examine this issue further. The table shows the mean total

capital ratio and mean nonperforming loan ratio calculated from the Call Report for the year prior to the

examinations versus these same ratios for the industry as a whole. For the total capital ratio, the difference

between the mean for examined banks and the mean for the industry narrows considerably during the credit crunch

period. As shown in Panel A, the capital ratio for examined banks is 2.4 percentage points lower on average than

the industry as of 1986, and this difference narrowed to below 1 percentage point by 1990. As shown in Panel B,

the average difference fell by about one-half from 1.9 percentage points during the pre-crunch years to 0.9

percentage points during the credit crunch years, consistent with the argument that examinations during the credit

crunch period tended to cover a higher-quality cut of the industry than did examinations during the pre-crunch

period, which may explain the slightly improved supervisory assessments. Similar results hold for other capital

ratios (not shown in table).3 Perhaps surprisingly, there is much less support for this argument from the

nonperforming loan data — examined banks had only slightly higher nonperforming loan ratios than the industry

as a whole during the pre-crunch period, and the difference disappeared during the credit crunch period.4 Thus,

the examination pool seemed to have improved substantially relative to the industry in terms of capital, but much

less so in terms of nonperforming loans.


3
  The mean Tier 1 and leverage capital ratios for examined banks improved from 0.149 and 0.082, respectively, during the
pre-crunch years to 0.160 and 0.087 during the credit crunch years. For the industry, the corresponding ratios increased from
0.168 and 0.086, respectively, to 0.170 and 0.089. Again, the percentage point difference in capital ratios between examined
banks and the industry as a whole dropped by about one-half in the credit crunch period.
4
  A potential problem with the nonperforming loan data is that the definition may have changed slightly over time due to
changes in supervisory policy in which loans in which no repayments had been missed were recorded as nonperforming.
Similarly, there may have been a change in the reported data for C&I and real estate loans, as supervisors became more
                                                            13

         Table 6 rearranges the raw data in a way that should at least partially offset the changes in sample

selection over time. For each examination, we show the changes in composite CAMEL ratings, total classified

asset ratio, and weighted classified asset ratio since the previous examination. If a bank did not have an

examination in the year or if there are no prior examinations available, the data are excluded (this is for illustrative

purposes only – we include banks with missing past examinations in our empirical analysis below). This

procedure should partially offset the sample selection problem, since each examination is paired with exactly one

prior examination of the same bank, with no additions or subtractions to the data set. As shown, there are very few

observations at the start of the sample, since we have data on only a very small number of examinations prior to

the start of the pre-crunch period in 1986. The data are roughly consistent with the expectations that supervisory

assessments deteriorated during the credit crunch period and improved during the boom period. As shown in

Panel A, CAMEL downgrades exceed upgrades in the first three years of the credit crunch period from 1989

through 1991, and CAMEL upgrades exceed downgrades in every year from 1992 through 1997 (upgrades,

downgrades, and constant CAMEL ratings fractions sum to 1 by construction). Similarly, the percentage of

examinations with increases in classified assets is relatively high in 1989 through 1991 and then falls off sharply

in the immediately following years (classified asset ratio decreases and increases fractions sum to 1 by

construction). The summary data in Panel B confirm this. During the credit crunch period, composite CAMEL

downgrades slightly exceed upgrades, whereas upgrades slightly exceed downgrades during the pre-crunch years

and upgrades greatly exceed downgrades during the boom years. Similarly, the fractions of examinations with

increases in the classified asset ratios are greatest during the credit crunch years, whereas the fractions with

decreases in these ratios is highest during the boom years. The data in Table 6 suggest that supervisory

assessments began to be somewhat harsher just before the onset of the credit crunch and began to be somewhat

less harsh just before the onset of the banking boom. These data are also consistent with our arguments about

sample selection. It may be the case that on average banks of a given quality received worse supervisory

assessments in the credit crunch period than in the pre-crunch period, but that the average assessments given

improved because the increased examination frequency resulted in a better-quality cut of the industry being

examined during the credit crunch period.



vigilant in requiring that commercial loans secured by real estate were reported as real estate loans.
                                                        14

        There are several other sample selection issues as well. There may be some missing observations —

examinations that took place but were not on the electronic files — particularly at the beginning of our data set.

Prior to 1986, the files are very incomplete, making lagged examination data an issue. Some of the data may also

be missing for 1986 or other early years. We also may be missing some examinations from 1998 that were not

finalized at the time we extracted the data set in the latter part of 1999. In addition, some banks drop out of the

sample due to mergers and failures, and others enter the sample through the creation of new charters.

        We deal with these sample selection issues in the empirical analysis in several ways. First, we include a

large number of controls for bank quality, which may help compensate for changes over time in the quality of the

cut of the industry that is examined. Second, we include observations in the regressions even when data for lagged

supervisory assessments are missing, and include a dummy variable flagging these observations to account for the

average difference of these banks from other banks. This increases representation for new entrants and for banks

near the beginning of the data set when examination data are sparse. Third, we try a Heckman correction for

sample selection bias, although we acknowledge that there are identification problems with this procedure in our

case.

4. Literature Review

        In this section, we first briefly review the literature on the causes for the decline in bank lending during

the credit crunch period. Very little of this research has used supervisory data, despite the widespread belief

discussed above that an increase in supervisory toughness may be responsible for the reduced lending. We then

review prior research that has used the supervisory data to test the timeliness and accuracy of supervisory

assessments. To our knowledge there have been no prior tests of whether a decline in supervisory toughness may

have contributed to changes in bank lending behavior during the banking boom.

4.1 Prior research on the causes of the credit crunch

        A number of hypotheses of the decline in bank credit to business during the credit crunch period have

been tested. A few studies have explicitly investigated forms of Hypotheses H1 and H3, i.e., that supervisors got

tougher and this toughness reduced business lending. In the study closest in approach to the current paper, Bizer

(1993) ran ordered logit equations for composite CAMEL ratings on a limited number of Call Report items,

regional dummies, and primary supervisor dummies. He found that the model predicted tougher CAMEL ratings
                                                        15

during the quarters of the credit crunch period than in a single-quarter control period of 1988Q4. He also

regressed lending on lagged CAMEL ratings and a few control variables and found that worse CAMEL ratings

were associated with reduced lending.

        While this was an excellent early attempt, a more comprehensive approach is needed in our opinion. As

discussed above, it is important to control for as much of the information used in the supervisory process at the

time of the ratings assignment, including the levels, trends, and peer group percentile ranks of the key balance

sheet and income variables explicitly used to form the CAMEL ratings, or else biases may be created. Bizer’s

CAMEL equations include very few of the specified levels, and none of the trends or peer group percentile ranks.

For example, he excluded the risk-based capital ratios, so the effects of enforcing these regulatory requirements

through the supervisory process may not be captured. Similar criticisms also apply to the lending regressions,

which do not control for problem loan categories. As indicated below, our strongest results for the lending

equations are generated by changes in classified assets, which are excluded from Bizer’s analysis. As shown

below, we also include much more information about the condition of banks in the same state and use a three-year

pre-crunch base period in place of a single quarter.

        Another study that used supervisory assessments was Peek and Rosengren (1995a). These authors tested

a form of Hypothesis H3 by evaluating the effects of supervisory enforcement actions in New England during the

credit crunch period. They found that banks under enforcement actions reduced lending more than other banks in

the same region with the same capital-to-asset ratios, supporting the hypothesis that supervisory actions

contributed to the reduction in lending. Again, the conclusions may be somewhat limited, because there were very

few control variables specified for bank condition, making it difficult to disentangle supervisory actions from the

effects of the condition of the banks’ portfolios.

        A number of studies tested whether implementation of tougher capital standards contributed to the decline

in U.S. bank lending to business during the credit crunch period. Some tested the effects of implementation of the

Basle-Accord risk-based capital standards (e.g., Haubrich and Wachtel 1993, Berger and Udell 1994, Hancock

and Wilcox 1994a, Wagster 1999). Others tested whether supervisors or regulators implemented higher explicit or

implicit regulatory capital standards based on leverage ratios (e.g., Berger and Udell 1994, Peek and Rosengren

1994, 1995b, Hancock and Wilcox 1994a, Hancock, Laing, and Wilcox 1995, Shrieves and Dahl 1995).
                                                          16

Although there is not full consensus, the empirical results generally do not support risk-based capital as a major

contributor to the lending slowdown, but do provide some support for the effects of tougher explicit or implicit

leverage capital requirements.

        As noted above, to the extent that capital requirements or other regulatory changes are enforced through

the supervisory process by assigning worse CAMEL ratings for the same capital ratio or other balance sheet or

income ratios, they may be captured in our tests of supervisory toughness below. That is, if supervisors are

enforcing higher capital ratios, then there should be a worse CAMEL rating assigned for the same capital ratio, all

else equal. In our empirical analysis, we include the Tier 1 and Total risk-based capital ratios as well as the

leverage ratio to capture these effects, although identifying these individual capital effects is quite difficult and is

not a goal of this paper.

        A notable advantage of our tests is that by including actual supervisory assessments, we can better

distinguish between supervisory-induced changes in bank behavior and voluntary changes in bank behavior. It is

possible that a reduction in lending during the credit crunch period by banks with capital below the regulatory

minimums represents a voluntary retrenchment of risks by banks, rather than the effects of changes in

regulation/supervision, and our tests may help distinguish among these alternatives.

        Similarly, some studies found that during the credit crunch period, banks facing greater portfolio risks —

such as those with more nonperforming loans or those in nations with more banking system risk — also tended to

cut back their lending more than other banks (e.g., Berger and Udell 1994, Wagster 1999). Without supervisory

information, it is not possible to distinguish whether this represents supervisory versus voluntary reactions to risk.

Our tests, which control for measures of portfolio risks, may help distinguish between supervisory and voluntary

changes.

        Other studies tested whether demand or supply factors other than regulatory/supervisory changes

contributed significantly to the change in lending during the credit crunch period. Tests have been performed of

the effects of the depletion of bank capital from loan loss experiences of the late 1980s (e.g., Peek and Rosengren

1994, 1995b, Hancock and Wilcox 1994a, 1997, 1998), potential choices of lower risk profiles by bank managers

(e.g., Hancock and Wilcox 1993, 1994b), reduced loan demand because of macroeconomic or regional recessions

(e.g., Bernanke and Lown 1991, Hancock and Wilcox 1993, 1997), or a secular decline in the demand for bank
                                                        17

loans because of the growth of alternative sources of credit (e.g., Berger and Udell 1994). All of these hypotheses

were supported to at least some degree.

4.2 Prior research on supervisory timeliness and accuracy

        Previous research on bank examinations or bank holding company inspections has usually focused on

either the timeliness or accuracy of supervisory assessments of banking organization condition measured relative

to market assessments. Studies of timeliness generally tested whether changes in supervisory assessments —

changes in CAMEL, changes in BOPEC (the corresponding rating for bank holding companies), or identification

of problem banks — occurred before or after changes in market assessments of banking problems — equity or

debt price changes, changes in bond ratings, or changes in share ownership by institutions or insiders.

        Most of the early studies of timeliness found that supervisors did not have information in a more timely

fashion than market participants. Pettway (1980) performed event studies for six large banks that were placed on

the "problem bank list" during 1972-1976, and found significantly negative cumulative abnormal stock returns

before the examination that first recognized the banks' problems, suggesting a timeliness advantage for investors

over supervisors. Hirschhorn (1987) investigated whether CAMEL rating changes pre-date stock price changes,

using data on examination ratings of the lead banks of the 15 largest BHCs during 1978-1987. He found that

CAMEL ratings were approximately contemporaneously correlated with abnormal returns, suggesting that

supervisors generally have little if any economically significant informational advantage over equity market

participants. Cargill (1989) examined cross-sectional variation in the rates on large certificates of deposit for 58

large banks during 1984-1986. He found that CAMEL ratings added no significant explanatory power beyond

Call Report financial ratios, again implying that supervisors did not have substantial information prior to market

participants.

        In contrast, more recent studies generally found that supervisors did have some valuable information on a

more timely basis than market participants. Simons and Cross (1991) identified 22 BHCs whose lead banks had

their composite CAMEL rating lowered to the problem ratings of 4 or 5 during 1981-1987. They found that the

company's weekly abnormal stock returns for the year preceding the downgrade were equally likely to be positive

or negative, and that few news stories chronicled the firms' problems, suggesting that supervisors may have known

about problems before market participants. Berger and Davies (1998) used event study methodology to identify
                                                            18

abnormal BHC stock returns after 390 lead bank examinations during 1985-1989. They separated out the three

types of information that may be generated by the examination — private information about bank condition,

certification information about the quality of audited financial statements, and supervisory discipline information

about whether the bank may have greater or fewer restrictions placed on it. They found that the only type of

private information that was transferred to the market was unfavorable private information about bank condition,

suggesting that supervisors force the release of unfavorable information. Jordan (1999) found results consistent

with these when investigating the effects of examinations of banks in 35 BHCs in New England over the period

1988:Q1 – 1990:Q3. He found statistically significant negative abnormal stock returns (below the mean returns of

these 35 BHCs) in the quarter after CAMEL downgrades involving at least one-third of the BHCs’ banking assets,

but no significant change in market prices for examinations overall. DeYoung, Flannery, Lang, and Sorescu

(1998) investigated whether national bank examiners’ private information significantly predicted changes in the

risk premia on large BHCs’ subordinated debentures during 1989-1995. They found that debenture yield spreads

changed after the examination information, suggesting that examiners uncover relevant information before the

market. Consistent with Berger and Davies (1998), this predictive effect occurred only for negative supervisory

assessments. Flannery and Houston (1999) evaluated the correspondence between market and book valuations for

a sample of BHCs in the fourth quarters of 1988 and 1990, and found that investors evaluated financial

information differently when the BHC had recently received an on-site inspection, particularly in the relatively

"normal" 1988 period. Inspected BHCs showed a closer correspondence between market and book values,

consistent with the hypothesis that investors view examiners as credibly certifying of the financial statements'

accuracy. Finally, Berger, Davies, and Flannery (2000) used quarterly data from inspections of 184 large bank

holding companies over the period 1989:Q4-1992:Q2, and found that BHC supervisors and bond rating agencies

both have some timely prior information that is useful to the other. However, supervisory assessments and equity

market indicators were not strongly related to each other, presumably because of differences in incentives

regarding risks and expected returns.5,6


5
 Consistent with this conclusion, Hall, Meyer, and Vaughan (1997) found that supervisors and shareholders responded
differently to balance sheet measures of BHC condition.
 6
   Studies of bank "early warning" systems (e.g., Sinkey 1978, Whalen and Thompson 1988, O’Keefe and Dahl 1997) tested
how well supervisory ratings can be predicted from publicly available information, generally Call Report data. These may be
viewed as tests of whether supervisors have information not already in the publicly available data, although this was not the
                                                          19

         Studies of supervisory accuracy generally tested whether changes in supervisory assessments added to the

predictions of changes in bank condition (e.g., bank failure, book-value insolvency, changes in nonperforming

loans or equity capital) or macroeconomic performance beyond other public or private sources of information

(e.g., market assessments, Call Report information, or Federal Reserve staff forecasts). This literature found

mixed results. Davies (1993) tested whether CAMEL or BOPEC ratings versus market/book ratios better helped

predict future book-value insolvency (bank’s capital ratio below either 2% or 3% of assets) during 1986-1991 and

found that unsatisfactory bank CAMEL ratings helped predict a higher probability of book-value insolvency, but

that unsatisfactory holding company BOPEC ratings had little or no additional predictive power. Cole and

Gunther (1998) compared supervisory ratings with Call Report information in predicting future bank failures

during 1988:Q2-1992:Q1, and found that CAMEL ratings improved forecast accuracy, but only if the examination

was in the most recent two quarters. Berger, Davies, and Flannery (2000) similarly found that supervisory

assessments are much less accurate overall than both bond and equity market assessments in predicting future

changes in performance, but that supervisors may be more accurate when inspections are recent. Finally, Peek,

Rosengren, and Tootell (1999a,b) used quarterly data from 1978:Q1-1996:Q2 and 1978:Q1-1994:Q4,

respectively, and found that the proportion of the nation's banking assets in banks with composite CAMEL ratings

of 5 (the worst rating) added information in predicting macroeconomic performance beyond what was

incorporated in the predictions of private-sector forecasting firms and Federal Reserve staff.

         A fundamental problem with tests of supervisory accuracy is that accuracy in predicting future

performance may not be the primary goal of supervisors. Supervisors may be more concerned with accurately

describing the current condition of a BHC in order to exert pressure on institutions to resolve problems, and be

less concerned with predicting future condition. Supervisors may be very accurate in assessing current condition

while appearing to be very inaccurate at predicting future condition, particularly if supervisors are successful at

pressuring institutions to resolve problems. For example, a CAMEL downgrade or an increase in classified assets

may encourage an institution to stop making risky loans, eventually reducing its nonperforming loan ratio. The



main purpose. These studies generally found that the supervisory ratings were far from perfectly predictable from Call
Report information, consistent with the supervisors adding timely information. However, these studies are less useful for
evaluating timeliness than studies using stock and bond market data, since market data presumably incorporate much more
information than the Call Report.
                                                        20

finding in Cole and Gunther (1998) and Berger, Davies, and Flannery (2000) that supervisors may be more

accurate than market participants in predicting short-run future performance and less accurate than market

participants in predicting long-run future performance is consistent with this argument, since any change in

problem loans caused by supervisory pressure is likely to take several quarters to appear in full in the data.

Because of these difficulties, we do not try to determine whether any increase or decrease in supervisory toughness

in the data represents a change in accuracy.

5. Methodology and Data

        In this section, we first discuss the method and data used to test Hypotheses H1 and H2, which address

whether banks received harsher or less harsh supervisory assessments for a given set of bank conditions. We then

review our procedures and information used in testing Hypothesis H3, which addresses the effects of changes in

supervisory harshness on bank lending behavior.

5.1 Tests of changes in supervisory harshness (Hypotheses H1 and H2)

        As indicated above, to test for changes in supervisory toughness, we model two types of supervisory

assessments — classified assets and composite CAMEL ratings — as functions of measures of bank financial

condition and other factors representing the economic environment of the bank. The econometric models mimic

as closely as possible the information used in the supervisory process at the time of the supervisory assessments.

Of course, it is not possible to include all of the information available to supervisors at the time they set the

classified assets and CAMEL ratings, but we address this issue as well as we can by:


        1. Including the key balance sheet and income variables specified in the supervisory procedures in their
           level, trend, and peer group percentile ranks, as discussed above;

        2. Including a large number of other control variables for bank condition and economic environment;

        3. “Bracketing” the information set used by supervisors by running the models with and without
           information on the future performance of the bank, which is more information than the supervisors
           could have access to at the time of the supervisory assessments;

        4. Running large numbers of robustness checks on the models.


        Our models for classified assets and CAMEL ratings are very similar. We first review our classified assets

model in detail and then discuss how the CAMEL model differs. The classified assets model takes the form:
                                                            21


           ln(CLASS/(1-CLASS)) = f (TIME DUMMIES, LAGGED SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS,
                                    SUPERVISORY AGENCY DUMMIES, BANK SIZE, BANK
                                    BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS, STATE AVERAGES OF
                                    BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS, OTHER ECONOMIC
                                    ENVIRONMENT INDICATORS, [FUTURE PERFORMANCE])


These variables are shown in various degrees of detail in Table 7. There are between 190 and 199 coefficients

estimated in each of the classified assets equations, depending upon whether the future performance variables

(described below) are included.

           The dependent variable is in log-odds form, the natural log of the proportion of loans classified as

substandard, doubtful, or loss divided by one minus this proportion. The equation may be interpreted as a log-

odds grouped logit model for the probability that a dollar of loans will be classified. It is estimated by weighted

least squares in order to avoid heteroskedasticity problems and the adjusted R2s are corrected.7 As shown in Table

7, we specify models for both total classified assets and weighted classified assets.

           The TIME DUMMIES are also specified in several alternative ways to insure robustness of the results. In

some equations, we include dummies for each of our three main time periods, pre-crunch (1986-1988), credit

crunch (1989-1992), and boom (1993-1998). In other equations, we specify dummies for each individual year to

allow for the data more freedom to “choose for themselves” when changes in supervisory toughness occurred. We

use the coefficients of the TIME DUMMIES to establish the changes in supervisory toughness. That is, after

controlling as well as we can for the supervisors’ information in the rest of the equation, we test the coefficients of

these dummies to see if classified assets tend to be higher in the credit crunch period as predicted by Hypothesis

H1, and lower during boom period as predicted by Hypothesis H2.

           As an additional specification, we drop the TIME DUMMIES and simply run the model separately for the

pre-crunch, credit crunch, and boom periods, allowing the coefficients of all of the other regressors to change in an

unrestricted manner. This gives an alternative way of calculating economic significance by assessing whether the

predicted values for classified assets differ substantially for a given set of conditions (e.g., the median from one of

the time periods) using the coefficients from two different time periods.

           We also include LAGGED SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS to account for “stickiness” in assessments


7
    Each observation is divided by a number proportional to the estimated standard error of its error term [{(1/CLASS)) +
                                                             22

or additional information inherent about bank or portfolio quality in past assessments. We include the lagged total

classified assets ratio in the total classified assets regressions and the lagged weighted classified assets ratio in the

weighted classified assets equation. We include in both models lagged dummy variables for the last previously

recorded composite CAMEL rating (lagged CAMEL 4 or 5 is excluded as the base case). The time since last

recorded examination may help predict supervisory outcomes because problem banks are typically examined more

frequently, although a shorter lag may also predict less change in condition, since there is less time for changes in

condition to occur. Importantly, we also include data for banks without previous examination records to avoid

sample selection problems as discussed earlier. For these observations, we set the dummy for “No lagged

examination data” to 1, and set the values of the other LAGGED SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENT variables to

zero. In effect, we account for the average difference of these banks from other banks.

         We also include SUPERVISORY AGENCY dummies in the models. These account for the possibility of

systematic differences in supervisory standards across government agencies. They may also reflect systematic

differences in the quality of banks with different charter types or Federal Reserve membership for which we do not

otherwise adequately control.

         The BANK SIZE variables include a continuous measure of bank assets, as well as dummies for different

size classes. These control for many differences between large and small banks that may not be otherwise

controlled for in the model, including the degree of industrial and geographic diversification in the loan portfolio,

risks from off-balance sheet or international exposures, and any systematic differences in supervisory treatment.

         The BANK BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS are the levels, trends, and peer group percentile

ranks of the nine key balance sheet and income variables specified in the UBPR and taken from the appropriate

Call Report quarter. These are the Total Capital Ratio, Tier 1 Capital Ratio, Leverage Capital Ratio, Real Estate

Loans/Total Loans, Nonperforming Loans/Total Loans, Off-balance Sheet Items/Total Loans, Other Real Estate

Owned/Total Loans, Return on Assets, and Volatile Liability Dependence. All of these variables are specified in

both first- and second-order terms and interactions, so that each actually appears nine times in the regressor list to

allow for a very flexible functional form. That is, for i=1,…,9, we specify xit, (xit-xit-1), xrankit, (xit)2, (xit-xit-1)2,

(xrankit)2, xit • (xit-xit-1), xit • xrankit, and (xit-xit-1) • xrankit, where xit represents the current value of the variable



[1/(1-CLASS))]} / total loans]1/2.
                                                             23

computed from the Call Report, (xit-xit-1) is the trend, and xrankit is the current peer group percentile rank, for a

total of 81 variables specified (means, standard deviations, coefficients not shown in tables).

         We also include a number of variables to control for the economic environment of the bank. The STATE

AVERAGES OF BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS are the same 81 variables as are specified for the

bank itself, except that they are state averages to help control for the economic environment of the bank (data not

shown in tables). OTHER ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT INDICATORS include regional dummies for the

Federal Reserve District (which may capture systematic differences in regional economic conditions or supervisory

treatment) as well as state income growth and unemployment rate. Although the local economic environment is

not explicitly specified in the examination procedures, it is nonetheless important to control for the environment to

account for exogenous changes in bank condition that may be reflected in supervisory assessments. For example,

supervisors may be more likely to find problems in the loan portfolio and assign more classified assets and a worse

CAMEL rating for a bank in a state with low income growth, a high unemployment rate, and poor state-average

bank balance sheet and income items, even after taking into account the bank’s own balance sheet and income

items. To the extent that there are changes in the macroeconomic or regional environment that affect all banks in

the nation or region, these effects may be mostly captured by these state-level variables, since banks were

generally legally restricted to have full-service banking offices only in their home state for almost all of our

sample.8 That is, conditions outside the home state are likely to be much less important than those in the state.

         Finally, we alternately exclude and include the FUTURE PERFORMANCE variables, which are leads of

1, 2, and 3 years of nonperforming loans, charge-offs, and the total risk-based capital ratio. As noted above, it is

not possible to include all of the information available to supervisors at the time of the supervisory assessments,

although the variables reviewed thus far represent our best attempt. One of the ways we attack this problem is to

include these future values of nonperforming loans, charge-offs, and capital, which capture more information than

the supervisors could have had access to at the time of the assessments and represent fairly well the future

condition of the bank that supervisors are interested in predicting or altering. In effect, we try to “bracket” the

information set used by supervisors by running the models alternately with less information and with more


8
 Interstate bank branching was essentially prohibited prior to the implementation of the Riegle-Neal Act in 1997. Bank
holding companies were permitted to own banks in different states prior to this time, but our data are on the individual banks,
not their holding companies.
                                                         24

information than supervisors have. If the same qualitative result for changes in supervisory toughness holds when

we specify both less and more information than supervisors have, then we will feel more confident in drawing

conclusions about what occurred with their actual (unobserved) information set. We recognize that the FUTURE

PERFORMANCE variables are endogenous, that their coefficients are unreliable, and that the model is

underidentified with their inclusion, but our purpose is to check the robustness of the main model which excludes

these variables, rather than to rely on equations with the endogenous variables. Fortunately, the results are robust

to the inclusion or exclusion of the FUTURE PERFORMANCE variables, supporting our interpretation of the

time dummies as reflecting changes in supervisory toughness, rather than important excluded variables.

        We also run the classified asset model (as well as the CAMEL model below) using a Heckman correction

to deal with potential sample selection problems. We first run a probit equation for the probability that a bank has

an exam in a given year, and then include the resulting inverse Mills ratio as a regressor in the equations for the

classified asset ratios and CAMEL ratings. We specify a separate probit model for each year to take account of the

apparent significant changes over time in the probability of an examination. The variables in these models include

the same past values of key balance sheet and income variables, past supervisory ratings, etc. that that should

affect the decision to examine a bank, just as they affect the supervisory rating on a bank. This creates a problem

of identification for the Heckman correction, as we have no variables in the first stage for the probability of an

examination that are not also in the second stage for the supervisory assessments at the examinations. Since we do

not have any “true” exclusion restrictions, our sample selection correction is identified by 1) the fact that we run

separate probit equations for each year, letting all the coefficients vary to take account of changes over time in the

probability of an examination, and 2) the nonlinearity inherent in the inverse Mills ratio. The use of the same

underlying variables cannot be helped, since all of the variables that supervisors use in off-site monitoring in

selecting banks to be examined are also used in their determination of the supervisory assessments at the end of the

examination. Fortunately, our main results regarding Hypotheses H1 and H2 are robust to including or excluding

the Heckman correction.

        The model for the composite CAMEL ratings is very similar and takes the form:


        Probability(CAMEL) = g (TIME DUMMIES, LAGGED SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS,
                                SUPERVISORY AGENCY DUMMIES, BANK SIZE, BANK
                                BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS, STATE AVERAGES OF
                                                          25

                                          BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS, OTHER ECONOMIC
                                          ENVIRONMENT INDICATORS, [CLASSIFIED ASSETS], [FUTURE
                                          PERFORMANCE])


        This equation is specified as an ordered logit of the choice among composite CAMEL 1, 2, 3, and (4 or 5).

As indicated in Table 7, CAMEL 5 is grouped with CAMEL 4 because CAMEL 5 is so rare. As a robustness

check, we try running the model with the management (M) component of CAMEL rating in place of the composite

rating, since the supervisors have a significant amount of discretion in assigning a management rating, with results

very similar to those for the composite CAMEL. As an additional check, we rerun the composite CAMEL model

as a binomial logit for the probability of a satisfactory versus unsatisfactory rating, i.e., a CAMEL rating of 1 or 2

versus 3, 4, or 5.

        The regressors specified are identical to those in the classified assets model with one exception. We run

the CAMEL model three ways — with current total classified assets included as a regressor, with current weighted

classified assets included, and with no current classified assets included. The purposes are to allow the data to

describe different types of changes in supervisory toughness, and to check robustness of the results. One way that

changes in supervisory toughness may affect CAMEL ratings is that supervisors may simply assign a higher or

lower composite CAMEL grade after an on-site examination for a given evaluation of the loan portfolio, which

may be described by model with current classified assets specified in total or weighted form. That is, supervisors

may take as given the set of classifications for the loan portfolio and assign a harsher or laxer rating. Alternatively,

supervisors may assign a harsher or laxer rating CAMEL as part of the same process in which loans are classified

more or less harshly. In this case, the specification with no current classified assets specified is correct and the

models with classified assets specified have endogenous regressors and the associated problems these create.

Fortunately, the results are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of the current classified assets variables.

5.2 Tests of changes in supervisory toughness on bank lending behavior (Hypothesis H3)

        To test for the effects of changes in supervisory toughness on bank lending behavior, we model changes in

bank lending and other measures of performance as functions of three years of past changes in supervisory

assessments, and include control variables for three years of other past changes in bank condition and economic

environment. Three years of lagged changes are included because it may take a considerable amount of time for a

bank to change the composition of its loan portfolio.
                                                        26

        Our model for change in performance takes the form:


        ∆PERFORMANCE = h (TIME DUMMIES, ∆SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS (3 years of lags),
                             ∆BANK BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS (3 years of lags),
                             ∆STATE AVERAGES OF BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS
                             (3 years of lags), ∆STATE AVERAGES OF SUPERVISORY
                             ASSESSMENTS (3 years of lags), ∆OTHER ECONOMIC
                             ENVIRONMENT INDICATORS (3 years of lags))


        The ∆PERFORMANCE variables include two types of variables – 1) direct quantitative measures of the

changes in lending behavior and 2) measures of changes in bank risk. The direct measures of changes in lending

behavior are the one-year changes in the ratios of C&I loans, real estate loans, installment loans, and U.S.

Treasuries to gross total assets (e.g., C&It/GTAt - C&It-1/GTAt-1) as well as the proportional change in gross total

assets ((GTAt-GTAt-1)/GTAt-1). Our main tests of Hypothesis H3 are tests that CAMEL downgrades and increases

in classified assets predict reductions in lending and assets and increases in Treasuries, and vice versa for CAMEL

upgrades and decreases in classified assets.

        The measures of changes in bank risk that we include in the ∆PERFORMANCE variables are the ratios of

nonperforming loans and charge-offs to gross total assets and the total capital ratio. These are changes in the

current values of essentially the same variables alternately included and excluded in the supervisory assessment

regressions to “bracket” the supervisory information set because these represent fairly well the future condition of

the bank that supervisors are interested in predicting or altering. To the extent that changes in supervisory

toughness affect risk-taking in the predicted direction, then a supervisory downgrade should result in smaller

nonperforming and charge-off ratios and higher capital ratios, as downgrades are expected to encourage

institutions to reduce risks (and vice versa for upgrades). However, to the extent that a supervisory downgrade

reflects an accurate prediction that existing loans will become nonperforming or be charged off, the predicted

signs are in the opposite direction. Similarly, a supervisory downgrade in the form of an increase in classified

assets may reduce capital as discussed above. This tension between supervisory assessments as intended to change

behavior versus predict outcomes is difficult to disentangle, as indicated in the literature review. The results of

these regressions should yield some interesting information on the net effect of these opposing forces. However,

because of these opposing forces, we do not view the results of the nonperforming, charge-off, and capital
                                                          27

regressions as tests of Hypothesis H3.

        The regressors included in the ∆PERFORMANCE model are essentially analogous to those in the

classified assets and CAMEL models, with some exceptions. One exception concerns the TIME DUMMIES. We

include the year dummies, rather than the period dummies to allow maximum flexibility, since these variables are

not the main focus of attention here. Data for the year 1986 are dropped and the dummy for 1987 is the base case,

since the data did not go back far enough to cover the lags needed for 1986. The remaining variables are

measured as 3 years of lagged changes to allow time for the bank to adjust its portfolio in reaction to the change in

supervisory assessments and other changes in bank condition and economic environment. As additional variables,

we include state averages of changes in supervisory assessments (average change in classified assets and

composite CAMEL for banks in the state). We exclude peer group percentile ranks of the balance sheet and

income items, since we are investigating the bank’s behavior rather than the supervisor’s behavior. We also

exclude the measures of future performance sometimes included in the supervisory assessment equations because

issues of supervisory information and sample selection are not relevant here.

        In the specification of the ∆SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS variables, we specify 3 lags of dummies

for CAMEL upgrades and downgrades, leaving “no change” as the base case. This allows for an asymmetric

response of banks to upgrades and downgrades. We also run the model alternately with 3 lags of changes in total

classified assets and with 3 lags of changes in weighted classified assets. In the interest of brevity, we show only

the former specification, but the results are robust to this difference in specification. Finally, classified assets are

measured here as proportions of assets, rather than as proportions of loans as in the supervisory regressions. In our

view, the proportion of assets that are classified is a better indicator of the supervisory pressure on banks to change

their behavior.

6. Empirical Results

        In this section, we first review the results of the classified assets and CAMEL models that test Hypotheses

H1 and H2 that supervisory toughness may have changed during the credit crunch and boom periods. We then

review the results of the performance models that test Hypothesis H3 that changes in supervisory toughness, if

they occurred, changed bank lending behavior in the predicted directions.

6.1 Results of tests of changes in supervisory harshness (Hypotheses H1 and H2)
                                                             28

        Table 8 presents the weighted least squares regression equations for classified asset ratios and ordered

logit regressions for the composite CAMEL rating. These models include dummies for the main time periods, the

credit crunch (1989-1992), and boom (1993-1998) periods, with the pre-crunch (1986-1988) period excluded as

the base case. Other models include dummies for each individual year to allow the data more freedom to “choose

for themselves” when changes in supervisory toughness may have occurred. These models yield similar results,

but are not shown in the tables. We also do not show the coefficients for most of the control variables to save

space. As indicated above, there are nearly 200 coefficients estimated in each supervisory equation. The bold-

faced type indicates statistical significance at the 5% level, two-sided.

        To test Hypothesis H1 that supervisors got tougher on banks during the credit crunch period, we test the

coefficients of the time dummies to see if classified assets tend to be higher and composite CAMEL ratings tend to

be worse in the credit crunch period than in the pre-crunch period after controlling as well as we can for the

supervisors’ information in the equations. We find that the coefficients of the credit crunch dummy (1989-1992)

in the total classified assets equations in Table 8 are small and statistically insignificant. For the weighted

classified assets equations, we find that the coefficients of the credit crunch dummy are larger and statistically

significant. These findings hold whether or not the future performance variables (leads of 1, 2, and 3 years of

nonperforming loans, charge-offs, and total capital) are included in the estimation. Note that observations from

the last three years of the sample have to be dropped when the future performance variables are specified.

        To evaluate whether the classified asset results are economically significant, we evaluate the contributions

of the credit crunch dummy to the probability that dollar of loans is classified. Recall that the dependent variable

in these equations is in log-odds form [ln(CLASS/(1-CLASS))], and may be interpreted as a log-odds grouped

logit model for the probability that a dollar of loans will be classified. Since the equation is nonlinear, the

measured effect will depend on the point of evaluation. We choose the means of total and weighted classified

asset proportions during the credit crunch as the most relevant points of evaluation, .072 and .018, respectively

(see Table 4, Panel B). Increasing the dependent variable of the total classified assets equation by .005211 (the

coefficient on the credit crunch dummy) increases the predicted proportion of classified loans from 7.2% to

7.235%, an economically small effect.9 Similarly, increasing the dependent variable of the weighted classified


   9
    Letting P1 be the new probability of a dollar of loans being classified, the formula for the figure in the text is given by
                                                         29

assets equation by .046267 increases the predicted weighted classified proportion from 1.8% to 1.884%, which is

larger, but would still appear to be a small economic influence. Thus, the data suggest at most a relatively modest

effect of examiners getting tougher during the credit crunch period in terms of requiring that banks of a given

condition classify more loans or shifted loans into more serious classifications (e.g., from substandard to doubtful

or from doubtful to loss, which would raise weighted classified assets). The economic significance results are

consistent with on the order of magnitude of about 1% or less of the loan portfolio being additionally classified or

classified more seriously.

         We turn next to the measured effects on the composite CAMEL rating. The way the ordered logit

equations are set up, the negative, statistically significant coefficients on the dummy for the period of 1989-1992

indicate that the probability of receiving a favorable CAMEL rating is lower than during the pre-crunch period, all

else held equal. Again, the effects are comparable, whether or not the future performance variables are included.

The ordered logit models shown in Table 8 control for the current level of total classified assets. The results are

also robust with respect to using current weighted classified assets or to excluding current classified assets

altogether.

         It is more difficult to evaluate the economic significance of the CAMEL results because of the multiple

choices in the ordered logit equations. To do so, we compare the predicted values of CAMEL 1, CAMEL 2,

CAMEL 3, and CAMEL 4 or 5 with and without the coefficient of the credit crunch dummy variable. That is, we

evaluate the predicted CAMEL ratings as if the coefficients reflect the pre-crunch supervisory regime versus the

credit crunch supervisory regime. The point of evaluation is the median of all the variables for the credit crunch

period except that the dummy variables are set to one or zero. We assume that the lagged CAMEL rating is a 2

(the modal rating), the region is 1 (New England), the size class is 1 (assets below $100 million), and that the bank

was examined by a state supervisory agency (OCC, FDIC, FRB = 0). As we will see, the lagged CAMEL rating

dominates the other exogenous variables in determining the current CAMEL rating. The predicted percentages of

CAMEL 1, CAMEL 2, CAMEL 3, and CAMEL 4 or 5 are [9.37%, 88.91%, 1.70%, 0.001%], respectively,

without the credit crunch dummy coefficient and [6.89%, 90.74%, 2.36%, 0.002%], respectively, with the credit

crunch dummy coefficient. Notably, these results suggest that CAMEL ratings are relatively “sticky” — banks


ln(P1/(1-P1)) = ln(.072/(1-.072)) + .005211.
                                                         30

rated as CAMEL 2 in the prior examination are close to 90% likely to receive a 2 during the next examination.

These results are consistent with only a modest increase in supervisory harshness during the credit crunch period,

moving the CAMEL ratings for on the order of magnitude of about 3% of banks. Consistent with the classified

asset results, the CAMEL results suggest at most a relatively modest increase in supervisory toughness.

        As noted above, we also rerun the CAMEL model as a binomial logit for the probability of a satisfactory

versus unsatisfactory rating, i.e., a CAMEL rating of 1 or 2 versus 3, 4, or 5 (not shown in tables). The results

again show a statistically significant effect of the credit crunch dummy variable. The results were also more

economically significant than the full model – the data suggest that for a given bank condition at the mean of the

data set, the probability of a satisfactory rating decreased about 9 percentage points (from 74.2% to 65.0%). Part

of the difference from our main result may be due in part to the sparser specification of the satisfactory versus

unsatisfactory rating, and in part to the different point of evaluation.

        To test Hypothesis H2 that supervisors got easier on banks during the boom period, we use the same

models and test the coefficients of the time dummies to see if classified assets tend to be lower and CAMEL

ratings tend to be more favorable in the boom period for a given bank condition and economic environment. The

coefficients of the boom period dummy (1993-1998) in the classified assets equations in Table 8 are negative,

larger in absolute value than the credit crunch period dummies, and statistically significant in all four cases,

consistent with a reduction in supervisory toughness relative to the pre-crunch period. More important for

evaluating Hypothesis H2, boom period dummy coefficients are even further below the positive coefficients of the

credit crunch period dummy coefficients, consistent with a slightly larger supervisory toughening relative to the

credit crunch period. These results are robust to the specification of total or weighted classified assets and whether

or not the future performance variables are included.

        To assess the economic significance of the classified asset results for the boom period, we evaluate the

contribution to the probability that dollar of loans is classified of the boom period dummy minus the credit crunch

dummy, which measures the change between these two periods. Using the same method as above for testing

Hypothesis H1, we evaluate at the mean proportions of total and weighted classified assets during the boom

period, .039 and .009, respectively (see Table 4). Changing the dependent variable of the total classified assets

equation by (-.16131-.005211) (i.e., the coefficient on the boom period dummy minus the coefficient on the credit
                                                        31

crunch dummy) reduces the predicted proportion of classified loans from 3.9% to 3.322%. Similarly, the predicted

weighted classified proportion is reduced from 0.9% to 0.737%. These figures are not economically significant in

terms of the reduction in the proportion of loans that are predicted to be classified or receive less serious

classifications, on the order of magnitude of 1% or less of loans in both cases. Thus, the data are consistent with

rather modest reductions in supervisory toughness during the boom period in terms of classified assets.

        Turning to the potential effects of changes in supervisory toughness on CAMEL ratings during the boom

period, we note that the coefficients of the boom period dummy (1993-1998) in the CAMEL models are both

negative, and the coefficient for the main equation (without the future performance variables) is statistically

significant. This suggests that the CAMEL ratings were harsher for a given bank condition in the boom period

than in pre-crunch period, contrary to the classified assets results. More important for investigating Hypothesis

H2, however, is that the boom period dummies are less in absolute value than the coefficients of the credit crunch

period dummies, so they represent harsher ratings for a given condition than during the credit crunch period.

        To evaluate whether the CAMEL results for the boom period are economically significant, we again

compare the predicted values of the CAMEL probabilities. In this case, we evaluate the predicted probabilities

with the coefficient of the boom period dummy in place of the credit crunch period dummy, evaluated at the

median of the variables for the boom period (as well as lagged CAMEL rating 2, region 1, size class 1, and state

agency examination). The predicted percentages of CAMEL 1, CAMEL 2, CAMEL 3, and CAMEL 4 or 5 are

[21.98%, 77.39%, 0.63%, 0.004%], respectively, with the credit crunch dummy coefficient specified and [24.96%,

74.50%, 0.54%, 0.004%], respectively, with the boom period dummy coefficient. These data suggest that bank

conditions and economic environments were so strong during the boom period that even banks with lagged

CAMEL 2 ratings were predicted to have over a 20% probability of rising to a CAMEL 1 rating without any

change in supervisory toughness. The effects of any change in supervisory toughness are again rather mild,

consistent with supervisory easing resulting in improved CAMEL ratings on the order of magnitude of about an

additional 3% of banks receiving better CAMEL ratings. The use of the binomial logit model for the probability

of a satisfactory versus unsatisfactory rating also showed very little effect in this case, moving the predicted

probability of a satisfactory CAMEL rating during the boom period up by less than 1 percentage point (from

92.1% to 93.0%). Consistent with the classified asset results, the CAMEL results suggest at most a relatively
                                                         32

modest decrease in supervisory toughness.

        Overall, the classified assets and CAMEL models are modestly consistent with Hypotheses H1 and H2.

They generally show statistically significant results in the predicted directions but usually show only fairly small

results from an economic viewpoint. In most cases, the findings are consistent with no more than about 1% of

additional loans becoming classified or put into more serious classifications during the credit crunch period and

similarly for the reduction in classifications during the boom period, for a given bank condition and economic

environment. Similarly, the data are consistent with movements of CAMEL ratings for on the order of 3% of

banks in the predicted directions as a result of any changes in supervisory toughness, which is small compared

with the effects of “stickiness” in ratings during the credit crunch period and the trend toward improved ratings

from economic conditions during the boom period. These findings are generally confirmed by a number of

robustness checks not shown in the tables, including our Heckman correction for sample selection problems.

        As noted above, we also tried evaluating economic significance by dropping the TIME DUMMIES and

running the model separately for the pre-crunch, credit crunch, and boom periods, allowing the coefficients of all

of the regressors to vary. While this procedure generally mostly yielded the same qualitative results – consistent

with toughening during the credit crunch period and easing during the boom period – the quantitative results were

often too large to be believable. For example, at the boom period medians, the CAMEL models predicted a drop

from 73.4% to 2.6% in the probability of a CAMEL 3 rating from the credit crunch supervisory regime to the

boom period regime. Presumably, these models simply did not work very well out of sample.

        We briefly discuss the other coefficients shown in Table 8, but again remind the reader that a large

number of coefficients, mostly the balance sheet and income variables for the bank and their state averages, are not

shown. In the classified assets equations, the coefficients of lagged classified assets are positive and statistically

significant, consistent with the expectation that a prior problem loan portfolio would predict a current problem

loan portfolio, all else held equal, since it takes a considerable amount of time to dispose of problem assets. The

coefficients of the lagged CAMEL 1, CAMEL 2, and CAMEL 3 are positive and statistically significant in the

classified assets equations. This suggests that a past rating of CAMEL 4 or 5 — the base case in the regressions –

has a positive effect in encouraging banks to improve their loan portfolios and reduce classified assets relative to

their lagged levels. In the CAMEL equations, the positive and statistically significant lagged CAMEL coefficients
                                                         33

are consistent with CAMEL “stickiness” – the higher is the past rating, the higher is the predicted current rating.

As expected, the level of current total classified assets has statistically significant negative coefficients in the

CAMEL equations (as does the version of the model with weighted classified assets, not shown), consistent with

banks with poor loan portfolios receiving poor CAMEL ratings. However, the lagged classified assets variable has

a positive coefficient. Given that the current level of classified assets is in the same equation, this may be

interpreted as reward (punishment) for improvement (deterioration) in classified assets since the prior

examination. The variable for years since a prior examination has negative coefficients in the classified assets

equations, consistent with banks that have problem portfolios being examined more often, although this does not

appear to affect the CAMEL rating. The coefficients of the supervisory agency dummies, OCC, FDIC, and FRB,

suggest that banks examined by the OCC and FDIC received worse supervisory assessments (higher classified

assets, worse CAMEL ratings) than those examined by the Federal Reserve and state agencies (the base case), all

else equal. It is not known the extent to which this reflects differences in supervisory standards versus differences

in the quality distributions of banks with different supervisors. Finally, the coefficients of the future performance

variables generally suggest that banks that are assigned worse supervisory ratings (high classified assets or poor

CAMEL ratings) will have higher nonperforming loans and charge-offs in the future, but may also raise their

capital ratios. As noted, these variables are endogenous, and so we reserve further judgment on them until later,

when we treat them as endogenous variables.

6.2 Results of tests of changes in supervisory toughness on bank lending behavior (Hypothesis H3)

        Table 9 presents results from regressions aimed at addressing Hypothesis H3, the effect of changes in

supervisory toughness on direct measures of bank lending behavior. As discussed above, we regress changes in

bank lending on three years of past changes in supervisory assessments and control variables for changes in bank

condition and economic environment. The main predictions of Hypothesis H3 are that a supervisory downgrade

(worsened CAMEL rank, higher classified assets) should result in smaller proportions of assets being devoted to

loans, a reduction in asset growth, and a larger proportion of assets being devoted to government securities, and

vice versa for supervisory upgrades.

        Our regressions appear to explain very little of what drives changes in lending behavior. The adjusted R-

squared's for the equations in Table 9 are generally less than 5%. Nonetheless, a number of the changes in
                                                              34

supervisory assessments are statistically significant. The changes in classified assets all have signs that are

consistent with Hypothesis H3 for all lag lengths, and all but one of these coefficients are statistically significant at

the 5% level. That is, an increase in classified assets is associated with decreases in the future C&I loan ratio, real

estate loan ratio, installment loan ratio, and asset growth ratio, and associated with an increase in the future

Treasury holdings ratio. These results are also replicated when changes in weighted classified assets are specified

in place of total classified assets (not shown). In addition, we tried rerunning the loan and Treasury ratios with

different denominators to ensure that the results were not just driven by changes in asset denominator. We

specified (C&It-C&It-1)/GTAt-1 and (C&It-C&It-1)/C&It-1) in place of C&It/GTAt - C&It-1/GTAt-1, and so forth for

the other lending and Treasury ratios, and the results were robust.

           To determine if the classified assets results are economically significant, we simply sum the coefficients

on the three lags of the change in classified assets. Since the equations are linear, this gives the long-run effect of

a change in classified assets, i.e., the sum of the effect of a change one, two, and three years hence. The results

suggest that while the effects of classified assets are consistent and almost always statistically significant, their

economic impact appears to be rather small. An increase in classified assets of 1% of assets is predicted to reduce

the C&I loan ratio, real estate loan ratio, installment loan ratio, and asset growth ratio by 0.08%, 0.14%, 0.11%,

and 0.72%, respectively, and to increase the Treasury ratio by 0.08% in the long run.

           In contrast to the consistent but small effects of classified assets, the effects of CAMEL upgrades and

downgrades on lending are not very consistent. They sometimes predict changes in lending in the opposite

direction of what is expected, and the upgrades and downgrades sometimes work in the same direction (i.e.,

differing in the same way from the excluded case of no change in CAMEL). In most cases, the effects are very

small, moving the ratios less than 1 percentage point in the long run for a CAMEL upgrade or downgrade.10 Thus,

the support for Hypothesis H3 is mixed and weak. The changes in classified assets are consistent with the

hypothesis, but are small economically, and the changes in composite CAMEL ratings yield small, inconsistent

effects.

           Table 10 presents the regressions for the effects of changes in supervisory assessments on measures of

changes in bank risk – changes in the nonperforming loan, charge-off, and total capital ratios. As discussed, these


10
     The one exception of a larger predicted change is that a CAMEL upgrade predicts a decrease of 2.4% in the growth rate of
                                                          35

results may be interesting, but because they combine the effects of supervisory assessments on bank behavior with

predictions of how banks choose to adjust their risks, we do not view these equations as valid tests of Hypothesis

H3. The lagged changes in both classified assets and composite CAMEL ratings generally have statistically

significant coefficients that are consistent with each other. A supervisory downgrade of either type is followed by

increases in future problem loans and vice versa for supervisory upgrades. We interpret these results as suggesting

a dominance of the predictive ability of the ratings over their effects in persuading banks to change the riskiness of

their loan portfolios. That is, a supervisory downgrade predicts an increase in nonperforming loans and charge-

offs that is not fully offset by any changes in bank behavior to reduce their risky lending, likely in part because it

takes time to resolve existing problem loans. However, the results are not economically significant – a 1% change

in classified assets or a CAMEL upgrade or downgrade is predicted to change the nonperforming loan and charge-

off ratios by less than 1 percentage point.

         The results differ for the change in total capital ratio. The coefficients of the lagged changes in classified

assets are statistically significant and predict an increase in future capital, consistent with the possibility that

supervisory discipline from an increase in classified assets encourages banks to increase their capital ratios, more

than offsetting the erosion of capital from the change in classification. These findings are also consistent with the

possibility that banks may have found it easier to react to supervisory discipline from increases in classified assets

by changing increasing their capital ratios to cover potential losses than eliminating their problem loans. However,

changes in CAMEL ratings appear to have the opposite effect, with downgrades predicting a reduction in capital

and upgrades predicting an increase in capital. Once again, all of these changes are economically small.

7. Conclusions

         We investigate the possibility that overall changes in supervisory “toughness” may significantly affect

bank lending behavior and potentially affect macroeconomic or regional economic health. Specifically, we test

three hypotheses about whether U.S. bank supervisors changed their policies and whether these policy changes

affected bank lending behavior during the credit crunch period of 1989-1992 and the banking boom period of

1993-1998. We test these hypotheses using information on the supervisory process, confidential data on CAMEL

ratings and classified assets from bank examinations, and bank balance sheet and income data over the period



assets, which is inconsistent with expectations.
                                                          36

1986-1998. We find that the data provide some support for all three hypotheses. However, the data also suggest

that the economic effects of any policy changes are likely to have been quite small, and likely do not explain a

substantial portion of the wide swings in aggregate bank lending to business during the 1990s.

        The data provide modest support for Hypothesis H1, that there was an increase in toughness during the

credit crunch period. During 1989-1992, banks of a given measured financial condition and economic

environment had statistically significantly worse CAMEL ratings than in the pre-crunch period of 1986-1988, and

in some cases also had statistically significantly higher classified assets.

        Similarly, the data give some support for Hypothesis H2 — that there was a decline in toughness during

the boom period. During 1993-1998, CAMEL ratings are estimated to have eased and moved part of the way back

to their levels of the pre-crunch period for given measured circumstances. The estimated change in classified

assets for given measured bank condition and economic environment is comparatively greater. Classified assets

are measured to be statistically significantly lower than in either the pre-crunch or credit crunch periods for banks

in a given economic condition and environment.

        Despite the statistically significant support for Hypotheses H1 and H2, the data also suggest fairly small

results in terms of economic significance. The findings are generally consistent with no more than about 1% of

additional loans becoming classified or put into more serious classifications during the credit crunch period and

similarly for the reduction in classifications during the boom period, after controlling for bank condition and

economic environment. Similarly, the data are consistent with movements of CAMEL ratings for on the order of

3% of banks in the predicted directions as a result of any changes in supervisory toughness. The CAMEL changes

are small compared with the effects of “stickiness” in ratings during the credit crunch period (the lagged CAMEL

rating is very likely to be repeated) and overall improvement in ratings from improved economic conditions during

the boom period (over 20% of CAMEL 2 banks are predicted to move to a CAMEL 1 based on changes in

economic condition). The statistical and economic significance findings are generally confirmed by a number of

robustness checks, although some of the checks suggested larger economic significance.

        The data provide mixed support for Hypothesis H3, that changes in supervisory toughness, if they

occurred, affected bank lending as predicted. Increases in classified assets are statistically significantly associated

with decreases in the future C&I loan ratio, real estate loan ratio, installment loan ratio, and asset growth ratio, and
                                                          37

with an increase in the future Treasury holdings ratio, all consistent with the hypothesis. However, our analysis of

economic significance suggests that these effects are rather small, with an increase in classified assets of 1% of

assets predicted to change these portfolio ratios by less than 1 percentage point each in the long run, often much

less than 1 percentage point. The changes in CAMEL ratings did not appear to have consistent effects on future

lending behavior, although these effects also appeared to be small.

        We also tested for the effects of changes in supervisory assessments on measures of changes in bank risk –

changes in the nonperforming loan, charge-off, and total capital ratios. These results combine the effects of

supervisory assessments on bank behavior with predictions of how banks choose to adjust their risks. The findings

show that supervisory downgrades in terms of either increases in classified assets or worsened composite CAMEL

rank tend to predict statistically significantly more future nonperforming loans and charge-offs, and vice versa for

supervisory upgrades. These findings are consistent with a dominance of the predictive ability of the ratings over

their effects in getting banks to change the riskiness of their loan portfolios, likely in part because it takes time to

resolve existing problem loans. The results differ for the change in total capital ratio — lagged changes in

classified assets are statistically significant and predict an increase in future capital, consistent with supervisory

discipline that encourages banks to increase their capital ratios, more than offsetting any direct reduction in capital

that may occur from classification. However, changes in CAMEL ratings appear to have the opposite effect. As

with our tests of the main hypotheses, all of the measured effects of changes in supervisory assessments on bank

risk appear to be small, with a 1% change in classified assets or a CAMEL upgrade or downgrade predicted to

change the nonperforming loan, charge-off, and capital ratios by less than 1 percentage point.

        The findings also suggest that to the extent that regulatory changes like modifications of capital standards

are enforced through the supervisory process by assigning worse CAMEL ratings, these regulatory changes may

not have much effect on bank lending or portfolio risk, since lending and loan risk do not appear to be influenced

substantially through changes in CAMEL ratings. However, these regulatory changes could have strong effects

through other channels.

        These findings are subject to a number of caveats. First, our results of testing changes in supervisory

toughness (Hypotheses H1 and H2) are subject to bias because we cannot exactly replicate the information used by

supervisors. Part of what we measure as changes in supervisory toughness may be systematic changes in bank
                                                         38

conditions or economic environment over time that supervisors use, but are not specified in our econometric

models. We address this issue in a number of ways, by 1) including using the level, trend, and peer percentile

rank of the key balance sheet and income variables specified in the supervisory procedures, 2) including a large

number of other control variables for bank condition and economic environment, 3) “bracketing” the supervisory

information set using data on future performance, and 4) running many other robustness checks. The main

findings results are robust to these procedures, suggesting that bias from excluding important variables is not likely

to be a significant problem.

        Our discussant, Steve Cecchetti, correctly points out that the estimated coefficients of our time dummies

— which we interpret as reflecting changes in supervisory toughness — are highly correlated with macroeconomic

series, such as industrial production. This is not surprising, given that the credit crunch period essentially

corresponds to a macroeconomic recession and the boom period for bank lending essentially corresponds to a

strong macroeconomic expansion. That is, the time dummies virtually have to be strongly correlated with

macroeconomic series if Hypotheses H1 and H2 are true, since these hypotheses predict a supervisory toughening

during the recession and a supervisory easing during the expansion. These hypotheses do not specify reasons

behind the changes in supervisory toughness, so if such changes are caused by supervisory reactions to

macroeconomic conditions, this is still consistent with the hypotheses. However, a bias may occur if the

macroeconomic changes are strongly correlated with significant changes in bank conditions that supervisors

consider in making supervisory assessments that are left out of our econometric models. While such a bias may

exist, we do not believe it to be substantial because we control for state income growth, unemployment rate, and

state-average bank balance sheet and income items. We expect these state economic environment variables to

capture most of the effects of macroeconomic changes on banks, since banks mostly operated within their home

states during the sample. That is, we do not expect a strong separate and independent effect from conditions

outside the home state, which are represented by the macroeconomic variables. As well, we believe that the other

variables in the econometric models — especially the information on future nonperforming loans, charge-offs, and

capital used to “bracket” the supervisory information set – are much better proxies for the conditions that

supervisors consider than are general economic conditions outside the home state.

        Second, our results of the effects of changes in supervisory toughness on lending and bank risk taking are
                                                          39

subject to the possibility that part of the measured effects may reflect the reactions of market participants to

changes in bank condition or economic environment that are not captured by our control variables, rather than

changes in supervisory discipline. The fact that the models explain only a small percentage of the variance in the

changes in bank lending and the changes in problem loan ratios tends to make this scenario more likely. However,

the results of prior research suggest that supervisory assessments do embody some timely and accurate private

information rather than merely reflecting information known to market participants. In addition, changes in

classified assets often have a direct effect on bank lending behavior through changing regulatory capital ratios, so

it is expected that our findings of small effects of changes in classified assets on lending at least partially reflect

the effects of changes in supervisory harshness on bank lending behavior.

        Third, our results are subject to sample selection problems. The proportion of banks examined each year

changes quite dramatically over time, and the data suggest that a change in the sample selected for examination

may alter the quality pool of the banks examined relative to the industry as a whole. In addition, there may be

missing observations on examinations that took place at the beginning or end of our data set. As well, some banks

drop out of the sample due to mergers and failures, and others enter the sample through the creation of new

charters. We deal with these sample selection issues by including a large number of controls for bank quality, by

including observations even when data for lagged supervisory assessments are missing, and by using a Heckman

correction for sample selection bias.
                                                 REFERENCES
Avery, R., R.W. Bostic, and K.A. Samolyk. 1998. The evolution of small business finance: The role of personal
      wealth. Journal of Banking and Finance 22: 1019-1061.

Berger, Allen N., Seth D. Bonime, Daniel M. Covitz, and Diana Hancock. 2000. Why are bank profits so persistent?
        The roles of product market competition, informational opacity, and regional/macroeconomic shocks. Journal of
        Banking and Finance, forthcoming.

Berger, Allen N., and Sally M. Davies. 1998. "The Information Content of Bank Examinations," Journal of
        Financial Services Research 14: 117-144.

Berger, Allen N., Sally M. Davies, and Mark J. Flannery. 2000. Comparing Market and Supervisory Assessments
        of Bank Performance: Who Knows What When? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32 (August).

Berger, Allen N., Anil K. Kashyap, and Joseph M. Scalise. 1995. The Transformation of the U.S. banking industry:
        what a long, strange trip it's been.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 55-201.

Berger, Allen N. and Loretta J. Mester. 1999. What explains the dramatic changes in cost and profit performance of the
        U.S. banking industry? Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Berger, Allen. N., and Gregory F. Udell. 1994. Did risk-based capital allocate bank credit and cause a `credit crunch'
        in the United States?" Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 26 (August), 585-628.

Bernanke, B.S., and C.S. Lown. 1991. The credit crunch. 2: 205-48.

Bizer, David S.. 1993. "Regulatory discretion and the credit crunch," working paper, U.S. Securities and
        Exchange Commission, Washington, D.C .(April).

Cargill, Thomas F.. 1989. CAMEL ratings and the CD market. Journal of Financial Services Research 3 : 347-
         58.

Cole, Rebel A., and Jeffrey W. Gunther. 1998. Predicting bank failures: a comparison of on- and off-site
       monitoring systems. Journal of Financial Services Research 13: 103-117.

Commercial Bank Examination Manual, Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System.

Davies, Sally M.. 1993. The importance of market information in predicting bank performance," Board of
        Governors of the Federal Reserve System working paper (April).

Dahl, Drew, Gerald A. Hanweck, and John O'Keefe. 1995. The influence of auditors and examiners on
       accounting discretion in the banking industry. FDIC Working Paper, October.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Jean Tirole. 1994. The Prudential Regulation of Banks. Cambridge: The MIT Press.

DeYoung, Robert, Mark J. Flannery, William Lang, and Sorin Sorescu. 1998. Could publication of bank
      CAMELS ratings improve market discipline? Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, (November).

Diamond, Douglas W. 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Review of Economic Studies:
      393-414.

Dunkelberg, W.C., and W.J. Dennis, Jr. 1992. The small business “credit crunch.” The NFIB Foundation:
     Washington, D.C.

Flannery, Mark J. 1998. Using market information in prudential bank supervision: a review of the U.S. empirical
        analysis. 30: 273-305.
Flannery, Mark J., and Joel F. Houston.1999. The value of a government monitor for U.S. banking firms. Journal
        of Money, Credit, and Banking 31: 14-34.

Gilbert, R. Alton. 1993. Implications of annual examinations for the bank insurance fund. Federal Reserve Bank
         of St. Louis Review (January/February).

Gilbert, R. Alton. 1994. The benefits of annual bank examinations. George Kaufman, editor, Research in
         Financial Services, Vol. 6, JAI Press, 215-48.

Hall, John R., Andrew P. Meyer, and Mark D. Vaughan. 1997. Do equity markets and regulators view bank
        holding company risk similarly? An comparison of market-based risk measures and regulators' BOPEC
        scores. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Supervisory Policy Analysis Working Paper.

Hancock, D., A. Laing, and J.A. Wilcox. 1995. Bank balance sheet shocks and aggregate shocks: Their dynamic
       effects on bank capital and lending. Journal of Banking and Finance, 19: 661-77.

Hancock, D., and J.A. Wilcox. 1993. Has there been a `capital crunch' in banking? The effects on bank lending of
       real estate market conditions and bank capital shortfalls. Journal of Housing Economics, 3: 31-50.

Hancock, D., and J.A. Wilcox. 1994. Bank capital and the credit crunch: The roles of risk-weighted and
       unweighted capital regulations. AREUEA, 22: 59-94 (a).

Hancock, D., and J.A. Wilcox. 1994. Bank capital, loan delinquencies, and real estate lending. Journal of
       Housing Economics, 4: 121-46 (b).

Hancock, D. and J.A. Wilcox. 1997. Bank capital, nonbank finance, and real estate activity. Journal of Housing
       Research, 8: 75-105.

Hancock, D. and J.A. Wilcox. 1998. The `credit crunch and the availability of credit to small business. Journal
       of Banking and Finance, 22: 983-1014.

Hand, John R.M., Robert W. Holthausen, and Richard W. Leftwich. 1992. The effect of bond rating agency
       announcements on bond and stock prices. Journal of Finance 47: 733-752.

Haubrich, Joseph G., and Paul Wachtel. 1993. Capital requirements and shifts in commercial bank portfolios. Federal
       Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review 29: 2-15.

Holthausen, Robert W. and Richard W. Leftwich. 1986. The effect of bond rating changes on common stock
       prices. Journal of Financial Economics 17: 57-90.

Hirschhorn, Eric. 1987. The informational content of bank examination ratings. Federal Deposit Insurance
       Corporation Banking and Economic Review, 6-11.

Interagency Policy Statement on Credit Availability, March 10, 1993.

Jordan, John S. 1999. Pricing Bank Stocks: The contribution of bank examinations, New England Economic
        Review 39-53.

O’Keefe, John, and Drew Dahl. 1997. Scheduling bank examinations, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
       Working Paper.

Peek, J., and E.S. Rosengren. 1994. Bank real estate lending and the New England capital crunch. AREUEA 22:
         33-58.
Peek, J., and E.S. Rosengren. 1995. Bank regulation and the credit crunch. Journal of Banking and Finance, 19:
         679-92 (a).

Peek, J., and E.S. Rosengren. 1995. The capital crunch: Neither a borrower nor a lender be, Journal of Money,
         Credit and Banking, 27: 625-38 (b).

Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell. 1999. Does the Federal Reserve possess an
       informational advantage? working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (a).

Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell. 1996. Is bank supervision central to central banking?
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 629-653 (b).

Pettway, Richard H. 1980. Potential insolvency, market efficiency, and bank regulation of large commercial
       banks, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15(1) 219-236.

Simons, Katerina, and Stephen Cross. 1991. Do capital markets predict problems in large commercial banks?
       New England Economic Review, 51-56.

Sinkey, Joseph F. Jr. 1978. Identifying `problem' banks: How do the banking authorities measure a bank's risk
        exposure? Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 10: 184-93.

Swindle, C. Sloan. 1995. Using CAMEL ratings to evaluate regulator effectiveness at commercial banks, Journal
       of Financial Services Research 9: 123-141.

Wagster, John D. 1999. The Basle Accord of 1988 and the International Credit Crunch of 1989-1992, Journal of
       Financial Services Research 15: 123-143.

Whalen, Gary, and James B. Thomson. 1988. Using financial data to identify changes in bank condition, Federal
       Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review, (Second Quarter): 17-26.
                                                     Table 1

                               Descriptions of Composite CAMEL Ratings



RATING         DESCRIPTION

1              Institutions in this group are basically sound in every respect; any critical findings or
               comments are of a minor nature and can be handled in a routine manner. Such institutions
               are resistant to external economic and financial disturbances and more capable of
               withstanding the vagaries of business conditions than institutions with lower ratings. As a
               result, such institutions give no cause for supervisory concern.

2              Institutions in this group are also fundamentally sound, but may reflect modest weaknesses
               correctable in the normal course of business. The nature and severity of deficiencies,
               however, are not considered material and, therefore, such institutions are stable and also able
               to withstand business fluctuations quite well. While areas of weakness could develop into
               conditions of greater concern, the supervisory response is limited to the extent that minor
               adjustments are resolved in the normal course of business, and operations continue
               satisfactorily.

3              Institutions in this category exhibit a combination of financial, operational or compliance
               weaknesses ranging from moderately severe to unsatisfactory. When weaknesses relate to
               financial condition, such institutions may be vulnerable to the onset of adverse business
               conditions and could easily deteriorate if concerted action is not effective in correcting the
               areas of weakness. Institutions which are in significant noncompliance with laws and
               regulations may also be accorded this rating. Generally, these institutions give more cause for
               supervisory concern and require more than normal supervision to address deficiencies.
               Overall strength and financial capacity, however, are still such as to make failure only a
               remote possibility.

4              Institutions in this group have an immoderate volume of serious financial weaknesses or a
               combination of other conditions that are unsatisfactory. Major and serious problems or
               unsafe and unsound conditions may exist which are not being satisfactorily addressed or
               resolved. Unless effective action is taken to correct these conditions, they could reasonably
               develop into a situation that could impair future viability, constitute a threat to the interests of
               depositors and/or pose a potential for disbursement of funds by the insuring agency. A higher
               potential for failure is present but is not yet imminent or pronounced. Institutions in this
               category require close supervisory attention and financial surveillance and a definitive plan
               for corrective action.

5              This category is reserved for institutions with an extremely high immediate or near term
               probability of failure. The volume and severity of weaknesses or unsafe and unsound
               conditions are so critical as to require urgent aid from stockholders or other public or private
               sources of financial assistance. In the absence of urgent and decisive corrective measures,
               these situations will likely require liquidation and the payoff of depositors, disbursement of
               insurance funds to insured depositors, or some form of emergency assistance, merger or
               acquisition.

Source: Commercial Bank Examination Manual, A.5020.1, pp. 3-4: Uniform Financial Institutions Rating
System, effective 3/84.
                                               Table 2
                                      Components of the CAMEL Ratings

COMPONENT           DESCRIPTION
Capital Adequacy    A bank's Tier 1, total capital, and leverage ratios in relation to its peer group are the most
                    important factors in assigning a preliminary rating. Peer groups are based on bank asset
                    size, number of offices and location in a metropolitan or non-metropolitan area. More
                    capital is required for banks with deficiencies in any other area of the examination,
                    particularly in asset quality. Examiners also pay close attention to how equity and asset
                    growth affect the capital ratios, and look at retained earnings as a ratio of average total
                    equity to determine whether a bank's equity growth is through retained earnings or an
                    unsustainable outside source, and to the size of the dividend payout.

Asset Quality       The asset quality rating is an indicator of future losses to the bank and affects the ratings
                    of other areas of examination, which must be considered in light of their adequacy to
                    absorb anticipated losses. The most important factor in the asset quality rating is the
                    bank's weighted classified asset ratio, which is computed as [15%*substandard assets
                    +50%*doubtful assets + 100%*loss assets]/[Tier 1 capital + allocation for loan and lease
                    losses]. Examiners also consider the level, trend and composition of classified assets and
                    nonaccrual and renegotiated loans, loan concentrations, lending policies, and
                    effectiveness in monitoring past-due loans, insider loans and the types of risks inherent in
                    the bank's on- and off-balance sheet portfolios..

Management          Management is evaluated on a number of criteria, including compliance with applicable
                    laws and regulations, whether there is a comprehensive internal or external review audit,
                    internal controls to safeguard bank assets, and systems for timely and accurate
                    information. Examiners also consider the other components of the CAMEL rating,
                    shareholder return, and the extent to which the bank is serving all sectors of its
                    community.

Earnings            Earnings are assessed for ability to absorb future losses, so this rating is affected by asset
                    quality, a bank's level, trend and relation to peer of net interest income, noninterest
                    income, overhead expense and provision for loan and lease losses, extraordinary items,
                    additional required provision for loan and lease losses or other nonrecurring items, and
                    dividend payouts.

Liquidity           The liquidity rating is a determination of a bank's ease in obtaining money cheaply and
                    quickly, and a bank's management of interest rate risk. Considerations include the bank's
                    loan commitments and standby letters of credit, the presence of an "unstable core" of
                    funding, access to capital markets, the ratios of federal funds purchased and brokered
                    deposits to total assets and the ratios of loans to deposits.

Sensitivity to      Rating is based on based on, but not limited to, assessments of the sensitivity of the
Market Risk         financial institution's earnings or the economic value of its capital to adverse changes in
(since 1997 only)   interest rates, foreign-exchange rates, commodity prices, or equity prices, the ability of
                    management to identify, measure, monitor, and control exposure to market risk given the
                    institution's size, complexity, and risk profile, the nature and complexity of interest-rate
                    risk exposure arising from nontrading positions where appropriate, the nature and
                    complexity of market-risk exposure arising from trading and foreign operations.

Source: Commercial Bank Examination Manual.
                                                  Table 3
                                          Classified Asset Categories

COMPONENT         DESCRIPTION
Special Mention   This category includes loans that are potential problems, but that are currently of
                  adequate quality. Loans with inadequate documentation and loans particularly vulnerable
                  to a change in economic conditions may be classified as such. Loans to borrowers with
                  deteriorating but still acceptable financials are another example.

Substandard       Loans in this category are judged to have a well-defined weakness that may result in
                  losses to the bank if left uncorrected. Characteristics include significant deviations from
                  scheduled payments, delinquency, carried-over debt, numerous extensions or renewals
                  without statement of source of repayment, decreased borrower profitability or poor
                  borrower cash flow.

Doubtful          Doubtful loans have problems similar to those of substandard loans, but also have a loss
                  exposure considered severe enough to jeopardize full collection of the loan highly
                  unlikely. However, the loan is not yet considered a loss due to the possibility of
                  mitigating circumstances, such as a proposed merger, capital injection or refinancing
                  plans. A loan should not be classified as doubtful for two consecutive exams, since it is
                  assumed the status of the loan should be resolved during the time between exams.

Loss              A loan considered uncollectible is classified a loss. Although some probability of partial
                  recovery may exist, it is considered preferable to write off the loan in the current period.
                  Such loans are characterized by severe delinquency.

Source: Commercial Bank Examination Manual.
Table 4: Summary Statistics from Bank Examinations over Time

                                                        Panel A
  Year                Number    Total    Weighted    Mean    Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction
                     examined Classified Classified CAMEL CAMEL 1 CAMEL 2 CAMEL 3 CAMEL 4 CAMEL 5
                               Assets     Assets
              1986        6042     0.098      0.028    2.402     0.152    0.480    0.217    0.117    0.034
              1987        6763     0.086      0.024    2.291     0.177    0.515    0.182    0.093    0.034
              1988        7729     0.082      0.022    2.257     0.188    0.521    0.170    0.089    0.033
              1989        8352     0.082      0.022    2.216     0.206    0.525    0.153    0.077    0.039
              1990        8316     0.072      0.018    2.207     0.207    0.519    0.165    0.078    0.031
              1991        8377     0.070      0.017    2.194     0.202    0.523    0.178    0.075    0.023
              1992        9040     0.063      0.015    2.089     0.215    0.566    0.149    0.056    0.014
              1993        9594     0.051      0.012    1.869     0.297    0.580    0.088    0.029    0.007
              1994        8867     0.041      0.010    1.758     0.346    0.575    0.058    0.016    0.005
              1995        7821     0.036      0.008    1.676     0.396    0.547    0.045    0.010    0.002
              1996        7273     0.033      0.008    1.609     0.445    0.509    0.037    0.007    0.001
              1997        6381     0.033      0.008    1.591     0.467    0.488    0.036    0.009    0.001
              1998        5578     0.032      0.008    1.624     0.444    0.500    0.046    0.008    0.002

                                                Panel B
  Period       Number    Total    Weighted Mean      Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction Fraction
              examined Classified Classified CAMEL CAMEL 1 CAMEL 2 CAMEL 3 CAMEL 4 CAMEL 5
                        Assets     Assets
Pre-crunch       20534      0.088      0.024   2.311     0.174   0.507     0.187    0.098    0.034
Credit crunch    34085      0.072      0.018   2.175     0.208   0.534     0.161    0.071    0.026
Boom             45514      0.039      0.009   1.704     0.389   0.539     0.054    0.014    0.003



                                  CAMEL Distribution, 1986-1998

              0.700
              0.600
              0.500
   Fraction




              0.400
              0.300
              0.200
              0.100
              0.000
                       1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
                                                       Year

                              Fraction CAMEL 1     Fraction CAMEL 2      Fraction CAMEL 3
                              Fraction CAMEL 4     Fraction CAMEL 5
Table 5: Sample Selection – Examined Banks versus the Industry over Time

                                               Panel A
 Year            Number of Banks              Total Capital Ratio        Nonperforming Loan Ratio
          Examined Industry Fraction    Examined Industry Difference Examined Industry Difference
                             Examined
   1986       6042    14197       0.426     0.154      0.178      -0.024   0.061    0.057      0.004
   1987       6763    13956       0.485     0.157      0.177      -0.019   0.057    0.057      0.001
   1988       7729    13443       0.575     0.170      0.185      -0.015   0.050    0.049      0.000
   1989       8352    12863       0.649     0.173      0.185      -0.012   0.044    0.044      0.001
   1990       8316    12447       0.668     0.178      0.186      -0.008   0.043    0.042      0.000
   1991       8377    12088       0.693     0.169      0.177      -0.008   0.043    0.043      0.001
   1992       9040    11677       0.774     0.169      0.178      -0.009   0.042    0.042      0.000
   1993       9594    11232       0.854     0.179      0.186      -0.007   0.033    0.034     -0.001
   1994       8867    10778       0.823     0.183      0.191      -0.008   0.029    0.029      0.000
   1995       7821    10266       0.762     0.184      0.191      -0.007   0.026    0.025      0.000
   1996       7273     9760       0.745     0.182      0.193      -0.011   0.027    0.027      0.000
   1997       6381     9346       0.683     0.131      0.137      -0.005   0.028    0.028      0.000
   1998       5578     8954       0.623     0.173      0.192      -0.018   0.026    0.026      0.001

                                               Panel B
   Period           Number of Banks           Total Capital Ratio        Nonperforming Loan Ratio
              Examined Industry Fraction Examined Indust ry Difference Examined Indust ry Difference
                                Examined
Pre-crunch       20534    41596     0.494    0.161      0.180     -0.019   0.055    0.054       0.001
Credit crunch    34085    49075     0.695    0.172      0.181     -0.009   0.043    0.043      -0.000
Boom             45514    60336     0.754    0.174      0.182     -0.008   0.028    0.028       0.000
  Table 6: Changes Between Examinations in CAMEL Ratings and Classified Asset Ratios

                                                 Panel A
    Year      Number of             CAMEL                 Total Classified Asset Weighted Classified
               Banks                                              Ratio             Asset Ratio
                          Upgrades Downgrades    Constant Decreases Increases Decreases Increases
       1986         472       0.131      0.119      0.750      0.523       0.477    0.511       0.489
       1987        3816       0.187      0.155      0.658      0.583       0.417    0.591       0.409
       1988        5426       0.161      0.168      0.672      0.576       0.424    0.586       0.414
       1989        7258       0.157      0.158      0.685      0.554       0.446    0.563       0.437
       1990        7905       0.127      0.175      0.698      0.526       0.474    0.533       0.467
       1991        8072       0.135      0.171      0.694      0.513       0.487    0.522       0.478
       1992        8729       0.182      0.113      0.706      0.557       0.443    0.564       0.436
       1993        9364       0.230      0.060      0.710      0.675       0.325    0.678       0.322
       1994        8777       0.182      0.063      0.755      0.701       0.299    0.691       0.309
       1995        7754       0.164      0.067      0.769      0.645       0.355    0.643       0.357
       1996        7194       0.149      0.066      0.784      0.589       0.411    0.575       0.425
       1997        6277       0.127      0.079      0.794      0.576       0.424    0.568       0.432
       1998        5422       0.095      0.100      0.805      0.557       0.443    0.553       0.447


                                          Panel B
   Period      Number            CAMEL                Total Classified Asset Weighted Classified
              of Banks                                        Ratio             Asset Ratio
              Examined Upgrades Downgrades Constant Decreases Increases Decreases Increases
Pre-crunch         9714    0.170      0.160     0.670      0.576       0.424    0.584       0.416
Credit crunch     31964    0.151      0.153     0.696      0.538       0.462    0.545       0.455
Boom              44788    0.165      0.070     0.764      0.633       0.367    0.627       0.373
                                                   Table 7
              Variable Definitions and Sample Statistics for Supervisory Assessment Regressions

              Name                                    Definition                          Mean    Std. Dev.

                                               SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS OF BANK CONDITION

Total Classified Assets          Proportion of loans classified as substandard,           .060      .065
                                 doubtful or loss.

Weighted Classified Assets       Weighted proportion of loans classified, weights of      .015      .020
                                 .2 on substandard, .5 on doubtful, and 1 on loss.

CAMEL 1                          Dummy variable equal to 1 if CAMEL rating is a 1.        .275      .447

CAMEL 2                          Dummy variable equal to 1 if CAMEL rating is a 2.        .521      .500


CAMEL 3                          Dummy variable equal to 1 if CAMEL rating is a 3.        .128      .334


CAMEL 4 or 5                     Dummy variable equal to 1 if CAMEL rating is a 4         .075      .264
                                 or a 5 (combined because there were so few 5s).

CAMEL SATISFACTORY               Dummy variable equal to 1 if CAMEL rating is a           .797      .403
                                 1or a 2.

CAMEL UNSATISFACTORY             Dummy variable equal to 1 if CAMEL rating is a 3,        .203      .143
                                 4, or 5.

                                                          TIME DUMMIES

1986-1988                        Pre-Crunch Period. This is excluded as the base          .216      .412
                                 period in the regressions.

1989-1992                        Credit Crunch Period.                                    .370      .483

1993-1998                        Banking Boom Period.                                     .414      .493

Individual Year dummies          Included in some regressions.

                                                         LAGGED SUPERVISORY ASSESSMENTS

Lagged Total Classified Assets, Lagged values of supervisory assessments for banks
Weighted Classified Assets,     with prior examination data, set to zero otherwise
CAMEL 1, CAMEL 2, CAMEL 3 (see no lagged examination data variable).

Time Since Last Recorded         Years since last recorded examination, set to zero if   .994      .701
Examination                      no prior data (see no lagged examination data
                                 variable).

No Lagged Examination Data       Dummy variable equal to 1 if no lagged                  .106     .308
                                 examination data are available.
                               Table 7 (continued)
                  Variable Definitions and Sample Statistics

          Name                       Definition                     Mean       Std. Dev.

                                                  SUPERVISORY AGENCY

OCC              Dummy variable equal to 1 if the OCC was the           .248      .432
                 lead agency in the exam.

FDIC             Dummy variable equal to 1 if the FDIC was the       .366        .482
                 lead agency in the exam.

FRB              Dummy variable equal to 1 if the FRB was the           .078     .268
                 lead agency in the exam.

STATE            Dummy variable equal to 1 if State Agency or        .308        .461
                 Other Federal agency. This is excluded as the
                 Base case.

                                                  BANK SIZE VARIABLES

Ln(GTA)          Natural log of Gross Total Assets.                 11.039      1.221


SIZE1            Dummy variable equal to 1 if GTA≤ $100 million     .723         .448
                 (excluded from regressions as base case).

SIZE2            Dummy variable equal to 1 if $100 million < GTA    .245         .430
                 ≤ $1 billion.

SIZE3            Dummy variable equal to 1 if $1 billion < GTA ≤    .028         .164
                 $10 billion.

SIZE4            Dummy variable equal to 1 if $10 billion < GTA.    .004         .065

                                   BANK BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS

                 Total Capital Ratio, Tier 1 Capital Ratio,
                 Leverage Capital Ratio, Real Estate
                 Loans/Total Loans, Nonperforming
                 Loans/Total Loans, Off-balance Sheet
                 Items/Total Loans, Other Real Estate
                 Owned/Total Loans, Return on Assets, and
                 Volatile Liability Dependence. All are lagged
                 and all are included as level, trend, and peer
                 group percentile rank.
                                                                 Table 7 (continued)
                                 Variable Definitions and Sample Statistics


           Name                                Definition                        Mean     Std. Dev.


                                  STATE AVERAGES OF BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME ITEMS TORS

                             State averages of the same variables as the
                             bank balance sheet and income items. These
                             variables are also lagged and all are included as
                             level, trend, and peer group percentile rank.


                                             OTHER ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT INDICATORS

                             Regional Dummies, State Income Growth and
                             State Unemployment Rate.

                                                            FUTURE PERFORMANCE

Future Nonperforming Loans   Leads of 1, 2, and 3 years included in                .038       .036
                             regressions. Mean for lead 1 shown.

Future Charge-offs           Leads of 1, 2, and 3 years included in                .005       .035
                             regressions. Mean for lead 1 shown.

Future Total Capital Ratio   Leads of 1, 2, and 3 years included in                .169       .078
                             regressions. Mean for lead 1 shown.
                                                                                    Table 8
                                                         Regressions of Supervisory Assessments with Period Dummies
                                              Total Classified Assets                           Weighted Classified Assets                                     CAMEL
       Variable            Estimate    Std. Error      Estimate       Std. Err.    Estimate      Std. Err.      Estimate      Std. Err.  Estimate      Std. Err.  Estimate       Std. Err.
1989-1992                   0.005211       0.017926        0.01003      0.018817    0.046267        0.018059      0.057193      0.018726    -0.3355        0.0418    -0.1979           0.0489
1993-1998                   -0.16131       0.030755       -0.13853      0.033097     -0.15451       0.030464       -0.11518     0.032515    -0.1695        0.0719    -0.1268           0.0863
Lagged classified assets   10.29125       0.112903      8.977898        0.12419     25.51462        0.400763      21.73203     0.435849     10.9414        0.3002     10.4541         0.3654
Lag CAMEL1                  0.47908       0.028467       0.42174       0.03119      0.103299        0.029719      0.084658     0.032084       6.2138       0.0674      6.1182         0.0823
Lag CAMEL2                 0.699025       0.026069       0.60777       0.02823      0.405948        0.027581      0.339049     0.029372       3.6971       0.0609      3.6969         0.0731
Lag CAMEL3                 0.543288       0.023706      0.464806      0.025212      0.385124        0.025478      0.334712     0.026676       1.9102        0.052      1.9106         0.0618
Years since last exam      -0.16398       0.005336      -0.09785      0.007457        -0.1304        0.00555      -0.06696     0.007341        0.018       0.0143    -0.00672         0.0192
No prior exam              0.744434       0.031395      0.806143      0.034212      0.283331        0.032533      0.359236     0.034756       4.4846       0.0766      4.5068         0.0919
OCC                        0.159995       0.010574      0.168187      0.013095      0.151008        0.010116      0.154065     0.012467      -0.2793       0.0242     -0.3743         0.0318
FDIC                        0.11576       0.007679       0.14295      0.008797      0.115969        0.007836       0.15533     0.008961      -0.3258       0.0208     -0.3874         0.0259
FRB                        -0.00341       0.014849      0.008097      0.016897      0.024116         0.01436      0.024877     0.016248      -0.1479       0.0347     -0.1559         0.0431
Total classified assets                                                                                                                      -82.938       0.6564     -85.358         0.8218
NPF, t+1                                                2.797067      0.194073                                    3.352305     0.214042                              -0.00768         0.9653
NPF, t+2                                                0.559802      0.201674                                    0.965655     0.217772                               -1.4128         0.9934
NPF, t+3                                                0.549363      0.173385                                    -0.27295     0.188366                               -4.2268         0.8816
Charge-offs, t+1                                        1.293406      0.192597                                     1.68188     0.224471                               -20.087         1.9758
Charge-offs, t+2                                        2.142689      0.335742                                    2.430947     0.397049                               -0.4434         2.0324
Charge-offs, t+3                                        0.611406       0.21981                                    -0.00928     0.184508                                3.9199         2.1816
Total Capital, t+1                                      0.454978      0.116291                                    0.126771     0.148643                                2.1243         0.4814
Total Capital, t+2                                      0.576912      0.123038                                    0.917427     0.157945                               -1.2946         0.4949
Total Capital, t+3                                      -0.04714      0.095274                                    -0.36475     0.118142                               -0.2707         0.3772

Adj. R-sq                     0.5202                      0.5312                       0.5027                       0.5182
Obs                          107395                       67425                       107395                        67425                    107396                     67426
-2 Log L                                                                                                                                  101354.96                  64756.72

All of these regressions also include the following variables from the bank’s Call Report: Total Capital Ratio, Tier 1 Capital Ratio, Leverage Capital Ratio, Real Estate Loans/Total Loans,
Nonperforming Loans/Total Loans, Off-balance Sheet Items/Total Loans, Other Real Estate Owned/Total Loans, Return on Assets, and Volatile Liability Dependence. All are lagged and all
are included as level, trend, and peer group percentile rank. State averages of all of these items (lagged levels, trends, and peer group percentile ranks). State Income Growth and the State
Unemployment Rate are also included in all regressions.

The bold-faced type indicates statistical significance at the 5% level, two-sided.
                                                                                                    Table 9

                                            Regressions of Changes in Lending and Assets on Lagged Changes in Supervisory Assessments and Other Variables

                                               ∆C&I loans                 ∆Real Estate loans           ∆Installment loans              ∆U.S. Treasuries             ∆Gross Total Assets
               Variable                  Estimate      Std. Err.        Estimate      Std. Err.      Estimate      Std. Err.        Estimate      Std. Err.        Estimate     Std. Err.
1988                                         -0.0015       0.00114        0.002607       0.001653      0.002231       0.001008        0.012822      0.001729          -0.09668    0.014974
1989                                        -0.00293     0.000906         0.003247       0.001313      0.002629       0.000801          0.01308     0.001374          -0.08817    0.011897
1990                                        -0.00249     0.000978         0.001078       0.001418      0.002106       0.000865        0.021528      0.001484          -0.07921    0.012847
1991                                        -0.00547     0.000868         0.002569       0.001257       -0.00152      0.000767        0.023579      0.001316          -0.08796    0.011391
1992                                        -0.00351     0.000899           0.00462      0.001302       -0.00242      0.000795        0.027741      0.001363          -0.06352    0.011802
1993                                        -0.00224     0.000932         0.004634       0.001351      0.000208       0.000824        0.023088      0.001413             -0.071   0.012238
1994                                        -0.00119     0.000897         0.003448         0.0013        0.00389      0.000793        0.026555        0.00136          -0.0726    0.011779
1995                                       0.002087      0.000916         0.002035       0.001327      0.004961        0.00081        0.011197      0.001389          -0.06194    0.012027
1996                                       0.001892      0.000878         0.002887       0.001273      0.003276       0.000777          0.01199     0.001332          -0.05113    0.011532
1997                                       0.002663      0.000926         0.011934       0.001342        0.00199      0.000819        0.000216      0.001404         0.017994     0.012157
1998                                       0.002332      0.000816           0.01318      0.001182        0.00018      0.000721         -0.00477     0.001237         0.070603     0.010709

CAMEL upgrade, t-1                         -0.00437        0.000354        -0.00178     0.000514        -0.00347       0.000313        0.002534       0.000537        -0.00173       0.004653
CAMEL upgrade, t-2                         -0.00057        0.000363        -0.00346     0.000526        -0.00023       0.000321        0.000831        0.00055        -0.01895       0.004763
CAMEL upgrade, t-3                         0.000158        0.000357        -0.00091     0.000518        0.000357       0.000316        -0.00016       0.000542        -0.00329       0.004692

CAMEL downgrade, t-1                        -0.00088       0.000432        0.010906     0.000625        0.001593       0.000382          -0.0027      0.000654       0.060737        0.005666
CAMEL downgrade, t-2                        -0.00137       0.000447        -0.00258     0.000647        0.000706       0.000395        0.003478       0.000678       -0.03283        0.005867
CAMEL downgrade, t-3                        -0.00137       0.000444        -0.00147     0.000644        -0.00046       0.000393        0.002855       0.000674         -0.0222       0.005835

Change in total classified assets, t-1      -0.02704       0.003844        -0.08794     0.005569        -0.05641       0.003398        0.037958       0.005828        -0.39303       0.050464
Change in total classified assets, t-2       -0.0421       0.003973        -0.03533     0.005757        -0.03303       0.003513        0.028004       0.006024        -0.14216       0.052161
Change in total classified assets, t-3      -0.01597       0.003834        -0.01775     0.005555        -0.01677        0.00339        0.009414       0.005813        -0.18002       0.050334

Adj R-sq                                      0.0309                          0.0366                      0.0202                         0.0449                         0.0194         0.0309
Obs                                           79960                           79960                       79960                          79960                          79960          79960

   All of these regressions also include three years of lagged changes of the following balance sheet variables: Total Capital Ratio, Tier 1 Capital Ratio, Leverage Capital Ratio, Real Estate Loans/Total
   Loans, Nonperforming Loans/Total Loans, Off-balance Sheet Items/Total Loans, Other Real Estate Owned/Total Loans, Return on Assets, and Volatile Liability Dependence. Three years of lagged
   changes of the state averages of all of these items as well as three years of lagged changes of state averages of CAMEL and total classified assets, State Income Growth and the State Unemployment Rate
   are also included in all regressions.

   The bold-faced type indicates statistical significance at the 5% level, two-sided.
                                                                                               Table 10

                                             Regressions of Changes in Performance on Lagged Changes in Supervisory Assessments and Other Variables

                                                                              ∆Nonperforming Loans             ∆Charge-offs                  ∆Total Capital
                                                    Variable                  Estimate     Std. Err.      Estimate     Std. Err.         Estimate     Std. Err.
                                     1988                                         -0.0008    0.000505        -0.00086     0.000391         0.011116      0.001117
                                     1989                                        -0.00066    0.000401       3.41E-05        0.00031        0.012442      0.000888
                                     1990                                        -0.00039    0.000433        -0.00019     0.000335           0.00857     0.000959
                                     1991                                        -0.00031    0.000384       0.000207      0.000297         0.013028       0.00085
                                     1992                                         -0.0009    0.000398       0.000461      0.000308         0.016657      0.000881
                                     1993                                        -0.00048    0.000412        -4.9E-06     0.000319         0.014444      0.000913
                                     1994                                         -0.0004    0.000397       6.26E-05      0.000307         0.010648      0.000879
                                     1995                                       4.54E-05     0.000405       0.000406      0.000314         0.009896      0.000898
                                     1996                                        -0.00024    0.000389       0.000339      0.000301           0.00954     0.000861
                                     1997                                        -0.00027      0.00041      0.000221      0.000317          -0.02143     0.000907
                                     1998                                        -0.00072    0.000361       0.000211      0.000279         0.014723      0.000799

                                     CAMEL upgrade, t-1                          -0.00108     0.000157       -0.00044       0.000121        0.006821       0.000347
                                     CAMEL upgrade, t-2                          -0.00062      0.00016       -0.00036       0.000124        0.001418       0.000355
                                     CAMEL upgrade, t-3                          -0.00066     0.000158       -0.00042       0.000122        4.66E-05        0.00035

                                     CAMEL downgrade, t-1                        0.001639     0.000191       0.001638       0.000148        -0.00736       0.000423
                                     CAMEL downgrade, t-2                        0.000592     0.000198       0.000402       0.000153        -0.00022       0.000438
                                     CAMEL downgrade, t-3                        -0.00051     0.000197       -0.00068       0.000152        0.001562       0.000435

                                     Change in total classified assets, t-1      0.083329       0.0017       0.026872       0.001317         0.03454       0.003766
                                     Change in total classified assets, t-2      0.019455     0.001757       0.011038       0.001361        0.016247       0.003892
                                     Change in total classified assets, t-3      -0.00539     0.001696       -0.00696       0.001313        0.013343       0.003756

                                     Adj R-sq                                        0.0882                    0.0226                         0.4184
                                     Obs                                             79959                     79960                          79960

All of these regressions also include three years of lagged changes of the following variables: Total Capital Ratio, Tier 1 Capital Ratio, Leverage Capital Ratio, Real Estate Loans/Total Loans,
Nonperforming Loans/Total Loans, Off-balance Sheet Items/Total Loans, Other Real Estate Owned/Total Loans, Return on Assets, and Volatile Liability Dependence. Three years of lagged changes of
the state averages of all of these items as well as three years of lagged changes of state averages of CAMEL and total classified assets, State Income Growth and the State Unemployment Rate are also
included in all regressions.

The bold-faced type indicates statistical significance at the 5% level, two-sided.
