                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  MOTHERS AND OTHERS:
                            WHO INVESTS IN CHILDREN’S HEALTH?


                                              Anne Case
                                            Christina Paxson


                                          Working Paper 7691
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7691

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000




We thank Angus Deaton, I-Fen Lin, Sara McLanahan and seminar participants for helpful conversations,
Zahid Hafeez for research assistance, and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Anne Case and Christina Paxson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Mothers and Others: Who Invests in Children’s Health?
Anne Case and Christina Paxson
NBER Working Paper No. 7691
May 2000
JEL No. I1, D1

                                             ABSTRACT


        We estimate the impact of family structure on investments made in children’s health, using

data from the 1988 National Health Interview Survey Child Health Supplement. Controlling for

household size, income and characteristics, we find that children living with step mothers are

significantly less likely to have routine doctor and dentist visits, or to have a place for usual medical

care, or for sick care. If children living with step mothers have regular contact with their birth

mothers, however, their health care does not suffer relative to that reported for children who reside

with their birth mothers. In addition to health investments, we find a significant effect of step

mothers on health-related behaviors: children living with step mothers are significantly less likely

to wear seatbelts, and are significantly more likely to be living with a cigarette smoker. We cannot

reject that investments for children living with birth fathers and step mothers are the same as those

made by birth fathers living alone with their children. Who invests in children’s health? It appears

these investments are made, largely, by a child’s mother, and that step mothers are not substitutes

for birth mothers in this domain.



Anne Case                                               Christina Paxson
217 Bendheim Hall                                       219 Bendheim Hall
Princeton University                                    Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544                                      Princeton NJ 08544
and NBER                                                and NBER
accase@princeton.edu                                    cpaxson@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

Much has been written about outcomes for children in the U.S. who grow up with at least one of

their birth parents absent. These children, roughly half of all children in the United States, are

more likely to have academic problems and to drop out of school; they are also more likely to

exhibit a range of behavioral problems, including substance abuse, delinquency, and early sexual

activity; and they are more likely to live in poverty later in life.1

        While much is known about the outcomes for children raised by a single parent, or by a

birth and step parent, less is known about the mechanisms that give way to these outcomes.

Scarring left by an earlier unhappy home life, and the stress of living in a new blended family,

both appear to play a role (Cherlin and Furstenberg 1994), as does the economic insecurity that

accompanies marital disruption (Duncan and Brooks-Gunn 1996). Children who do not reside

with both birth parents move more frequently (McLanahan and Sandefur 1994), which adds an

additional layer of instability in the children’s lives.

        Differences in outcomes may also be due to differences in the investments made in step

children relative to birth children. Parents may choose to invest less in step children because they

are not as attached emotionally to these children. Furstenberg (1987) cites results from a

nationally representative child survey which followed 2200 children for a 5 year period, and

which found that 15 percent of step parents failed to mention step children living in their

household when asked to identify all family members (compared to 1 percent with birth


        1
        See Hetherington et al. 1998 for a review of this literature. In this paper, we will refer to
children as “birth” children of a parent, rather than the more commonly used expression,
“biological” children, to highlight the fact that a parent can develop a biological relationship
with a child that he or she has not given birth to, through contact with that child. See Blaffer
Hrdy 1999 (page 57).

                                                   1
children). Similarly 31 percent of children did not mention a residential step parent when asked

the same question (Furstenberg, page 54). This lack of emotional attachment may be at least

partially the result of the step child’s behavior toward the step parent. The child may view the

step parent as a threat to his or her relationship with the birth parent, and may resent having a

new person in a position of authority (see Stevenson and Black, 1995, pages 53-56). Whether the

lack of emotional attachment is driven by the indifference of a step parent or the resentment of a

step child, the end result may be less investment on the part of the parent. Step parents who are

less attached to step children may hold lower expectations of reciprocal giving of time and

money with their step children, which may lead the parents to invest less.

       A complementary explanation for lower investments is provided by Daly and Wilson

(1987, 1998), who examine the possibility that parents invest to protect their own genetic

material and, for this reason, are more keen to invest in their birth children. They argue that there

is “a strong theoretical rationale for expecting that the evolved human psyche contains

safeguards against allowing a mere step-child, however appealing, easy access to that special

mental category occupied by genetic children, the appropriate objects for the most nearly selfless

love we know.” (Daly and Wilson, 1998, page 66.)

       There is little evidence on investments made in step children. There is a small literature

that examines the role played by step parents — usually step fathers — in child maltreatment.

Daly and Wilson have a number of studies that carefully document the increased risk of physical

child abuse and child homicide among children being raised by a step parent. Step fathers are

more likely than biological fathers to be perpetrators of sexual abuse (National Research

Council, page 127). However, step fathers do not appear to be associated greater child neglect


                                                 2
(usually defined as inadequate provision of food, clothing, housing, medical care, or education.)

Dubowitz, Black, Kerr, Starr and Harrington (1999) examine child neglect outcomes for a small

sample of African American children and find that, although greater father involvement is

associated with less neglect, there are no differences in neglect outcomes between children with

biological and non-biological father figures.

        Other research looks directly at whether step parents invest in children’s education.

Beller and Chung (1992) present evidence that step children are significantly less likely to attend

college, perhaps because a step parent is less willing to underwrite the college education of a

step child. Case, Lin and McLanahan (2000b) use data from the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID) to compare educational outcomes of children from families with at least one

birth child of the mother and one step, adopted or foster child of the mother. They find that,

relative to the birth child of the mother, the other child is significantly less likely to obtain

schooling beyond a high school degree. This result is robust to adding time-varying household

characteristics and mother fixed effects. However, one cannot reject that the results on children’s

educational attainment reflect scarring or stress faced by step children, rather than the investment

strategy of a step parent.

        Case, Lin and McLanahan (1999, 2000a) use panel data from the PSID to examine one

input into children: food. They find that if a birth child of the mother figure in a household were

to be replaced by a step child, food expenditure would fall by roughly five percent. Consistent

with an attachment based on genetic connection, one cannot reject that the size of the fall in food

expenditure is identical, whether the child is a step, or foster or adopted child of the mother. The

results in Case, Lin and McLanahan are consistent with those discussed in Daly and Wilson


                                                   3
(1998) in many respects. The results are strongest for the youngest children, and are much

diminished by the time a child reaches adolescence. In addition, the step parent effect is

independent of the effect that poverty has on children’s outcomes. (See Daly and Wilson, 1998,

page 30.)

       Although the results on food spending are interesting, the connection between food

expenditure and child well-being is not well forged. It may be that reduced food expenditure has

a positive effect on children’s outcomes, if it reduces the odds of obesity, for example. It may be

that the reduced expenditure is on some product thought to be bad for children’s health. With the

limited data available in the PSID, it is not possible to pinpoint which food expenditure is lower.

       In this paper, we add to what is known about the relationship between household

structure and investments made in children, by examining parental investments in children’s

health. We find, controlling for household income and parental and household characteristics,

that children living with a step mother appear to be disadvantaged in health investments and

behaviors. Children living with birth fathers and step mothers are significantly less likely to have

routine doctors visits, or places for usual health care, or to wear seatbelts. In fact, we cannot

reject that investments for children living with birth fathers and step mothers are the same as

those made by birth fathers living as single parents with their children.

       We identify two mechanisms that protect children raised by step mothers. If the child’s

birth mother has regular contact with the child (on the order of two to three times a month or

more), then the child is at no disadvantage with respect to doctors visits or places for usual

health care. In addition, when a step mother has birth children of her own living in the

household, then her step children appear to benefit. For example, children living with a step


                                                  4
mother are less likely to have a place for regular medical care, unless the step mother has birth

children in the household as well. Our results are specific to step mothers; children living with

foster and adoptive mothers have health investments that are generally insignificantly different

from those reported for children living with their birth mothers. Consistent with results in Case,

Lin and McLanahan (1999, 2000a), we find little evidence that the nature of the relationship of

the child to his or her father has any effect on the investments made in children.

       In the next section we describe our data, and in Section 3 we present results. Section 4

concludes with a discussion of the role of mothers in the provision of children’s health.



2. Data

The data we use come from the 1988 Child Health Supplement to the National Health Interview

Survey (NHIS-CH). The NHIS is an annual nationally representative survey that collects

extensive information on chronic and acute heath conditions, doctor visits, and hospital stays, for

American adults and children. The survey also collects socioeconomic information for each

family that is interviewed. Although the socioeconomic information is less extensive than the

health information, measures of family income (in bracketed amounts), parental education and

parental work status are available. In 1988, 50,061 households containing 33,945 children

younger than 18 years old were surveyed. The 1988 child health supplement was then

administered to a single randomly-selected child from each family with one or more children,

yielding a sample of 17,110 sample children.2 The person in the family most knowledgeable

about the child was asked to answer the survey, which collected information on the child’s


       2
          For no apparent reason, forty households contain two sample children each.

                                                 5
health outcomes, behavioral problems, and parental investments in the child’s health. Unlike the

basic NHIS, the child health supplement also collected detailed information on the relationships

between the sample child and other household members. Parent figures are identified as being

birth (“biological” in the survey), adoptive, step, foster, or other relatives or non-relatives of the

child. Other children in the household are identified as full, step or half siblings, or as unrelated

children. In cases in which the sample child does not live with one or both birth parents,

questions were asked about the length of time the child has lived apart from the birth parent, and

the current frequency of contact with the birth parent.

       Most of our analysis uses a sample of children for whom both a “mother figure” and

“father figure” are reported being present in the household, and for whom the relationships

between the child and both parent figures are known. The sample is restricted to children who

are 0-16 years of age. 17-year-olds are excluded because they were allowed to answer the survey

questions themselves, and also because several of the parental investments we examine (for

example, seat belt use and smoking) may, by age 17, be under the control of the child. In several

cases, 17-year-olds in the survey were married or had a child themselves. We also remove a

small number of “rare” household structures: children living with birth mothers and foster

fathers (4 cases); step mothers and adoptive fathers (1 case); step mothers and step fathers (3

cases); and adoptive mothers and step fathers (7 cases). Results do not change when we keep

these cases in our sample. However, because these cases were rare, we wanted to ensure that our

results were not being driven by them. In addition, 475 cases were dropped because the child

health respondent was reported to have an age of zero or be less than 12 years old. The final

sample contains 10,541 children. In some of the results that follow we compare investments in


                                                   6
children with two parents figures with those for children who have only one parent figure. In this

case, the sample described above is combined with a sample of 2,715 children who live with

either their birth mother (and have no father figure), or with their birth father (and have no

mother figure.)

       The definition of “step parent” requires some discussion. The NHIS-CH asked the

respondent to identify the child’s “mother figure” and “father figure,” making it clear that

mother or father figures could be people other than the birth parents of the child. Then, the

respondent was asked to specify the nature of the relationship between the sample child and each

of the parent figures (biological, foster, step, etc.) Of the 17,110 children sampled, 478 (or,

2.79%) of children had mother figures for whom the type of mother figure was coded as

“unknown” — although in many of these cases, the mother figure was herself the respondent!

Another 566, or 3.31%, of children had a father figure with type unknown. We suspect that these

parents of unknown type consist largely of “informal” step parents, who are living with but are

not married to one of the child’s birth parents. However, without better information on exactly

who these “type unknown” parents are, we chose a conservative strategy of coding children as

having a step parent only if an answer of “step parent” was given, and children with “type

unknown” parents were excluded from the analysis. Thus, this study does not address the role

that non-marital partners of birth parents play in children’s lives.

       Table 1 contains descriptive statistics, by family type, on the set of parental investments

and behaviors we analyze, as well as information on the socioeconomic characteristics of

families. The investments and behaviors we examine include: whether the child had a routine

doctor visit in the last year; whether the child visited a dentist in the last year; whether the child


                                                   7
has a usual bedtime; whether the child has a usual place for routine medical care and a usual

place for sick care; whether the child wears a seatbelt most of the time; whether household

members smoke in the home; and whether the child is covered by either private health insurance

or Medicaid. The first three of these measures are used only for children over the age of 1. All

but 5% of the sample children age 1 or less had a doctor visit in the year before the interview,

and almost none had a dentist visit. The question on “usual bedtime” was not asked for children

under the age of 1; whether we choose a sample of children greater than age 1, or greater than or

equal to age 1 makes little difference to the results that follow.

        We chose the investments and parental behaviors listed above because they are inputs

into children’s health, rather than health outcomes. Outcomes, although interesting in their own

right, may be the driven by earlier events in a child’s life, that are in turn correlated with current

family structure. For example, a finding that children of step parents are more likely to have

accidental injuries could be due to less careful parenting by step parents. However, it could also

be that children whose parents have divorced and remarried develop behaviors that make them

more accident-prone. Similar arguments can be made for children’s behavioral outcomes or their

educational performance.

        The descriptive statistics in the top panel of Table 1 indicate that there are substantial

differences in health investments across the different family types. Overall, pairs of adoptive

parents appear to do the best, and are even more likely to invest in their children than are pairs of

birth parents. Adoptive parents are more likely than birth parents to have taken the child to a

routine doctor visit (.65 versus .61) and a dentist visit (.73 versus .64) in the last year, and are

less likely to smoke at home (.24 versus .36). Although the sample of foster children is small,


                                                   8
this group also appears to fare well. A comparison of step parent families with birth parent

families reveals differences in some, although not all, of the health investment measures.

Children in families with step fathers are less likely to have routine doctor’s visits, usual places

for medical care, to regularly wear seatbelts, and to have health insurance coverage. They are

more likely to be exposed to cigarette smoke at home. The same patterns appear for children in

families with step mothers, and for several of the measures, investments are even less likely in

step mother families than in step father families.

       There are also large differences across family types in other household characteristics,

such as income, education, and the age of the child. It is possible that these differences account

for the different patterns in investments noted above. For example, families with pairs of

adoptive parents have, on average, higher family incomes, smaller family sizes, and more

parental education than do other families. Considering that, in addition, adoptive parents have

been screened as “good parents” prior to adopting, it is hardly surprising that the levels of

investments among these families is high. Foster families, although with lower levels of income

and education, are also typically screened, trained, and monitored.

       The characteristics of step families differ in small but potentially important ways from

those of birth parent families. Income and education levels are slightly lower in step families,

especially in those with a step father. In addition, children in step families are on average older

than those who live with their birth parents. If health investments vary systematically with the

age of the child (so that, for example, older children have less frequent routine doctor’s visits),

then the differences in investment behavior shown in the top part of the table could simply

reflect differences in children’s ages. In the results that follow, it will be important to control for


                                                   9
differences in characteristics of children and their that may influence health investments.



3. Results

Our analysis of the effect of family structure on health outcomes begins in Table 2, where we

regress the probability of investment in child health for children aged 0 to 16 years old on

variables identifying family structure and measures of household socioeconomic status. We

include indicator variables for all of the following: child’s age, household income (28

categories), household size (11 categories, one for each household size); and MSA status (4

categories). We also control for parents’ ages and educations, and indicators of parents’ work

status. Work status is included both to give us a richer picture of household finances, and to

control for parents’ other time commitments. We also include mother’s age at the child’s birth as

a measure of a child’s vulnerability, and indicators that the child is female and that the child is

white. We observe in these data that when the father figure is the child’s health respondent, the

child is less likely to be reported as suffering from any physical ailments. In part we believe this

reflects the fact that women are the primary health care givers and investors, and the fathers may

not know as much about child’s health or health investments. For this reason, we include a

control indicating the father figure is the child’s health respondent. (Results do not change when

we remove all children whose father figures were their health respondents.) In an attempt to

control for respondent effects more generally, we include controls for child health respondent’s

sex, age and education, and an indicator of his or her work status.

       Our focus will be primarily on the indicators identifying family structure—that the child

is living with a step mother, an adoptive mother, a step father, an adoptive father, or foster


                                                 10
parents. The omitted categories throughout will be ‘birth mother’ and ‘birth father,’ so that the

coefficients on family structure answer the question: holding constant all of the household

income and socioeconomic characteristics discussed above, relative to living with his or her birth

mother, how does living with (say) an adoptive mother affect the probability that the child has

had a routine doctor’s visit in the past year.

       In each of our tables, column (a) presents results in which responses to questions on

investments in child health have been coded as follows. If the respondent answers affirmatively

to the question posed, then the response is coded as a “1.” Otherwise, the response is coded as a

“0.” In contrast, in column (b) for each health investment, an affirmative response is coded as a

“1,” a negative response is coded as a “0” and answers in which the respondent “doesn’t know”

or “refuses to say” is set as a missing value. For some health investments, that the respondent

does not know the answer to the question has information value. For example, if the respondent

does not know whether the child has been to the dentist in the past year, this may signal

something about the attention the child receives. We will find small but important differences in

the results when the “don’t know” answers are treated as a negative response, relative to when

they are treated as missing. Results in columns marked (b) are restricted to the sub-sample for

which there are no missing values for any of the dependent variables.



3.1 Investments in Child Health and Well Being

       Results for routine doctors’ visits in the past year are presented in the first two columns

of Table 2. We find that children with adoptive mothers and those with foster parents are

significantly more likely to have been to the doctor than are children who reside with their birth


                                                 11
mothers, and that for foster children this result is quite large. (This may reflect a legal duty that

foster parents must discharge.) Children with step mothers are significantly less likely to have

been reported as visiting the doctor—about 8 percent less likely—and much of this appears to be

due to the fact that the respondent did not know whether the child had seen a doctor for a routine

visit. (We examine below why this might be the case.)

       For this health investment, as well as the others presented in Table 2, the education of the

mother figure in the household is a much larger and more significant determinant of health

investment than is father’s education. In all of these investments, the impact of an additional year

of mother’s education is five to ten times as large as that of additional year of education of the

father figure. Again, this may be because mothers are generally the health care investors in the

household.

       Results for dental visits are presented in columns 3 and 4. The most prominent effect is

for step mothers and, again, it appears that for children being raised by a step mother, the child

health respondent is significantly less likely to know whether the child has been to the dentist.

White children are significantly more likely to have been to the dentist, and girls are more likely

than boys.

        Results in columns 5 and 6 present results on whether children have a place for usual

medical care. Evidence from Lutz (1990) suggests that such children are at risk for not being up

to date on their immunizations. Children living with step mothers are significantly less likely to

have a place for usual medical care. Similarly, children living with step mothers are significantly

less likely to have a usual place for sick care. Children living with step fathers are also

disadvantaged in having a place for usual or sick care, relative to those living with birth fathers,


                                                  12
although the effects are only half as large as those found for step mothers.

       Results in Table 2, consistent with the cross-tabulations presented in Section 2, show that

children living with step mothers are disadvantaged in health investments, even after controlling

for parents’ age, education and household income. We find that these children are also at risk in

some important household health behaviors, results for which are presented in Table 3. Children

living with step mothers are significantly less likely to wear a seatbelt “most or all of the time.”

It is also more likely that someone in the child’s household smokes, when a child is living with a

step mother than when living with a birth mother. That the child is less likely to have a place for

routine medical care (results reported in Table 2) is not due to lack of health insurance: children

with step mothers are no less likely than those living with birth mothers to be reported as

covered by medical insurance. The children of step fathers, in contrast, are more likely to be

without health insurance coverage or for the respondent to not know if the child is covered. We

do not know if this means that step fathers are less willing to invest in health insurance for their

step children, or if step father’s job-related health insurance policies do not extend to step

children, effectively making health insurance for these children more expensive.

       The difference in mother’s and father’s spheres of influence may be reflected in the

relative effect of their education on these outcomes. Unlike what was observed in Table 2 on

health investments, father’s education is a more important determinant in children’s seatbelt

usage, in smoking in the household, and in health insurance coverage. Mother’s education

dominates for children having a regular bedtime.




                                                 13
3.2 Contact with Birth Parents and Effects of Step and Half Siblings

This section examines how contact with birth parents and the presence of half and step siblings

mediates the relationship between step parents and health investments. There are several reasons

to think that contact with a birth parent affects health investments. First, the degree of emotional

attachment between a step child and step parent may be altered if a birth parent is in regular

contact with the child. The child development literature offers several conflicting hypotheses

about how emotional attachment will be affected by contact with a birth parent. For example,

Clingempeel and Segal (1986) discuss how regular contact with a non-custodial birth parent may

“reduce children’s fears that the step parent is a parent replacement and result in more positive

step parent-step child relationships,” but such contact at the same time may undermine the

cohesiveness of the step family.

       Second, the behavior of a step parent may be affected by the presence of an involved

birth parent. Non-custodial birth parents may monitor step parents’ behavior, and contact with a

birth parent could result in greater investments by the step parent. Finally, it is possible that the

non-custodial birth parent undertakes the health investments that we observe: the reason we find

that the respondent does not know whether the child has been to the dentist, or the reason the

child has no regular place for medical care, may be because the birth mother is responsible for

the children’s medical visits. In this case, apparent negligence on the part of step mothers may

simply reflect the fact that they do not have responsibility for these aspects of a child’s care.

       The possible effects of half or step siblings on health investments are similarly

ambiguous. Although there is little written on this topic, existing research indicates that the

presence of half or step siblings will adversely affect the relationship between a child and a step


                                                  14
parent, and that step parents display preferential treatment toward their own children. For

example, Mekos, Herington, and Reiss (1996) study differences across siblings in the type of

parenting behavior they receive (and in a set of child behavioral outcomes), and conclude that

differential treatment between siblings is “magnified when siblings differ in relatedness to the

parent” (p. 2161). However, many of the health investments and behaviors we consider fall into

the category of household “public goods,” and in this case step children could benefit from the

presence of half or step siblings. Exposure to cigarette smoke is the clearest example of a

household public good. The decision to allow smoking in a home involves comparing the cost of

not smoking with the sum of benefits over all household members. The addition of a more-

preferred birth child may count more heavily in a parent’s decision than the addition of a less-

preferred step child, so that step children with more half or step siblings (holding the total

number of children fixed) may fare better. Several of the other health investments we consider

— for example whether a child has a place for routine medical care — will have similar

properties, if there are fixed costs associated with making these investments.

       To explore these extensions, we augment the regressions run in Tables 2 and 3 with

several variables. We split the indicator for step mothers into two variables: (i) child lives with

step mother, and has “regular contact” (at least 2 or 3 visits per month) with the non-resident

birth mother, and (ii) child lives with step mother, but does not have regular contact with the

non-resident birth mother. We also break the indicator for step fathers according to whether they

report regular contact with birth fathers. We continue to include indicators for adoptive and

foster children, but do not report them in Tables 4 and 5, in order to concentrate on the step

families.


                                                 15
        We find large differences in the health investments reported for those step children who

see their non-resident birth mothers regularly and those who do not. Those children who have

regular contact with their non-resident birth mothers have health investments that are not

significantly different from children with resident birth mothers. Step children who do not have

regular contact with their birth mothers, in contrast, are significantly less likely than children

with resident birth mothers to have seen a doctor or dentist or have a place for regular or sick

care. Results for this group of step children are consistent between columns (a) and (b): that is,

the health respondent knows that the child has not seen the doctor or dentist; it isn’t simply a

matter of not knowing whether this is the case. Having regular contact with the birth mother

protects the children’s health investments.

        For children living with step fathers, we see a similar pattern. Those children who have

regular contact with their non-resident birth fathers are no more at risk of not having a place for

regular or sick care than are children with resident birth fathers. Those children without regular

contact with their birth fathers are three to five percent less likely to have a place for sick or

usual medical care. These effects are significant but, again, much smaller in magnitude than what

was observed for children living with step mothers, where the effects were on the order 15 to 20

percent less likely.

        In Tables 4 and 5 we also include interaction terms for step parents and indicators of

whether the child has step- or half-siblings in the household. If a woman has a place to take her

own children for medical care, this may spillover for her step children. Indeed, we find (row 5 of

Table 4) that, for a child living with a step mother, the presence of step or half siblings is a

significant determinant of whether the child has a place for sick care. The presence of a half-


                                                  16
sibling or step-sibling increases the probability of having a place for sick care and usual medical

care by 12 to 14 percent. We cannot reject that the presence of step- or half-siblings entirely

offsets the effect of living with a step mother when it comes to having a place for sick care. Thus

the presence of step- and half-siblings is somewhat protective for children’s health investments.

Notice, however, that although the child has a place for medical care, the child is still

significantly less likely to have been to the dentist or the doctor in the past year, if the child is

living with a step mother and does not have regular contact with his or her birth mother. Having

a place for medical care may be a public good, in that once a place has been identified, all

children are eligible to use this facility. Actual medical visits, however, take time, and are

generally thought to be private goods. For these goods, the step children are still at risk.

        The effects of contact with a non-resident birth mother on health related behaviors are

presented in Table 5. Seat belt use is less likely among children who have regular contact with

their birth mothers (a result we do not understand). Contact with a non-resident birth mother

does not change the smoking habits of a step mother and, not surprisingly, does not change the

probability that the child is living with a smoker. In the case of cigarette smoke, what is

protective for the child is the presence of step- or half-siblings. This effect is large and negative

for children living with a step mother (although not significant at usual significance levels).

Among children living with step fathers, it is those children who lack regular contact with their

birth fathers who are significantly less likely to be covered by medical insurance.3

        Overall, evidence in Tables 4 and 5 display a pattern in which the health investments


        3
        We have run the complete sets of interaction terms: step children with and with out
access to birth parent with and without step- or half-siblings in the household. The patterns,
allowing for the complete set of interactions, look like those we have presented here.

                                                   17
made in children living with a step parent, particularly those living with a step mother, are

protected by their non-resident birth parents and, to a lesser extent, by the presence of the step

parent’s own birth children. Children who have neither contact with the birth mother nor step- or

half-siblings appear to be most vulnerable.



3.3 What do we Know About Step Mothers and Step Children?

There are many possible reasons why children living with step mothers are at greater risk with

respect to health investments. Some of these explanations center on the nature of the women who

become step mothers, and others on the nature of children who become step children.

       One could develop a selection model in which women who become step mothers have

less aptitude for mothering. These women would make fewer investments in both their birth

children and their step children. A more sophisticated version of the step mother as ‘bad’ mother

story could be told by appealing to the greater difficulty blended families have in developing

norms—like children going to the dentist regularly— when the children come from different

original families. The difficulties inherent in being a stepmother may make women be less good

mothers to both their step and birth children.

       To learn more about the women who are step mothers, it would be interesting to follow

multiple children in the same households, to test whether the birth children of a woman and the

step children of that same woman received different health investments. Unfortunately in these

data that is not possible: the NHIS sampled only one child per household. However, we can look

at the outcomes of birth children who have step siblings in the household to see whether these

birth children are at risk. If step mothers are ‘bad’ mothers or if families with step and birth


                                                 18
children have a harder time negotiating, then we would expect to observe that birth children who

live with step siblings have fewer health investments than birth children who do not live with

step siblings. The last row in Tables 4 and 5 present information on birth children who are living

with step siblings. These results show that birth children living with step siblings have health

investments that are insignificantly different from birth siblings without step siblings, making

stories based on step mothers being ‘bad’ mothers untenable.4

       A second possible explanation for some of our results is that step mothers do not have the

legal right to take their step children to the doctor or dentist. Legal or other conflict with the non-

resident birth mother may make it difficult for a step mother to invest in a child.5 Our finding

that regular visits with birth mothers are protective of step children casts doubt on this idea.

However, it is still possible that birth mothers who visit only irregularly with their children exert

control over what step mothers can do. To test whether restrictions placed on the step mother by

the non-resident birth mother are responsible for the reduced investment we observe, we divide

children living with step mothers into two groups: those whose birth mothers are deceased, and

those whose birth mothers are living. Presumably, if the birth mother is deceased she can exert

no control on the step mother’s behavior. Results for these groups are presented in Table 6. In

the top panel, we compare the results when the child’s birth mother is alive to the results when

the birth mother is deceased. In the bottom panel, we compare the results when the child’s birth




       4
         This result is consistent with the findings of Case, Lin and McLanahan (2000b), who
find that controlling for mother’s fixed effect in PSID households that the birth children of the
household mother figure receive significantly more education than the step children of the
mother figure.
       5
        We are grateful to Janet Currie for this suggestion.

                                                  19
mother is alive to those when the birth mother is deceased or it is unknown whether she is alive,

or it is recorded that the child “never sees” the birth mother. In both panels, we find that the

birth mother’s permanent absence leads to fewer health investments in the child. In every case,

the health investments are reported to be lower for those whose birth mothers are dead, although

often the difference between the birth mother deceased and birth mother alive outcomes are

insignificantly different from one another. These results do not support the hypothesis that the

birth mother is prohibiting the step mother from taking a child to the doctor.

       An alternative explanation for the lower health investments observed for children living

with step mothers is that these children are more difficult to negotiate with, and that the step

mothers cannot force them to go to the dentist, or to wear a seat belt. Children who have

weathered a divorce may have more behavioral problems than children who have not. In

addition, that a child lives with a step mother indicates the child’s birth father was granted

custody after a divorce (except in those cases in which the birth mother has died). Paternal

custody is relatively unusual, and it could signal that the child had a birth mother who was

unattached to the child or was an unusually poor parent, possibly creating a more severely

scarred child. Or, it could signal that the child is exceptionally difficult, and was for that reason

put in the father’s custody. Whatever the mechanism, a finding that the children of step mothers

have more behavioral problems may provide clues as to why these children receive fewer health

investments.

       We explore this explanation of our results by examining whether children with step

mothers display worse behavioral outcomes than children in other living arrangements. Table 7

presents results of regressions of indicators for whether a child “frequently” displays a given


                                                  20
behavior, regressed on the set of socioeconomic characteristics and measures of family structure

used in the regressions reported above. The sample is restricted to children aged 6 or older, since

behavioral outcomes were not coded for younger children. We find marked differences between

children with either step mothers or step fathers and children who live with both birth parents.

Step children are more likely be reported to feel worthless, be unhappy, sad, or depressed, or to

be withdrawn. They are also more likely to be reported to display impulsive or restless behavior

(“can’t concentrate”, “acts without thinking”, and “one track mind”). With only cross-sectional

data, we cannot determine whether these behaviors stem from the events surrounding the divorce

of the birth parents (or death of a birth parent), or are the direct result of step parenting.

However, with the exception of a few behaviors (“cheats/tells lies,” and “withdrawn”), children

with step mothers do not have worse behaviors than do children with step fathers.

        In addition, the children of step fathers, but not step mothers, are more likely to display

the kinds of behaviors that might make them more difficult to negotiate with. For example,

children with step fathers are significantly more likely to be reported to argue too much, be

disobedient at home and school, misbehave, have trouble getting along with teachers, be sullen,

stubborn or irritable, and to have strong tempers. Lower health investments in children with step

mothers cannot be attributed to more belligerent behavior by these children.

        The results in Tables 4 through 7 lead us to dismiss any simple explanation of health

investments being determined by women who are inadequate mothers—their own children

receive adequate health care—or by children who are more troubled than those who live with

birth mothers and step fathers.




                                                   21
3.4 Single and Two Parent Families

Thus far we have focused on two-parent households in which the relationship between the child

and both parent figures was clear. We complete this section by adding back in information from

single parent households, to see how health investments in single and two parent households

compare. Table 9 presents results from regressions that control for the same set of SES and

household and respondent characteristics discussed above, and has the following controls for

household structure: child lives with two adoptive parents, two foster parents, a birth mother and

adoptive father, a birth mother and step father, a step mother and birth father, a birth mother

only, a birth father only, and adoptive mother only. We dropped the following rare cases:

adoptive fathers with no mother figure present (3 cases); step fathers with no mother figure

present (2 cases); step mothers with no father figure present (5 cases); adoptive mothers with

birth fathers (9 cases); birth mothers with foster fathers (4 cases); step mothers with step fathers

(3 cases); foster mothers with no father figure present (8 cases);. There were no cases of foster

fathers with no mother figure present. In all of the regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7, the

omitted category is the “two-birth parent” household.

       Children raised by two adoptive parents (row 1 of Tables 9 and 10) have health

investments and behaviors that are not significantly different from those observed in two-birth

parent households. Children raised by two foster parents (row 2) are significantly more likely to

have been to the doctor in the past year, and are significantly more likely to have a regular bed

time. They are also significantly more like to be living with a cigarette smoker. Those children

living with a birth mother and step father are also significantly more likely to be living with a

smoker.


                                                 22
        Children living with a step mother and birth father are less likely to have been to the

doctor, or to have a place for usual medical care or sick care, and are significantly more likely to

be living with a cigarette smoker. The same is true for children living with their birth father only.

There is no behavior examined here for which the outcome for children with birth fathers and

step mothers is significantly different from that for birth fathers living alone. (F-tests for this

hypothesis are provided in row 11 of these tables.)



4. The role of mothers in health investments

The results presented in Section 3 suggest that health investments are made disproportionately

by a child’s mother, and that on this dimension a step mother is not an adequate substitute for a

birth mother. There are two important questions here. First, why do mothers invest more than

fathers in children’s health? Second, why do step mothers invest less than birth mothers?

        Mothers’ primacy in children’s health investments may be primarily the result of the

magnification of small differences in parental responses. Blaffer Hrdy reports on a study

(Stallings et al. 1997) in which new parents listened in a laboratory to two recordings, one of a

one-day old baby crying because he or she was hungry. In the other, a baby was crying during

his circumcision. The parents’ reactions were monitored, and their stress levels measured

through their release of cortisol, testosterone and prolactin. The parents responded equally

quickly to the “jagged and alarming cries” of the child being circumcised. However, the sound of

the hungry baby’s cry was responded to more quickly by the woman. Although it is not possible

to know whether this response is learned or innate, it may well be the latter. Small differences in

responses may be “exaggerated by life experiences and then blown out of all proportion by


                                                  23
cultural customs and norms.” [Blaffer Hrdy, p. 212]

       Sociobiologists also argue that men face trade-offs that differ in important ways from

those faced by women. Men must decide how much effort to expend caring for children who

may or may not be their children, and how much effort to expend mating with additional

females. Unlike maternity, paternity is (or was) difficult to prove. Because women bear most of

the costs of pregnancy, a mother’s best response may weight more heavily the survival of each

child, while a father’s best response may include siring additional children. Consonant with the

discussion by Becker (1981), this may lead to an equilibrium where children’s health

investments are made in the mother’s sphere of influence.

       Step mothers’ investments in step children’s health is consistent with Hamilton’s Rule.

Hamilton (1964 a,b) hypothesizes that altruistic behavior between any two individuals will

depend upon the degree of genetic ‘relatedness’ between them. Blaffer Hrdy (1999) refers to

Hamilton’s rule as “a formally organized metaphor for how natural selection shaped the

economy of maternal emotions.”[p. 364] Blaffer Hrdy, who at times discusses Hamilton’s rule

as if ‘relatedness’ were simply genetically based, and at times as if it were based on a broader

notion of emotional connectedness, writes:

       As in all cooperative breeders, human animals have an internalized emotional
       calculus predisposing them to protect, care for, and allocate resources to individuals
       they classify as kin, their genetic relatives, or those they think of as kin. Familiarity
       from an early age would be the most common cue, affection and sympathy the
       immediate conscious motivations. Whenever costs of helping are less than the
       benefits to their “kin,” alloparents [non-birth parental helpers] help. [p.271]


Step mothers may invest less in step children because the “affection and sympathy” needed to

motivate them to act are not present. Apparently, “affection and sympathy” are available to


                                                  24
foster and adoptive parents. Indeed these parents may have been selected for these qualities.6

       Should we be concerned about lower health investments among children with step

mothers? It is true that a relatively small fraction of children with divorced parents are “at risk”

of being raised by step mothers. Data from 19 states compiled by the National Center for Health

Statistics in 1990 indicate that in divorces involving children, mothers received sole custody

72% of the time, fathers were awarded sole custody 9% of the time, and joint physical custody

was awarded 16% of the time (US Department of Health and Human Services, 1995.) We have

little information on whether granting fathers sole custody has become more common over the

past several decades. There was a clear shift in state custody laws in the 1970's and 1980's, with

almost all states abandoning the “tender years” doctrine—which asserted that mothers are the

best caretakers of children except in unusual cases—in favor of a standard in which custody is

decided in the “best interests of the child.”7 Despite these changes in custody laws, evidence

from scattered states indicates that divorced fathers are not more likely to receive custody at the

time of the divorce than in the past (Bahr et. al., 1994, Santilli and Roberts, 1990.)

       Although divorced fathers may not be more likely to be awarded custody, the overall

increase in the prevalence of divorce means that there has been a dramatic increase in the

fraction of children who live with their fathers only. Figure 1 indicates that this fraction rose




       6
        We recognize that once Blaffer Hrdy definition of ‘relatedness’ is adopted, it is no
longer useful for hypothesis testing: anyone who invests does so because their coefficient of
relatedness is large enough, given the costs and benefits of investment.
       7
        For example, Bahr et. al (1994) write that, for fifty years prior to 1969, “Utah law
specified that custody of minor children be given to the mother unless it was shown that she was
an immoral or otherwise incompetent person.” The presumption that the mother is the best
caretaker was loosened and then finally abandoned in 1977.

                                                 25
from little more than 1% in 1960, to over 4% in 1998. The fraction of children living with their

mothers only has increased as well, but at a somewhat slower rate: the ratio of children living

with mothers only to fathers only declined from 7.05 in 1960 to 5.29 in 1998. These figures do

not tell us the change in the fraction of children being raised by step mothers. However, a large

number of children living with fathers only are likely to gain step mothers when their fathers

remarry—placing them at a greater risk of receiving lower health investments than if they were

in the custody of their birth mothers.

       Although our results indicate that children in step mother households receive fewer

investments in their health, they do not imply that mothers should always be granted custody of

children, or that the “tender years” doctrine should be re-established. There are many dimensions

to children’s well-being in addition to health. If custody decisions are actually made in the best

interests of children, then perhaps the reduced health investments in children in households with

step mothers are offset by benefits that we do not observe. We also know little about the long-

term effects of having lower health investments in the domains studied in this paper. These are

important areas for future research. However, our findings indicate that research on children’s

well-being should pay closer attention to the relationships between children and the parent-

figures in their households. It is common to compare differences in investments in and outcomes

of children in single-parent and two-parent families. However, our finding that children with step

mothers fare worse, and that children who live with a father alone fare no differently than

children with a father and step-mother, indicate that the focus on the number of parents in a

family, rather than the kind of parents in a family, is misplaced.




                                                 26
References

Bahr, Stephen J., Jerry D. Howe, Meggin Morrill Mann, and Matthew S. Bahr. 1994. “Trends in
       Child Custody Awards: Has the Removal of Maternal Preference Made a Difference?”
       Family Law Quarterly, Summer.

Becker, Gary S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

Black, M.M., H.Dubowitz, and R. Starr. 1999. “African American Fathers in Low Income,
       Urban Families: Development Behavior and Home Environment of Their Three-Year-
       Old Children.” Child Development, 70(4). 967-78.

Blaffer Hrdy, Sarah. 1999. Mother Nature, A History of Mothers, Infants and Natural Selection.
        New York: Pantheon Books.

Beller, Andrea H. and Seung Sin Chung. 1992. “Family Structure and Educational Attainment of
        Children: Effects of Remarriage,” Journal of Population Economics 5(1). 39-59.

Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin and Sara McLanahan. 1999. “Household Resource Allocation in
       Stepfamilies: Darwin Reflects on the Plight of Cinderella,” American Economic Review
       Papers and Proceedings 89(2). 234-238.

Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin and Sara McLanahan. 2000a. “How Hungry is the Selfish Gene?” NBER
       Working Paper No. 7401. (Forthcoming, Economic Journal, October 2000).

Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin and Sara McLanahan. 2000b. “Educational Attainment in Blended
       Families.” mimeo, Princeton University.

Cherlin, Andrew and Frank Furstenberg. 1994. “Step families in the United States: A
       Reconsideration.” pp. 359-381 in J. Blake and J. Hagen (eds.), Annual Review of
       Sociology. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.

Clingempeel, W. Glenn and Sion Segal. 1986. “Stepparent-Stepchild Relationships and the
      Psychological Adjustment of Children in Stepmother and Stepfather Families.” Child
      Development, 57: 474-484.

Daly, Martin and Margo Wilson. 1987. “The Darwinian Psychology of Discriminative Parental
       Solicitude.” Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 35, 91-144.

Daly, Martin and Margo Wilson. 1998. The Truth About Cinderella, A Darwinian View of
       Parental Love. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Dubowitz, H., M. Black, M. Kerr, R.H. Starr and D. Harrington. 2000. “Fathers and Child
     Neglect.” Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 15492). 135-41.

                                              27
Duncan, Greg and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (eds.). 1996. The Consequences of Growing Up Poor.
      Cambridge MA.: Harvard University Press.

Furstenberg, Frank F. Jr. 1987. “The New Extended Family: The Experience of Parents and
       Children After Remarriage” in Kay Palsey and Marilyn Ihinger-Tallman (eds.),
       Remarriage and Stepparenting: Current Research and Theory. New York: Guilford
       Press.

Hamilton, W.D. 1964a. “The Genetical Evolution of Social Biology.” Journal of Theoretical
       Biology 7, 1-16.

Hamilton, W.D. 1964b. “The Genetical Evolution of Social Biology.” Journal of Theoretical
       Biology 7, 17-52.

Hetherington, E. Mavis and Margaret Bridges, and Glendessa M. Insabella. 1998. “What
       Matters? What Does Not? Five Perspectives on the Association Between Marital
       Transitions and Children’s Adjustment.” American Psychologist 53, 2, 167-184.

Lutz, Mary E. 1990. “The Effect of Family Structure and Regular Places of Care on Preventive
       Health Care for Children,” Health Values 14, 1, 38-45.

McLanahan, Sara and Gary Sandefur. 1994. Growing Up with a Single Parent: What Hurts,
     What Helps , Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

Mekos, Debra, E. Mavis Hetherington and David Reiss. 1996. “Sibling differences in Problem
      Behavior and Parental Treatment in Nondivorced and Remarried Families.” Child
      Development. 67: 2148-2165.

National Research Council. 1993. Understanding Child Abuse and Neglect. Washington:
       National Academy Press.

Santilli, Laura E. and Michael C. Roberts. 1990. “Custody Decisions in Alabama Before and
        After the Abolition of the Tender Years Doctrine.” Law and Human Behavior, 14 (April).
        123-57.

Stallings, J.F., A.S. Fleming, C.M.Worthman, M.Steiner, C.Corter and M.Coote. 1997.
        “Mother/Father Differences in Response to Infant Crying (abstract),” American Journal
         of Physical Anthropology (supplement) 24, 217.

Stevenson, Michael and Kathryn Black. 1995. How Divorce Affects Offspring. Madison, WI:
       Brown and benchmark.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1998. “Marital Status and Living Arrangements.” Series P20-514.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1995. Monthly Vital Statistics Report, Vol. 43,
No. 9 (5).

                                              28
                                 Table 1. Sample Means of Investment Variables and Family Characteristics
                                        National Health Interview Survey Child Health Supplement 1988
                                              Birth Mother    Birth Mother    Step Mother    Birth Mother     Adoptive      AdoptveMother       Foster
                                              Birth Father    Step Father     Birth Father    Adoptive         Mother       AdoptveFather       Parents
                                                                                                Father       Birth Father

 Observations                                     9,023           1,022            162            85              9               207              33

 Observations with child age >1 year              7,454           1,006            161            84              9               187              31

 Routine doctor visit in last year (age >1)        .61             .53             .46            .45            .68               .65            .94
 Dentist visit in last year (age >1)               .64             .66             .63            .82            1.0               .73            .62
 Has usual bed time (age >1)                       .85             .84             .89            .84            1.0               .89            .92
 Has place for routine medical care                .91             .83             .79            .79            .91               .92            .90
 Has place for sick care                           .94             .88             .88            .88            .91               .93            .88
 Wears a seat belt almost all the time             .74             .63             .52            .57            .37               .80            .67
 Household members smoke in the home               .36             .56             .54            .48            .22               .24            .48
 Covered by medical insurance                      .86             .79             .84            .86            .82               .92            .93

 Family income ($)                               33,772          30,474           33,512        31,089         33,196            40,087         35,608
 Age of child                                      7.3            10.4             11.5          11.8           11.7               7.9            7.4
 Child is white                                    .85             .82              .90           .92            .61               .80            .45
 Number of household members                       3.6             3.7              4.0           3.4            5.2               3.3            5.4
 Respondent is the father                          .11             .08              .53           .13            .08               .09            .13
 Age of mother                                    34.1            33.3             34.0          34.4           35.5              41.0           44.2
 Years of education of mother                     12.8            12.1             12.6          12.8           13.3              13.4           11.9
 Mother works                                      .52             .65              .63           .51            .18               .55            .27
 Age of father                                    36.8            35.7             37.4          36.8           43.5              42.6           48.8
 Years of education of father                     13.1            12.4             12.5          12.7           12.4              13.8           10.8
 Father works                                      .94             .93              .95           .93            1.0               .93            .82

Note: Family income is constructed by setting income equal to the midpoint of the 26 possible income categories. Families with income of $50,000 or more
were assigned an income of $57,500. Some families have missing values for the income category. The number of observations used to compute average family
income was (in order of the columns): 8103, 909, 152, 76, 7, 185, and 27. Means are weighted using survey-provided weights.




                                                                             29
                        Table 2. Investments in Child Health and Well Being

                                            Dependent Variables
                                         [variable means in brackets]
                            Routine Doctor       Dentist Visit in       Child has Place   Child has Place
                           Visit in Past Year        Past Year            For Usual        for Sick Care
                           For child age>1 yr   For child age>1 yr       Medical Care

                           [.625]     [.635]    [.650]       [.665]     [.910]   [.925]   [.934]    [.946]

Explanatory Variables        (a)        (b)       (a)         (b)        (a)       (b)     (a)       (b)
[means in brackets]

Adoptive mother             .099       .120      .006        –.005       .124     .125     .011      .037
[.020]                     (.058)     (.059)    (.049)       (.050)     (.034)   (.032)   (.030)    (.028)

Step mother                !.084      –.052     !.082        –.055      –.086    –.075    –.042     –.041
[.015]                     (.038)     (.041)    (.033)       (.034)     (.023)   (.023)   (.020)    (.020)

Adoptive father            !.063      –.069      .035         .040      -.107    –.096    –.018     –.031
[.028]                     (.049)     (.050)    (.042)       (.042)     (.029)   (.028)   (.026)    (.024)

Step father                !.017      –.009     !.027        –.028      –.034    –.030    –.029     –.023
[.097]                     (.016)     (.017)    (.014)       (.014)     (.010)   (.009)   (.009)    (.008)

Foster parents              .303       .357      .059         .146       .026     .027     .057      .073
[.003]                     (.084)     (.093)    (.072)       (.079)     (.049)   (.050)   (.043)    (.043)

White                      !.026      –.028      .071         .077       .008     .009     .001     –.001
[.842]                     (.014)     (.015)    (.012)       (.013)     (.008)   (.007)   (.007)    (.006)

Female                     !.006      –.001      .020         .021       .008     .009     .001      .001
[.487]                     (.010)     (.010)    (.008)       (.009)     (.005)   (.005)   (.005)    (.004)

Mother<20 at Child’s        .031       .026     !.012        –.009      –.020    –.024     .003      .002
birth [.104]               (.019)     (.019)    (.016)       (.016)     (.011)   (.010)   (.009)    (.009)

Mother’s education          .009       .011      .021         .023       .008     .011     .006      .006
[12.84]                    (.006)     (.006)    (.005)       (.005)     (.003)   (.003)   (.003)    (.003)

Father’s education         !.001      –.002      .007         .008       .001     .001     .001      .001
[13.09]                    (.002)     (.003)    (.002)       (.002)     (.001)   (.001)   (.001)    (.001)

Father is respondent on    !.001       .008     !.006        –.002      –.024    –.024    –.040     –.037
Child’s health [.120]      (.018)     (.019)    (.016)       (.016)     (.010)   (.010)   (.009)    (.008)

Number of Obs               8932       8420      8932        8420       10541     9971    10541     9971




                                                        30
Notes on Table 2.

Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.

For each outcome, the first column (a) reports results for the full sample, with answers coded: behavior =1 if
respondent says this is true for the child, and =0 otherwise. That is, “don’t know” and “refused” and “no” are coded
as zeros. The second column (b) reports results for which “don’t know” and “refused” are set equal to missing. The
results here are for the sub-sample for which none of the dependent variables in Table 2 and 3 were answered as
“don’t know” or “refused.”

The full sample is restricted to children for whom both a “mother figure” and “father figure” are reported being
present in the household, and for whom the relationships between the child and both parent figures are known.
Sample is restricted to children aged 0-16 years of age, with the following exceptions: the child sample for doctors
and dentists visits is restricted to children aged 2 and above. We also remove a small number of “rare” household
structures: children living with birth mothers and foster fathers (4 cases); step mothers and adoptive fathers (1 case);
step mothers and step fathers (3 cases); and adoptive mothers and step fathers (7 cases). Results do not change when
we keep these cases in our sample. However, because these cases were rare, we wanted to ensure that our results
were not being driven by them. 475 cases were dropped because the child health respondent was reported to be zero
or less than 12 years old.

All regressions include indicators for child’s age, for household income (28 categories, of which one is omitted), for
household size (11 categories, of which one is omitted), and for MSA status (MSA-Central city, MSA-non-Central
city, non-MSA, non-farm); child health respondent’s age, education and work status; parents’ ages and indicators of
parents work status; and a constant term. Omitted categories for parental types are “birth mother” and “birth father.”




                                                          31
                    Table 3. Behaviors Influencing Child Health and Well Being

                                                Dependent Variables
                                             [variable means in brackets]
                               Child wears a           Someone in           Child has a regular     Child is covered
                             seatbelt all or most   household smokes             bedtime           by health insurance
                                 of the time                                For child age>1 yr         or medicaid

                              [.743]     [.753]     [.391]       [.397]      [.840]     [.855]      [.860]     [.873]

 Explanatory Variables         (a)         (b)        (a)         (b)         (a)        (b)         (a)        (b)
 [means in brackets]

 Adoptive mother               .033       .017      !.096        –.118       .080        .064      –.012      –.011
 [.020]                       (.049)     (.050)     (.057)       (.059)     (.044)      (.044)     (.040)     (.040)

 Step mother                  !.081      –.060       .146         .108       .039        .038      –.020       .013
 [.015]                       (.033)     (.035)     (.038)       (.041)     (.029)      (.031)     (.027)     (.028)

 Adoptive father               .005       .015       .032         .049      –.026       –.020       .037       .049
 [.028]                       (.042)     (.043)     (.049)       (.050)     (.038)      (.037)     (.034)     (.034)

 Step father                  !.015      –.018       .142         .144       .014        .024      –.030      –.017
 [.097]                       (.014)     (.014)     (.016)       (.017)     (.013)      (.013)     (.011)     (.011)

 Foster parents                .088       .030       .146         .145       .183        .222       .064       .055
 [.003]                       (.071)     (.078)     (.082)       (.091)     (.065)      (.069)     (.058)     (.061)

 White                         .057       .058       .040         .041       .062        .064      –.011      –.009
 [.842]                       (.011)     (.011)     (.013)       (.013)     (.011)      (.011)     (.009)     (.009)

 Female                        .024       .023       .002         .002       .007        .007      –.012      –.010
 [.488]                       (.008)     (.008)     (.009)       (.009)     (.008)      (.008)     (.006)     (.006)

 Mother<20 at Child’s         !.054      –.056       .025         .026      –.028       –.028      –.023      –.024
 birth [.104]                 (.016)     (.016)     (.018)       (.018)     (.015)      (.014)     (.012)     (.012)

 Mother’s education            .010       .005      !.005        –.003       .014        .013        .004      .005
 [12.84]                      (.005)     (.005)     (.005)       (.006)     (.004)      (.005)      (.004)    (.004)

 Father’s education            .018       .017      !.029        –.030       .004        .005        .010      .009
 [13.09]                      (.002)     (.002)     (.002)       (.002)     (.002)      (.002)      (.002)    (.002)

 Father is respondent on      !.008      –.007      !.017        –.011      –.024       –.013       –.025     –.022
 Child’s health [.120]        (.014)     (.015)     (.017)       (.018)     (.014)      (.014)      (.012)    (.012)

 Number of Obs                10541       9971      10451        9971        8932       8420       10541       9971

Notes on Table 3.
See notes to Table 2 for information about the sample.
Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.




                                                            32
         Table 4. Investments in Child Health, Controlling for Access to Birth Parents

                                                     Dependent Variables
                                            Doctor Routine          Dentist Routine   Child has Place   Child has Place
                                             Visit in Past           Visit in Past      For Usual        for Sick Care
                                             Year (age>1)            Year (age>1)      Medical Care

 Explanatory Variables                       (a)         (b)         (a)      (b)      (a)      (b)      (a)      (b)
 [means in brackets]
 Step mother, child does not have regular   !.120       !.113       !.113    !.090    !.168    !.179    !.139    !.163
 contact with birth mother [.010]           (.055)      (.061)      (.047)   (.051)   (.033)   (.034)   (.029)   (.029)

 Step mother, child has regular contact     !.005        .013       !.092    !.079    !.100    !.050    !.037     .019
 with birth mother [.005]                   (.076)      (.082)      (.065)   (.069)   (.045)   (.048)   (.040)   (.038)

 Step father, child does not have regular   !.005       !.002        .001     .002    !.045    !.036    !.035    !.032
 contact with birth father [.079]           (.022)      (.022)      (.019)   (.019)   (.013)   (.012)   (.011)   (.011)

 Step father, child has regular contact      .040        .042       !.022    !.020     .009     .006     .018     .015
 with birth father [.018]                   (.036)      (.037)      (.031)   (.031)   (.021)   (.020)   (.019)   (.018)

 Step mother, child has half- or step-       .121        .181       !.107    !.066     .100     .108     .192     .170
 siblings in the household [.007]           (.143)      (.149)      (.123)   (.126)   (.086)   (.082)   (.075)   (.071)

 Step father, child has half- or step-      !.125       !.139        .074     .050     .052     .035    !.043    !.026
 siblings in the household [.035]           (.115)      (.116)      (.098)   (.098)   (.069)   (.064)   (.060)   (.055)

 Birth mother, child has step siblings in    .065        .101       !.138    !.114    !.029    !.006     .026     .026
 the household [.012]                       (.107)      (.108)      (.092)   (.091)   (.065)   (.060)   (.056)   (.051)

 F-test: {Step mother with no regular
 contact with birth mother} = {Step          2.11        2.17        0.09     0.02     2.05     7.47     6.06    19.97
 mother with reg contact birth mother}      (.146)      (.141)      (.758)   (.876)   (.152)   (.006)   (.014)   (.000)
 (p-value)

 Number of Obs                              8932        8420        8932     8420     10541    9971     10541    9971

Notes on Table 4.

Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.
See notes to Table 1 for information on the sample.
“Regular” contact with a birth parent refers here to respondent reporting that child sees the birth parent at least two
or three times a month.

All regressions include indicators that child is adoptive child of the mother figure, dichotomized by whether the
child has regular contact with birth mother; indicators that child is adoptive child of the father figure, dichotomized
by whether the child has regular contact with birth father; an indicator that the child is a foster child of both the
mother and father figure in the household; indicators that child is adoptive child of mother figure or father figure or
foster child, interacted with whether the child has step or half siblings in the household; indicators for child’s age,
for household income (28 categories, of which one is omitted), for household size (11 categories, of which one is
omitted), and for MSA status (MSA-Central city, MSA-non-Central city, non-MSA, non-farm); child health
respondent’s age, education and work status; parents’ ages; indicators of parents work status; and a constant term.
Omitted categories for parental types are “birth mother” and “birth father.”




                                                               33
    Table 5. Behaviors Influencing Child Health, Controlling for Access to Birth Parents
                                                     Dependent Variables
                                             Child wears a            Someone in        Child has a     Child covered by
                                             seatbelt all or           household      regular bedtime   health insurance
                                            most of the time            smokes        Child age>1 yr      or medicaid


 Explanatory Variables                       (a)         (b)         (a)      (b)      (a)       (b)     (a)       (b)
 [means in brackets]
 Step mother, child does not have regular    .001        .013        .119     .053     .032     .011    !.050     !.013
 contact with birth mother [.010]           (.048)      (.052)      (.055)   (.061)   (.043)   (.045)   (.039)    (.041)

 Step mother, child has regular contact     !.141       !.122        .145     .136    !.031    !.043     .020      .072
 with birth mother [.005]                   (.061)      (.069)      (.075)   (.081)   (.059)   (.061)   (.053)    (.055)

 Step father, child does not have regular   !.015       !.020        .158     .163     .019     .030    !.043     !.029
 contact with birth father [.079]           (.019)      (.019)      (.022)   (.022)   (.017)   (.017)   (.015)    (.015)

 Step father, child has regular contact     !.026       !.037        .138     .154     .043     .053     .039      .047
 with birth father [.018]                   (.031)      (.032)      (.036)   (.037)   (.027)   (.027)   (.025)    (.025)

 Step mother, child has half- or step-      !.054       !.024       !.209    !.225     .072     .097    !.071     !.102
 siblings in the household [.007]           (.124)      (.128)      (.143)   (.149)   (.110)   (.111)   (.101)    (.100)

 Step father, child has half- or step-       .039        .040        .042     .049    !.006    !.022     .069      .058
 siblings in the household [.035]           (.100)      (.100)      (.115)   (.116)   (.088)   (.086)   (.081)    (.078)

 Birth mother, child has step siblings in   !.052       !.034       !.047    !.035    !.016    !.005    !.091     !.084
 the household [.012]                       (.093)      (.093)      (.107)   (.108)   (.083)   (.080)   (.075)    (.073)

 F-test: {Step mother with no regular        4.30        3.40        0.11     0.93     1.07     0.73     1.59      2.17
 contact with birth mother} = {Step         (.038)      (.065)      (.736)   (.336)   (.301)   (.393)   (.208)    (.141)
 mother with reg contact birth mother}
 (p-value)

 Number of Obs                              10541       9971        10541    9971     8932      8420    10541     9971

Notes on Table 5.
Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.
See notes to Table 2 for information on the sample.
“Regular” contact with a birth parent refers here to respondent reporting that child sees the birth parent at least two
or three times a month.


All regressions include indicators that child is adoptive child of the mother figure, dichotomized by whether the
child has regular contact with birth mother; indicators that child is adoptive child of the father figure, dichotomized
by whether the child has regular contact with birth father; an indicator that the child is a foster child of both the
mother and father figure in the household; indicators that child is adoptive child of mother figure or father figure or
foster child, interacted with whether the child has step or half siblings in the household; indicators for child’s age,
for household income (28 categories, of which one is omitted), for household size (11 categories, of which one is
omitted), and for MSA status (MSA-Central city, MSA-non-Central city, non-MSA, non-farm); child health
respondent’s age, education and work status; parents’ ages; indicators of parents work status; and a constant term.
Omitted categories for parental types are “birth mother” and “birth father.”




                                                               34
                    Table 6. Controlling for Whether Non-resident Mother is Alive

                                                                             Dependent Variables
                                                       Doctor     Dentist      Child      Child       Child     Someone
                                                      Routine     Routine       has         has      Wears a    in Hhold
                                                      Visit in    Visit in     Place     Place for   Seatbelt    Smokes
                                                        Past        Past        For        Sick
                                                        Year        Year       Usual       Care
                                                      (age>1)     (age>1)     Medical
                                                                               Care

 Panel A: Birth Mother Deceased

 Child lives with step mother, birth mother is        !.067       !.076       !.079       !.028       !.104       .165
 alive [ .014]                                        (.040)      (.034)      (.024)      (.021)      (.034)     (.040)


 Child lives with step mother, birth mother is        !.263       !.141       !.160       !.195        .173      !.060
 deceased [.001 ]                                     (.130)      (.111)      (.078)      (.068)      (.113)     (.130)

 Panel B: Birth Mother Deceased, or Vital
 Status Unknown, or Never Present

 Child lives with step mother, birth mother is        !.054       !.074       !.076       !.029       !.076       .155
 alive [ .014]                                        (.044)      (.038)      (.027)      (.023)      (.039)     (.044)

 Child lives with step mother, birth mother is        !.160       !.103       !.114       !.075       !.092       .124
 deceased, or vital status unknown, or never          (.071)      (.061)      (.043)      (037)       (.062)     (.071)
 present [ .002]

 Number of Obs                                         8932        8932       10541       10541      10541       10541

Notes on Table 6.

Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.
See notes to Table 1 for information on the sample.
In Panel A, birth mother is deceased =1 if biological mother’s vital status is listed as deceased, = 0 otherwise.
         birth mother is alive = [1-deceased].
In Panel B, definition of birth mother deceased (etc) =1 if child reported to never see birth mother, or birth mother
deceased, or it is unknown whether birth mother is deceased, or it is “ unknown, or answer refused, or no answer” to
the question of how often the child sees his birth mother.
         Birth mother is alive = [1-deceased(etc)].

All regressions include indicators that child is female, white, and born to a teenaged mother; indicators that the child
is the adoptive child of the mother figure; indicators that child is adoptive child of the father figure; an indicator that
the child is a foster child of both the mother and father figure in the household; indicators for child’s age, for
household income (28 categories, of which one is omitted), for household size (11 categories, of which one is
omitted), and for MSA status (MSA-Central city, MSA-non-Central city, non-MSA, non-farm); child health
respondent’s age, education and work status; parents’ ages, educations and work status; and a constant term.
Omitted categories for parental types are “birth mother” and “birth father.”




                                                            35
                           Table 7. Behavioral Outcomes of Children Aged 6 or more
                                                      Step mother                 Step father           F-test: step-mother=step father

 cheat/tells lies                                   .041        (.013)         .010         (.006)          5.62             (.02)

 argues too much                                    .015        (.029)         .043         (.014)         0.91              (.34)

 bullies, cruel or mean                            -.001        (.008)         .003         (.004)         0.22              (.64)

 disobedient at home                               -.012        (.012)         .021         (.006)         7.31              (.01)

 disobedient at school                              .003        (.008)         .014         (.004)         1.77              (.18)

 misbehaves                                         .008        (.013)         .016         (.006)         0.29              (.59)

 trouble getting along with children                .002        (.007)         .005         (.003)         0.15              (.70)

 trouble getting along with teachers               -.001        (.008)         .014         (.004)         3.78              (.05)

 not liked by others                                .001        (.006)         .001         (.003)         0.00              (.99)

 stubborn, sullen or irritable                      .023        (.018)         .049        (.009)          1.96              (.16)

 has strong temper                                 -.017        (.019)         .028         (.009)         5.33              (.02)

 can’t concentrate                                  .086        (.022)         .053         (.011)         2.04              (.15)

 acts without thinking                              .056        (.017)         .031         (.008)         2.10              (.15)

 one track mind                                     .056        (.014)         .042         (.007)         1.09              (.30)

 can’t sit still                                    .004        (.021)         .017         (.011)         0.33              (.56)

 high strung                                        .015        (.020)         .033         (.010)         0.74              (.39)

 fearful/anxious                                   -.008        (.016)         .010         (.008)         1.16              (.28)

 easily confused                                    .004        (.011)         .021         (.005)          2.23             (.01)

 complains about love                               .029        (.015)         .031         (.007)         0.02              (.88)

 feels worthless                                    .030        (.010)         .029         (.005)         0.01              (.92)

 unhappy, sad or depressed                          .018        (.007)         .017         (.004)         0.03              (.87)

 withdrawn                                          .045        (.007)         .013         (.003)         18.10             (.00)
Notes on Table 7. Each row represents the results from one linear probability model. The dependent variables are coded as 1 if
the child frequently displays the behavior, else 0. The columns headed by “step-mother” and “step-father” contain the
coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) for these variables. The third column is an F-test statistic and associated p-value
(in parentheses) for the hypothesis that the effect of a step-mother equals the effect of a step-father. The sample is defined as in
Table 1, and is additionally restricted to those aged 6 or more. All regressions include indicators that child is female, white, and
born to a teenaged mother; indicators that the child is the adoptive child of the mother figure; indicators that child is adoptive
child of the father figure; an indicator that the child is a foster child of both the mother and father figure in the household; and
indicator of whether the child has step- or half- siblings in the household; indicators for child’s age, for household income, for
household size, and for MSA status (MSA-Central city, MSA-non-Central city, non-MSA, non-farm); child health respondent’s
age, education and work status; parents’ ages, educations and work status; and a constant term. Omitted categories for parental
types are “birth mother” and “birth father.”




                                                                 36
               Table 8. Investments in Child Health, Single and Two-Parent Families
                                                         Dependent Variables
                                                Doctor Routine          Dentist Routine     Child has Place       Child has Place
                                                 Visit in Past           Visit in Past        For Usual            for Sick Care
                                                 Year (age>1)            Year (age>1)        Medical Care

 Explanatory Variables                           (a)         (b)         (a)      (b)        (a)        (b)        (a)        (b)
 [means in brackets]
 Two adoptive parents                            .044        .059        .033     .030       .016       .025      !.009       .003
 [.016]                                         (.035)      (.036)      (.031)   (.031)     (.021)     (.020)     (.018)     (.017)

 Two foster parents                              .294        .345        .034     .127      !.008      !.013       .015       .028
 [.002]                                         (.085)      (.094)      (.075)   (.082)     (.051)     (.052)     (.045)     (.045)

 Birth mother, Adoptive father                  !.063       !.065        .062     .061      !.115      !.092      !.017      !.023
 [.006]                                         (.051)      (.052)      (.045)   (.046)     (.032)     (.030)     (.028)     (.026)

 Birth mother, Step father                      !.018       !.009       !.029    !.032      !.046      !.041      !.033      !.027
 [.078]                                         (.017)      (.017)      (.015)   (.015)     (.010)     (.010)     (.009)     (.008)

 Step mother, Birth father                      !.086       !.058       !.087    !.062      !.110      !.103      !.074      !.078
 [.012]                                         (.041)      (.044)      (.036)   (.038)     (.025)     (.025)     (.022)     (.021)

 Birth father only                              !.072       !.068       !.082    !.099      !.062      !.084      !.064      !.078
 [.014]                                         (.047)      (.049)      (.041)   (.043)     (.028)     (.027)     (.025)     (.023)

 Birth mother only                               .001        .008        .050     .052      !.010      !.000       .008       .017
 [.185]                                         (.017)      (.018)      (.015)   (.015)     (.010)     (.009)     (.009)     (.008)

 Adoptive mother only                            .068        .058        .183     .170      !.067      !.078       .010       .001
 [.002]                                         (.108)      (.107)      (.095)   (.093)     (.065)     (.060)     (.057)     (.051)

 Child has regular contact with non-             .049        .061        .053     .058       .080       .097       .113       .125
 resident birth mother [.013]                   (.048)      (.051)      (.042)   (.044)     (.029)     (.029)     (.025)     (.025)

 Child has regular contact with non-             .031        .027        .029     .035       .047       .039       .028       .026
 resident birth father [.057]                   (.020)      (.020)      (.017)   (.018)     (.012)     (.011)     (.010)     (.010)

 F-test: Step-mother, Birth Father =             0.07        0.04        0.01     0.58       2.17       0.33       0.12       0.00
 Birth Father Only (p-value)                    (.786)      (.850)      (.919)   (.447)     (.141)     (.564)     (.730)     (.991)

 Number of Observations                         11355       10644       11355    10644      13256      12469      13256      12469

Notes on Table 8.

Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.
To be included in the sample, the relationship between the child and parent(s) must be known. We dropped the following rare
cases: foster fathers with no mother figure present (0 cases); foster mothers with no father figure present (8 cases); adoptive
fathers with no mother figure (3 cases); step fathers with no mother figure present (2 cases); step mothers with no father figure
present (5 cases); adoptive mothers with birth fathers (9 cases); birth mothers with foster fathers (4 cases); step mothers with step
fathers (3 cases).
For each outcome, the first column (a) reports results for the full sample, with answers coded: behavior =1 if respondent says
this is true for the child, and =0 otherwise. That is, “don’t know” and “refused” and “no” are coded as zeros. The second column
(b) reports results for which “don’t know” and “refused” are set equal to missing. The results here are for the sub-sample for
which none of the dependent variables in Table 8 and 9 were answered as “don’t know” or “refused.”
“Regular” contact with a birth parent refers here to respondent reporting that child sees the birth parent at least two or three times
a month.




                                                                   37
                 Table 9. Behaviors Influencing Child Health, Single and Two-Parent Families
                                             Dependent Variables
                                             Child wears a       Someone in          Child has a       Child covered
                                             seatbelt all or      household        regular bedtime        by health
                                              most of the          smokes          Child age>1 yr       insurance or
                                                  time                                                    medicaid


 Explanatory Variables                        (a)       (b)      (a)       (b)       (a)      (b)       (a)       (b)
 [means in brackets]

 Two adoptive parents                        .046      .037     !.068    !.071      .048      .041     .033      .046
                                            (.030)    (.030)    (.034)   (.035)    (.028)    (.027)   (.024)    (.024)

 Two foster parents                          .063      .012      .211     .194      .178      .225     .028      .024
                                            (.075)    (.081)    (.085)   (.093)    (.067)    (.072)   (.061)    (.064)

 Birth mother, Adoptive father              !.018      .001      .050     .059     !.019     !.013     .031      .052
                                            (.046)    (.047)    (.052)   (.054)    (.040)    (.040)   (.037)    (.037)

 Birth mother, Step father                  !.013     !.015      .152     .155      .012      .023    !.044     !.032
                                            (.015)    (.015)    (.017)   (.017)    (.013)    (.013)   (.012)    (.012)

 Step mother, Birth father                  !.069     !.054      .172     .123      .049      .046    !.044     !.012
                                            (.036)    (.039)    (.041)   (.045)    (.032)    (.033)   (.030)    (.031)

 Birth father only                          !.044     !.059      .215     .199      .071      .066    !.075     !.073
                                            (.041)    (.042)    (.046)   (.049)    (.037)    (.037)   (.033)    (.033)

 Birth mother only                          !.039     !.027     !.025    !.029      .007      .017     .060      .070
                                            (.014)    (.015)    (.016)   (.017)    (.013)    (.014)   (.012)    (.012)

 Adoptive mother only                        .192      .184      .110     .096      .149      .136     .016      .003
                                            (.094)    (.093)    (.107)   (.107)    (.085)    (.082)   (.077)    (.073)

 Child has regular contact with non-        !.044     !.031     !.053    !.021     !.025     !.023     .068      .067
 resident birth mother                      (.042)    (.044)    (.048)   (.051)    (.038)    (.039)   (.034)    (.035)

 Child has regular contact with non-        !.014     !.021     !.013    !.012      .011      .010     .050      .042
 resident birth father                      (.017)    (.018)    (.020)   (.020)    (.016)    (.016)   (.014)    (.014)

 F-test: Step-mother, Birth Father =         0.28      0.01      0.65     1.79      0.27      0.21     0.66      2.53
 Birth Father Only (p-value)                (.578)    (.919)    (.419)   (.181)    (.601)    (.644)   (.418)    (.111)

 Number of Observations                     13256     12469     13256    12469     11355     10644    13256     12469

Notes on Table 9.

Results reported are for linear probability models. Standard errors are provided in parentheses.
See notes to Table 8 for information on the sample.
“Regular” contact with a birth parent refers here to respondent reporting that child sees the birth parent at least two
or three times a month.




                                                           38
  Figure 1. Fraction of Children Less Than Age 18 Living with Father or Mother Only


                    .24                  mother only
                     .2


                    .15


                     .1


                    .05                         father only

                    .01

                          1960       1970          1980          1990       1998
                                                  year



Source: Marital Status and Living Arrangements, March 1998 and earlier reports. U.S. Bureau of the Census,
Current Population Reports, Series P20-514.




                                                   39
