                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE IMPACT OF MATERNAL ALCOHOL AND ILLICIT DRUG USE
           ON CHILDREN’S BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS: EVIDENCE FROM THE
          CHILDREN OF THE NATIONAL LONGITUDINAL SURVEY OF YOUTH


                                           Pinka Chatterji
                                           Sara Markowitz


                                         Working Paper 7692
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7692

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 by Pinka Chatterji and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Impact of Maternal Alcohol and Illicit Drug Use on Children’s Behavior
Problems: Evidence from the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
Pinka Chatterji and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 7692
May 2000
JEL No. IO

                                           ABSTRACT


     This study uses data from the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to test

for evidence of a causal relationship between maternal alcohol use, marijuana use and cocaine use,

and children’s behavior problems. Ordinary least squares results provide strong evidence that

maternal substance use is associated with children’s behavior problems. Models that account for the

potential endogeneity of maternal substance use yield mixed results. Models estimated using

instrumental variables (IV) methods are inconsistent with OLS findings. Child-specific and family-

specific fixed effects models, however, suggest that maternal alcohol, marijuana and cocaine use are

associated with increases in behavior problems.



Pinka Chatterji                                              Sara Markowitz
Department of Epidemiology and Social Medicine               NBER
Montefiore Medical Center                                    365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
111 East 210th Street                                        New York, NY 10016
Bronx, NY 10467                                              and New Jersey Institute of Technology
Phone: 718-519-0772                                          markowitz@adm.njit.edu
Fax: 718-654-7305
pchatter@montefiore.org
INTRODUCTION

       In 1996, approximately one out of ten American children was living in a household

where at least one parent met clinical standards for alcohol and/or illicit drug dependence.

Larger numbers of children in 1996 lived in households where one or more parents reported any

illicit drug use [Huang et al. (1996)]. Previous researchers, mostly from the fields of psychology

and psychiatry, have noted that parental substance abuse is associated with mental health

problems in children, but it is not clear whether or not the relationship is causal. The observed

positive correlation may be causal if illegal drug or alcohol consumption directly affects

parenting ability. However, the observed relationship also may be due to unobserved factors that

determine both parental substance use and children’s mental health outcomes, such as

environment or personality.

       The objective of this study is to use a large, national sample of mothers and children to

test for evidence of a causal relationship between maternal alcohol use, marijuana use and

cocaine use, and children’s early mental health problems, as measured by an index of behavior

problems. Behavior problems during childhood are associated with psychiatric disorders, mental

health services use, and delinquency later on in childhood and in adolescence [Gortmaker et al.

(1990), Wacschlag et al. (1997)]. This study is based on the hypothesis that some forms of

maternal substance use will interfere with the production of children’s mental health by

decreasing the quality of parenting inputs, or by reducing the productive efficiency of the

mother. For example, use of substances by the mother may decrease the quality of the home

environment or harm the parent/child relationship, leading to children’s behavior problems.

       Empirically, establishing a causal relationship between maternal substance use and

children’s behavior problems is not straight-forward. If unobserved factors exist that are
correlated with both maternal substance use and children’s outcomes, an observed positive

association may not be causal. For example, if mother and child both live in a stressful home

environment or in a dangerous neighborhood, these issues may lead both to maternal substance

use and to children’s behavior problems. If the relationship between maternal substance use and

children’s outcomes can be explained by unobservable factors, programs and policies that reduce

maternal substance use will not be effective in improving children’s behavior problems.

Alternatively, if maternal substance use is causally linked to children’s outcomes, children will

benefit from programs and policies that reduce maternal substance use. This study uses three

methods to address this issue: (1) an instrumental variables (IV) method, which uses alcohol and

illicit drug prices and policies as identifying instruments; (2) child-specific fixed effects models,

which control for child-specific unobserved heterogeneity; and (3) family-specific fixed effects

models, which control for unobserved heterogeneity at the level of the mother’s family of birth.

       The OLS results of this study suggest that after controlling for a range of socioeconomic

and demographic factors, maternal alcohol use, marijuana use and cocaine use are all strong

predictors of children’s behavior problems. Child-specific and family-specific fixed effects

models are consistent with the OLS findings. The results from instrumental variables (IV)

estimation, which control for the correlation between substance use and unobserved

characteristics, however, show no consistent relationship between maternal substance use and

children’s behavior problems. The identifying instruments performed very poorly in the first

stage, casting doubt on the validity of the IV results. Overall, then, this analysis provides some

evidence that the observed association between maternal substance use and children’s behavior

problems may be causal.




                                                  2
PREVIOUS LITERATURE

        Researchers have identified a number of physiological, environmental, and genetic

pathways that link maternal substance use to children’s behavioral outcomes. First, maternal

substance use during pregnancy may adversely affect a developing child’s future behavioral

outcomes through teratogenic processes. Second, maternal substance use may disrupt the home

environment or affect parenting in a way that leads to children’s behavior problems. Finally,

mothers and children may share an unobserved genetic or environmental vulnerability to

substance use and other types of problem behavior. Such a relationship may underlie what

appears to be an observable physiological or environmental relationship.

        These three pathways are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they are likely to overlap.

Mothers who use substances during pregnancy are likely to continue substance use after

pregnancy and are likely to face other genetic and environmental adversities. These factors in

combination may affect children’s behavioral outcomes. Determining the contribution of each of

these factors is a difficult task.



Physiological Pathways: Prenatal Substance Exposure and Children’s Behavioral Outcomes

        Virtually all substances pregnant women ingest can cross the placenta and affect the

developing fetus [Behnke and Eyler (1993)]. In many cases, prenatal substance use can lead to

serious health consequences for infants. Tobacco use during pregnancy is associated with

spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, perinatal death, and reduced birth weight [Fried (1993)]. Heavy

alcohol use during pregnancy is linked to Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol Effects.

[Sokol & Clarren (1989)]. Very little is known about the consequences of marijuana use during




                                                 3
pregnancy, but there is suggestive evidence that cocaine use during pregnancy is associated with

pregnancy complications, prematurity, and adverse neurological, behavioral, and fetal growth

outcomes [Hans (1998), Richardson et al. (1993)].

       Prenatal drug exposure also may lead to adverse behavioral outcomes that become

apparent during childhood. Although it is not clear that the relationship is causal, smoking during

pregnancy is associated with children’s behavior problems, particularly attention deficit

hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and conduct disorder (CD) [Wacschlag et al. (1997), Fried et. al.

(1992), Milberger et al. (1996), Weitzman et al. (1992), Kirstjansson et al. (1989)]. Although

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome can include behavioral dysfunction, there is no evidence that lower

levels of alcohol use during pregnancy have adverse effects on children's behavior [Sokol &

Clarren (1989), Fried et al. (1992)].

       Very little information is available on the association between prenatal illicit drug

exposure and children’s behavioral outcomes. Findings from the Ottawa Prenatal Prospective

Study (OPPS) indicate that mothers who were regular marijuana users during pregnancy report

higher rates of children’s behavior problems compared to women who were not regular

marijuana users during pregnancy. Prenatal marijuana exposure was associated with omission

errors, one measure of attentional deficit [Fried (1995)]. A recent NIDA monograph focused on

the long-term effects of prenatal drug exposure on behavioral outcomes [Wetherington et al.

(1996)]. Although this monograph included some suggestive results, there is no conclusive

evidence at this time that prenatal exposure to illicit substances results in adverse behavioral

outcomes.




                                                  4
Environmental Pathways: Postnatal Maternal Substance Use and Children’s Behavioral
Outcomes


       Prenatal exposure to substances has the potential to place children at risk for poor

behavioral outcomes. The postnatal environment, however, becomes increasingly important as

the child grows and develops [Fried (1993)]. In particular, maternal postnatal substance use may

be an important factor in determining children’s behavioral outcomes through its impact on

parenting. There is evidence that substance use can affect the parent’s ability to provide

supervision and support for children, or to maintain a good relationship with children, and these

problems in turn could lead to adverse outcomes. Parental substance use has been found to be

positively associated with lower levels of supervision and discipline [Chassin et. al. (1993),

Kandel (1990)]. Parental substance use problems also may lead to stress for children, or to

conflict between children and parents [Barrera & Stice (1998), Chassin et. al. (1993)].

        If substance use interferes with parenting, children of substance users might be more

likely than other children to have mental health problems. Many researchers have found that

children of substance abusing parents are at elevated risk for behavior problems and

psychopathology. Kandel (1990), using a sample of 28-29 year old parents from a longitudinal

study of New York State public high school students, finds that maternal drug involvement is

positively related to both problematic parenting styles and children’s behavior problems, as

measured by maternal reports [Kandel (1990)]. Tarter et. al. (1993), Jacob et. al. (1986), Jansen

et. al. (1995), and Puttler et. al. (1998) find that parental alcoholism is positively associated with

children’s behavior problems, as measured by the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) [Tarter et.

al. (1993), Jansen et. al. (1995), Puttler et. al. (1998), Jacob et. al. (1986)]. Many other

researchers report that parental substance use disorders are associated with numerous adverse




                                                   5
behavioral outcomes among pre-school to young adult children. These adverse outcomes include

behavior problems, psychiatric symptoms, hyperactivity, and clinically significant depression,

anxiety disorders and disruptive behavior disorders [Wacschlag et al. (1997), Clark et al. (1997),

Stein et al. (1993), Stanger et al. (1999), Kuperman et al. (1999), Aytaclar et al. (1999), Sher et

al. (1991)].

        In addition to parental substance use disorders, researchers have identified a number of

other factors that place children at elevated risk for adverse behavioral outcomes. These risk

factors include premature birth, parental psychiatric disorder, family disruption and conflict,

stressful life events, difficult temperament, low socioeconomic status, low parental education,

and extensive maternal employment early in the child’s life [Wacschlag et al. (1997), Clark et al.

(1997), Chassin et al. (1991), Jansen et al. (1999), Kuperman et al. (1999), Najman et al. (1997),

Baydar et al. (1991), Belsky et al. (1991)].



Economic Studies of Parental Substance Use and Children’s Behavioral Outcomes

        To the best of the authors’ knowledge, only one group of researchers has used an

economic approach to study the impact of parental substance use on children’s behavioral

outcomes. Jones et al. (1999) use data on parents and children from the 1988 National Health

Interview Survey to estimate the impact of maternal and paternal alcohol use on children’s

behavior problems, as measured by the Behavior Problems Index (BPI) [Jones et al. (1999)].

After using an instrumental variables approach to account for the endogeneity of parental

alcohol use, these researchers find consistent evidence that the number of alcoholic drinks

consumed in the past year by the parent is positively associated with higher BPI scores

(indicating more behavior problems) among children. As the authors acknowledge, however, the




                                                  6
identifying instruments used in the analysis had fairly low joint F statistics, which potentially

resulted in biased IV estimates.

        Like the Jones et al. (1999) paper, this analysis enhances the existing literature on the

effects of parental substance use on children’s mental health by: (1) using a national sample of

mothers and children, while most existing research is based on much smaller, clinical samples;

(2) using econometric methods that account for the potential endogeneity of parental substance

use; and (3) considering the effects of substance use itself rather than clinically defined abuse

and dependence. This study also builds on the Jones et al. (1999) paper in several ways. First,

this analysis considers the impact of mothers’ illicit drug use as well as alcohol use on children’s

behavior problems. Because large numbers of children live with parents who use and abuse

illicit drugs, it is essential that researchers also address the effects of illicit drug use on children’s

behavioral outcomes. Furthermore, because the identifying instruments used in this analysis had

fairly low predictive power, this analysis is also based on child-specific fixed effects models and

family-specific fixed effects models which account for two types of unobserved heterogeneity.

The use of these methods allows a comparison of results between three methods that account for

endogeneity.



ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK

        The equation to be estimated can be viewed as a child's mental health capital production

function:

1) BPIijt = α0 + α1 S jt + α2 Xit + α3 Xjt + α4 u i + α5 u j + εijt .

This production function is specific to the ith child of mother j at time t. The output of the

production function is measured by the standardized percentile score on the Behavior Problems




                                                         7
Index (BPI). The variable Sjt is a vector of alcohol and illicit substance use measures. The

vector Xi includes observed child-specific factors that may determine behavioral problems, such

as the child's age, gender, and mental health endowment at birth, as proxied by low birth-weight.

The vector Xj includes observed mother-specific factors that may determine the child's

behavioral problems. Such factors include maternal education, marital status, and household

size. The vectors ui and uj represent the time-invariant unobserved child and maternal factors,

respectively, that affect a child's mental health. Such factors can include the home environment,

genetic traits or personality. The vectors ui and uj may have many of the same elements in

common if, for example, the mother and child both reside in a violent or stressful home

environment.

         A maternal demand equation for a substance (alcohol or illegal drugs) is presented in

equation 2:

2) S jt = β 0 + β 1 P t + β 2 Yjt + β 3 u j + ωjt ,

where Pt is the full price of alcohol and illicit drugs which varies by state and time, and Yjt

represents the mother's observed characteristics which may affect illicit drug and alcohol use.

The vector Pt contains the prices of both alcohol and illegal drugs because drugs and alcohol may

be substitute or complement goods. The vectors Xjt in equation 1 and Yjt in equation 2 may have

many or all of the same elements in common. As in equation 1, unobserved individual traits (uj )

which do not vary over time also are determinates of maternal substance use.

         Many of the studies discussed in the literature review have used ordinary least

squares (OLS) to estimate equation 1. However, estimating equation 1 by OLS can lead to

biased and inconsistent coefficients if maternal substance use is determined by the same

unmeasured, individual-level factor that determines a child's behavioral problems (α5 ≠ 0




                                                      8
and β 3 ≠0). In this case, uj is present in both the child behavior and alcohol equations. Thus,

estimating the coefficients by OLS will violate the requirement that the right-hand side

variables be orthogonal to the error term.

       In order to avoid the problems presented by OLS estimation, the two stage least

squares (TSLS) method is used to estimate equation 1. This technique requires that at least

one exogenous variable (instrument) exists that is a predictor of maternal substance use but

is not correlated with the error term in the behavior problems equation. When estimating

equation 1 by TSLS, substance use is first predicted by the instruments and then the

predicted values are used as regressors in equation 1. The predicted values of consumption

are purged of their correlation with the error term in the behavior equation, leading to

unbiased estimates of maternal drug and alcohol use on children’s behavioral problems. A

positive coefficient on predicted alcohol or drug consumption will indicate that increased

substance use leads to increased behavioral problems. A zero coefficient provides

evidence against causality.

       The success of the TSLS method depends on the predictive power of the instruments in

the first stage equations. Bound et al. (1995), Bollen et al. (1995), Nelson & Startz (1990),

Staiger & Stock (1994) and others all have noted that a low first stage F statistic for the

identifying instrumental variables may suggest that the TSLS estimates are no better than biased

OLS estimates. Because of this potential problem, this study also uses fixed-effects models to

account for unobserved heterogeneity. Fixed-effects models in this study take advantage of two

features of the data: (1) some mothers in the data are sisters and, consequently, some children in

the sample are cousins; and (2) two or three BPI scores (for the years 1988, 1992, and 1994) are

available for each child. Fixed-effects methods model unobserved heterogeneity as a variable




                                                  9
that is unique to each mother’s family of birth and unique to each individual child. The former is

a family-specific fixed-effect model that is based on the idea that mothers may have obtained

parenting skills and other attributes that affect their children’s behavioral outcomes from their

family of birth. The latter is a child-specific fixed-effect model that presumes that the individual

child has unobserved fixed attributes that influence behavior problems. Some of these attributes

may be shared with the mother (i.e. home environment).2 Both these approaches use differences

in maternal substance use and differences in children’s behavior problems within extended

families and within individual children over time. Consequently, the methods rely on the

existence of sufficient variation in maternal substance use and BPI scores within extended

families and within individual children over time.3



THE CoNLSY DATA

         The data used in this study come from the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey

of Youth (CoNLSY). The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) is an annual,

national survey that was initiated in 1979 with a sample of 12,686 young people who at that time

were aged 14-21. NLSY79 respondents provided extensive information on labor market

participation, education, fertility, substance use, attitudes and family background. Beginning in

2
  Models also were tested that include a fixed effect for the mother. Results are very similar to the child specific
fixed-effects models presented below. The interpretation of a mother fixed-effect is not straightforward in that it
compares differences in the mother’s substance use over time to differences in her children’s behavioral scores both
at a point in time and across time. Since the mother’s substance use does not vary among her children in a given
year, the child fixed-effect encompass the mother fixed-effects. The family specific fixed effects models are
advantageous because they rely on variation in extended families at a point in time and over time.
3
  There are substantial differences in the maternal drinking variable over time. Fifty-three percent and eighty-five
percent of mothers report different numbers of days on which they drank in the past month between their 1988 and
1992, and 1992 and 1994 observations, respectively. There is much less variation in the illegal drug use measures
over time. Eleven percent of mothers report different marijuana use status between 1988 and 1992, and eight
percent of mothers report different marijuana use status between 1992 and 1994. Four percent of mothers report
different cocaine use status between the 1988 and 1992 surveys and two percent of mothers report different cocaine
status between the 1992 and 1994 surveys. The children's BPI scores demonstrate significant variation over time;




                                                         10
1986, children of female NLSY79 respondents were assessed in a range of areas important in

child development, including motor, cognitive, and social development and behavior problems.

        This analysis utilizes information on children’s behavior problems index scores, child

characteristics, and maternal characteristics from the 1988, 1992, and 1994 CoNLSY surveys.

Children who were between 4-14 years old and who have valid data for behavior problems

scores and maternal substance use measures in at least one survey year (1988, 1992 or 1994) are

included in the main analysis sample. Children who have missing data for family income, age,

birth-weight, mother’s marital status, family size, religion, mother’s education, mother’s Armed

Forces Qualification Test Score, and father’s residence in child’s household are included in the

analysis sample with the missing data imputed with sample means. The final sample size is

10,579, which includes data for 6,194 children. For the family-specific fixed effects models,

which require that each mother have at least one sister in the sample, the sample size is 2,498.

For the child-specific fixed effects models, which require either two or three observations per

child, the sample size is 7,546.



Behavior Problems Index

        The Behavior Problems Index (BPI) is based on the Achenbach Behavior Problems

Checklist and other child behavior scales. The BPI measures the frequency, range and type of

childhood behavior problems for children at least four years old using responses from mothers

[Peterson & Zill (1986)]. The BPI consists of 28 items pertaining to antisocial behavior,

anxiousness/depression, headstrongness, hyperactivity, immaturity, dependency and peer

conflict/social withdrawal. Mothers respond “often”, “sometimes true” or “not true” to each item


very few children had the same BPI scores in two years. Between 1988 and 1992, the mean percentage change in
BPI scores was 27% and between 1992 and 1994, the mean percentage change in BPI scores was 15%.


                                                      11
which describes a particular troubling behavior such as “too fearful or anxious”, “not liked by

other kids” or “cheats or lies”. Items with responses of “often” or “sometimes true” receive a

value of one while the response “not true” receives a value of zero. The responses on the 28

items are summed and then normed based on data from the 1981 National Health Interview

Survey. This study uses percentile scores from these normed distributions. Higher scores

indicate higher levels of behavior problems.

       Behavior problems may reflect the beginning of mental health problems as well as

normal stages in child development [Crockenberg & Litman (1990), Campbell (1990)].

Consequently, the prevalence of behavior problems in populations of normal children is quite

high. In populations of normal preschool children, the estimated prevalence rates for mild to

moderate levels of behavior problems range from 10-15 percent [Cornely & Bromet (1986),

Earls (1980)]. Although some children in this analysis may meet clinical criteria for mental

disorders, the BPI percentile scores used in this study are not comparable to a DSM IV clinical

diagnosis.

       Even though percentile scores do not constitute a clinical diagnoses, there is evidence that

young children with high percentile scores on the CBCL and other behavior problem scales are

more likely than other children to have persistent behavior problems, DSM III diagnoses of

externalizing disorders in later childhood, and mental health services use later in childhood

[Achenbach et al. (1995), Campbell & Ewing (1990), McGee et. al. (1991), Gortmaker et. al.

(1990)]. The BPI therefore offers a useful measure of children’s emerging mental health

problems. In this study, children’s behavior problems will be measured by the child’s normed

percentile total score on the BPI. Table 1 displays means and standard deviations for behavior

problems scores for the main analysis sample.




                                                12
Maternal Substance Use Measures and Other Covariates

       This analysis is based on mothers’ self-reports about alcohol and illicit drug use from the

1988, 1992 and 1994 surveys. Information about alcohol consumption in the past month, past

year marijuana use and past year cocaine use are available in the 1988, 1992 and 1994 surveys.

Past month binge drinking information is available in the 1988 and 1994 surveys only. The four

substance use measures used in this analysis are: (1) number of days alcohol was consumed in

the past month; (2) a dichotomous indicator for any binge drinking in the past month; (3) a

dichotomous indicator for any marijuana use in the past year; and (4) a dichotomous indicator for

any cocaine use in the past year. Mensch & Kandel (1988), Fendrich & Vaughn (1994), and

Fendrich & Mackesy-Amiti (1995) all find that NLSY79 respondents may have under-reported

or inconsistently reported their substance use. Like any type of measurement error, as long as

under-reporting is random, it will lead to estimates that are less precise but still consistent.

       Table 1 displays the percentage of mothers who reported substance use in the main

analysis sample. Although the mothers consumed alcohol on an average of 5.07 days in the past

month, past month binge drinking was less frequent (18.5 percent), and fairly small percentages

of mothers reported marijuana use (10.7 percent) and cocaine use (2.9 percent) in the past year.

In addition to maternal substance use, the models also include variables that control for the

child’s endowment of mental health at birth (proxied by low birth-weight) and a number of other

exogenous, child-specific and mother-specific characteristics that have been linked to behavior

problems. Table 1 summarizes these variables.

       Table 2 displays cross-tabulations of changes in maternal illicit drug use over time and

changes in children’s BPI scores over time. Children whose mothers stopped using marijuana




                                                  13
between two survey years experienced decreases in BPI scores while children whose mothers

started using marijuana between two survey years experienced increases in BPI scores. This

pattern was true for cocaine use and children’s BPI scores in 1992 and 1994, but not true for

cocaine use and children’s BPI scores in 1988 and 1992.

Instruments

       Moffitt (1991) suggests that suitable instruments are more likely to be found from

“…variation in the availability, rather than the actual receipt, of treatment across the population.”

This study takes advantage of geographical variability in the availability of substances by using

alcohol and illicit drug prices and policies as identifying instruments. These measures are

theoretically valid instruments because there is little reason to believe that the prices of

drugs and alcohol are predictors of children’s behavior problems, holding consumption

constant. Prices, however, should predict consumption. Previous research has show that

consumption of these goods is negatively related to their prices [Leung & Phelps (1993),

Grossman & Chaloupka (1998), Saffer & Chaloupka (1999)].

       A number of variables are used as instruments, including the real (1982-1984=1)

state-level excise tax on beer, the real price of cocaine, and an indicator for whether a state has

decriminalized the possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use. Prices of

marijuana generally are not available so the decriminalization indicator is used instead.

For this variable, a value of 1 means the state has decriminalized; thus, users in these states

face a lower expected penalty and a lower price of possessing marijuana. Beer taxes come

from the Beer Association’s Brewer’s Almanac, cocaine prices come from the Drug

Enforcement Administration's System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence

(STRIDE), and information on decriminalization of marijuana comes from the Bureau of




                                                 14
Justice Statistics (1995). The methodology for creating the cocaine price series is

described in detail in Grossman and Chaloupka (1998). Finally, total spending in 1991 by

each state on police in drug enforcement per capita is included. These data come from the Office

of National Drug Control Policy's, State and Local Spending on Drug Control Activities: Report

from the National Survey of State and Local Governments.

       To capture the full price of alcohol consumption, two variables representing the

availability of alcohol are included. First, the percentage of each state’s population living in

counties dry for beer in each of the survey years is included. These data come from the Beer

Institute's Brewers’ Almanac (1996). Secondly, the number of retail outlets per 1,000 population

that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise or off-premise consumption is

included. These data come from Jobson's Liquor Handbook, (various years). With larger

percentages of populations living in dry counties or with fewer outlets available, travel time to

obtain alcohol increases, adding to the full price of alcohol.

       In addition to these instruments, variables that enter the first stage include the

characteristics of the mother, child and the household, although these variables also appear

in the second stage equations as well.



REGRESSION RESULTS

       Initially, the models are estimated using ordinary least squares (OLS) to establish

baseline estimates of the effects of maternal substance use on children’s behavior problems.

Although the OLS method ignores the potential endogeneity of maternal substance use, it offers

the advantage of being robust to many specification errors. OLS results are displayed in the first

columns of Tables 3-7. The second column of each table shows the TSLS coefficients, while




                                                 15
columns 3 and 4 show the child-specific and family-specific fixed effects results, respectively.

According to equation 1, the use of any or all three of the substances may potentially affect a

child’s BPI score. Nevertheless, the models in Tables 3-6 each include a different measure of

substance use separately, while Table 7 presents estimates with alcohol, marijuana and cocaine

use measures included simultaneously. The substances are initially included individually

because of potential collinearity problems. First, marijuana and cocaine consumption tend to be

highly correlated and entering the substances one at a time demonstrates the impact of the one

substance on behavioral problems.4 Secondly, in the TSLS estimates, all three substances are

predicted by the same set of variable making the predicted values highly collinear, with the result

that the effect of one substance becomes practically indistinguishable from the others. For this

reason, Table 7 excludes TSLS models.

        The OLS results in each table strongly suggest that maternal substance use is positively

associated with children’s behavior problems after controlling for a range of other factors. The

number of days alcohol was consumed in the past month, any maternal binge drinking in the past

month, any marijuana use in the past year, and any cocaine use in the past year all increase

children’s BPI scores. The magnitude of this impact is fairly modest for alcohol. An incremental

increase in the number of days the mother drank in the past month is associated with a less than 1

percent increase in BPI scores at the mean BPI score in the sample (Table 3). Maternal binge

drinking is associated with an increase of about 2.3 percentage points in BPI scores, which

represents about a 4 percent increase at the mean BPI score in the sample (Table 4). Maternal

marijuana and cocaine use (Tables 5 and 6), however, are associated with increases of 7.6 and

6.4 percentage points in BPI scores. These increases represent percentage increases of about 12


4
   In the main analysis sample, the Pearson correlation coefficient between marijuana and cocaine use was .34 which
is statistically significant at the .01 level.


                                                        16
percent and 10 percent respectively at the mean BPI score in the sample. Although the alcohol

and cocaine measures are statistically insignificant when the substance use measures are included

in the same model, the magnitude and statistical significance of the marijuana effect remains

constant (Table 7). These OLS findings strongly support previous literature, mostly based on

smaller, clinical samples, that indicates that parental substance use disorders are associated with

adverse mental health outcomes among children.

         The OLS models also offer interesting information about the impact of child and family

characteristics on behavior problems. Girls have lower BPI scores than boys, and child’s age is

positively related to behavior problems. Low birth-weight (5.5 pounds or less at birth) also is a

positive, statistically significant predictor of behavior problems; this finding is consistent with

clinical literature.5 Children from higher socioeconomic backgrounds, as measured by family

income and maternal education, have lower levels of behavior problems compared to children

from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Maternal employment also has a negative impact on

behavior problems, suggesting that maternal employment captures some aspects of

socioeconomic status in the models. Finally, children who live with their fathers and children

with married mothers have lower levels of behavior problems compared to children who live

without their fathers or in single-parent households.

         To account for the potential endogeneity of the maternal substance use measures, the

models are estimated using the TSLS method with alcohol and illicit drug prices and policies as

identifying instruments.6 Because the binge drinking, marijuana and cocaine use measures are

dichotomous, the first stage for these models is estimated using linear probability models. The

5
  Low birth weight may be endogenous. The models were run with and without this variable, and there were no
appreciable differences in the results.
6
  It is questionable whether or not the child-level variables (child's age, low birth weight and gender) should be
included in the first stage. For ease of computation, these variables are included in both stages. Models were tested



                                                         17
predicted probabilities of substance use are then substituted into the BPI equations which are

estimated using robust standard errors [Heckman and MaCurdy (1985)] . TSLS results are

displayed in the second columns of Tables 3-6. In contrast to the OLS results, the TSLS results

yield no consistent evidence of a statistically significant relationship between maternal substance

use and BPI scores. All of the substance use measures are negative in sign and are statistically

insignificant. Nevertheless, these TSLS estimates are not trustworthy because the instruments

are not strong predictors of maternal substance use. The identifying instruments as a group are

statistically significant predictors of maternal substance use. However, with the exception of the

number of days alcohol was consumed in the past month, the R-squared statistics on the first

stage equations all are below 0.10. Hausman tests indicate that the consistency of OLS cannot be

rejected in all but the cocaine models.

         Table 8 displays first stage results, which highlight some interesting relationships

between prices and policies and maternal substance use. State excise taxes on beer are inversely

related to drinking (although the effect is statistically significant only at the 10 percent level in a

two-tailed test for number of days drink), marijuana use, and cocaine use. The percentage of the

population in the state living in dry counties is inversely related to the number of days alcohol

was consumed in the past month, marijuana use, and cocaine use. These findings suggest that

mothers in this sample use alcohol and illicit drugs as complements. This evidence is consistent

with other work based on samples of youth [Yamada et. al. (1998), Kenkel (1993), Moore &

Cook (1995), Cook & Moore (1993), and Pacula (1998)]. Marijuana decriminalization is

associated with increases in maternal marijuana and cocaine use. This finding is consistent with

some studies that also report that marijuana decriminalization leads to increases in illicit drug use


without these variable in the first stage, but their inclusion does not affect the predicted value of maternal substance
use.


                                                           18
[Chaloupka et. al. (1998), Saffer & Chaloupka (1999), Model (1993)]. The price of cocaine is

negatively related to cocaine use, but the effect is statistically insignificant. The price of cocaine,

however, is negatively related to the number of days alcohol was consumed in the past month,

again providing evidence that alcohol and cocaine are complements. Finally, increased spending

on police for drug enforcement in 1991 has a negative impact on binge drinking, but it is also

associated with increases in marijuana use.

        Even though the measures of price in the first stage equation are generally consistent with

economic theory, the instruments are not strong enough to render the TSLS estimates

trustworthy. The poor performance of the instruments in the TSLS method suggests that other

methods of accounting for endogeneity may be superior in this analysis. For this reason, the BPI

models also are estimated using child-specific fixed effects models (where the fixed effect

corresponds to the child) and family-specific fixed effects models (where the fixed effect

corresponds to the mother’s family of birth). Columns 3 and 4 of Tables 3-7 present results from

these two models. (Mothers were asked about binge drinking only in 1988 and 1994, so the

binge drinking fixed effects models are estimated using a subset of the full analysis sample.)

        Like the OLS models, the fixed effects models indicate that maternal drinking, marijuana

use, and cocaine use have a positive effect on children’s behavior problems. In the child-specific

fixed effects models, the number of days alcohol was consumed in the past month and marijuana

use in the past year both have positive, statistically significant effects on children’s behavior

problems. The magnitude of these impacts is less than 1% for maternal drinking and 7% for

maternal marijuana use at the mean BPI score in the sample. Cocaine use in the past year has a

positive but statistically insignificant impact on behavior problems, and the impact of binge

drinking is negative and statistically insignificant.




                                                  19
       The family-specific fixed effects models support the child-specific fixed effects model

results and the OLS model results. The number of drinks consumed in the past month has a

small but positive, statistically significant impact on behavior problems. The marijuana use

measure is positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The family-specific fixed

effect model indicates that marijuana use is associated with an 8 percent increase in BPI scores.

The family-specific fixed effect models also indicate that cocaine use is associated with a

statistically significant, 19 percent increase in BPI scores at the mean score in the sample.




SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

       This study provides some evidence that maternal substance use may be linked causally to

children’s behavior problems. Although TSLS results are problematic due to the poor

performance of the identifying instruments, OLS models, child-specific fixed effects models, and

family-specific fixed effects models all suggest that maternal alcohol, marijuana and cocaine use

are associated with increases in 4-14 year old children’s BPI scores. The magnitude of this

effect is very small for the number of days alcohol was consumed in the past month. The impact

of past year marijuana and cocaine use, however, ranges from 10-12 percent in the OLS models,

and from 7-19 percent in the fixed-effects models. These increases in children’s behavior

problems are quite dramatic because the maternal illicit drug use measures are broad, capturing

any use of marijuana or cocaine in the past year. The results of this study, therefore, suggest that

programs and policies that reduce maternal use of illicit substances may have the added benefit

of reducing adverse behavioral outcomes in children.




                                                 20
REFERENCES


1.    Achenbach, TM, Howell, CT, McConaughy, SH, Stanger, C. Six-year predictors in a
      national sample of children and youth: II. Signs of Disturbance. Journal of the American
      Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1995;34: 488-498.

2.    Aytaclar, S, Tarter, RE, Kirisci, L, Lu, S. Association between hyperactivity and
      executive cognitive functioning in childhood and substance use in early adolescence.
      Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1999;38:172-178.

3.    Barrera, M, Stice, E. Parent-adolescent conflict in the context of parental support:
      Families with alcoholic and nonalcoholic fathers. Journal of Family Psychology. 1998;
      12:195-208.

4.    Baydar, N, Brooks-Gunn, J. Effects of maternal employment and child-care
      arrangements on preschoolers’ cognitive and behavioral outcomes: evidence from the
      Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Developmental Psychology.
      1991;27:932-945.

5.    Behnke, M, Eyler, FD. The Consequences of Prenatal Substance Use for the Developing
      Fetus, Newborn and Young Child. The International Journal of
      Addictions.1993;28:1341-1391.

6.    Belsky, J, Eggebeen, D. Early and extensive maternal employment and young children’s
      socioemotional development: children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.
      Journal of Marriage and the Family. 1991;53: 1083-1098.

7.    Bollen, KA, Guilkey, DK, Mroz, TA. Binary Outcomes and Endogenous Explanatory
      Variables: Tests and Solutions with an Application to the Demand for Contraceptive Use
      in Tunisia. Demography. 1995;32:111-131.

8.    Bound, J, Jaeger, DA, Baker, RM. Problems With Instrumental Variables Estimation
      when the Correlation between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
      Variables is Weak. Journal of the American Statistical Association. 1995;90:443-450.

9.    Campbell, SB. Behavior problems in preschool children: Clinical and developmental
      issues. New York, NY, USA: Guilford Press, 1990.

10.   Campbell, SB, Ewing, LJ. Follow-Up of Hard-to-Manage Preschoolers: Adjustment at
      Age 9 and Predictors of Continuing Symptoms. Journal of Child Psychology and
      Psychiatry. 1990;31: 871-889.

11.   Chaloupka, F.J., Grossman, M., and Tauras, J.A.. The Demand for Cocaine and
      Marijuana by Youth. National Bureau of Economics Working Paper 6411, February
      1998.



                                             21
12.   Chassin, Laurie; Pillow, David R; Curran, Patrick J; Molina, Brooke S; et al. Relation of
      parental alcoholism to early adolescent substance use: A test of three mediating
      mechanisms. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 1993; 10: 3-19.

13.   Clark, DB, Moss, HB, Kirisci, L, Mezzich, AC, Miles, R, Ott, P. Psychopathology in
      preadolescent sons of fathers with substance use disorders. Journal of the American
      Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1997;36:495-502.

14.   Cook, P. and Moore, M.. Drinking and Schooling Journal of Health Economics 1993;
      12: 411-429.

15.   Cornely, P, Bromet, EJ. Prevalence of behavior problems in three-year-old children
      living near Three Mile Island: A comparative analysis. Journal of Child Psychology &
      Psychiatry & Allied Disciplines. 1986;27: 489-498.

16.   Crockenberg, S, Litman, C. Autonomy as competence in 2-year-olds: Maternal correlates
      of child defiance, compliance, and self-assertion. Developmental Psychology. 1990;26:
      961-971.

17.   Earls, F. Prevalence of Behavior Problems in 3-Year-Old Children: A Cross-National
      Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1980;37:1153-1157.

18.   Fendrich, M. and Mackesy-Amiti, M.. Inconsistencies in Lifetime Cocaine and Marijuana
      Use Reports: Impact on Prevalence and Incidence. Addiction, Vol. 90, 1995: 111-118.

19.   Fendrich, M. and Vaughn, C.M.. Diminished Lifetime Substance Use Over Time: An
      Inquiry into Differential Underreporting. Public Opinion Quarterly. Vol. 58 1994: 96-
      123.

20.   Fried, PA, Watkinson, B, Gray, RA. A Follow-Up Study of Attentional Behavior in 6-
      Year-Old Children Exposed Prenatally to Marijuana, Cigarettes, and Alcohol.
      Neurotoxicology & Teratology. 1992;14(5): 299-311.

21.   Fried, PA. Prenatal Exposure to Tobacco and Marijuana: Effects During Pregnancy,
      Infancy, and Early Childhood. Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology. 1993;36:319-337.

22.   Fried, PA. The Ottawa Prenatal Prospective Study (OPPS): Methodological Issues and
      Findings – It’s Easy to Throw the Baby Out With the Bath Water. Life Sciences.
      1995;56:2159-2168.

23.   Gortmaker, SL, Walker, DK, Weitzman, M, Sobol, AM. Chronic Conditions,
      Socioeconomic Risks, and Behavioral Problems in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics.
      1990; 85:267-276.




                                              22
24.   Grossman, M., Chaloupka, F.J.. The Demand for Cocaine by Young Adults: A Rational
      Addiction Approach. Journal of Health Economics 1998; 17: 427-474.

25.   Hans, S. Prenatal Drug Exposure: Behavioral Functioning in Late Childhood and
      Adolescence. In: Wetherington, CL, Smeriglio, VL Finnegan, LP (eds.). Behavioral
      Studies of Drug-Exposed Offspring: Methodological Issues in Human and Animal
      Research (RM 164) (1996) NCADI # M164 - NTIS PB# 96-177944.

26.   Heckman, JJ and MaCurdy, TE. A Simultaneous Equations Linear Probability Model.
      Canadian Journal of Economics. 1985; 18: 28-37.

27.   Huang, LX, Cerbone, FG, Gfroerer, JC. Children at Risk Because of Parental Substance
      Abuse. OAS Working Paper, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
      Administration, 1996.

28.   Jacob, T, Leonard, K. Psychosocial Functioning in Children of Alcoholic Fathers,
      Depressed Fathers and Control Fathers. Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 1986;47:373-380.

29.   Jansen, LI, Fitzgerald, HE, Ham, HP, Zucker, RA. Pathways into Risk: Temperament and
      Behavior Problems in Three-to-Five-Year-Old Sons of Alcoholics. Alcoholism: Clinical
      and and Experimental Research. 1995;19:501-509.

30.   Jones, AS, Miller, DJ, Salkever, DS. Parental Use of Alcohol and
      Children's Behavioral Health: A Household Production Analysis. Health Economics.
      1999;8:661-83.

31.   Kandel, DB. Parenting Styles, Drug Use, and Children’s Adjustment in Families of
      Young Adults. Journal of Marriage and the Family. 1990; 52:183-196.

32.   Kenkel, D.. Drinking, Driving, and Deterrence: The Effectiveness and Social Costs of
      Alternative Policies. Journal of Law and Economics 1993;2: 877-913.

33.   Kristjansson, EA, Fried, PA, Watkinson, B. Maternal Smoking During Pregnancy
      Affects Children’s Vigilance Performance. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 1989;24:11-
      19.

34.   Kuperman, S, Schlosser, SS, Lidral, J, Reich, W. Relationship of child psychopathology
      to parental alcoholism and antisocial personality disorder. Journal of the American
      Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1999;38:686-692.

35.   Leung, SF, Phelps, CE. My Kingdom for a Drink? A Review of Estimates of the Prices
      Sensitivity of Demand for Alcoholic Beverages. in: Hilton, ME & Bloss, G. (Eds.)
      Economics and the Prevention of Alcohol-Related Problems. National Institute of
      Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Research Monograph 25, 1993.




                                             23
36.   Mensch, B. and Kandel, D.. Underreporting of Substance Use in a National Longitudinal
      Youth Cohort: Individual and Interviewer Effects. Public Opinion Quarterly, vol. 52
      1988: 100-124.

37.   McGee, R, Partridge, F, Williams, S, Silva, PA. A twelve-year follow-up of preschool
      hyperactive children. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
      Psychiatry. 1991;30: 224-232.

38.   Milberger, S, Biederman, J, Faraone, SV, Chen, L; et al. Is maternal smoking during
      pregnancy a risk factor for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children? American
      Journal of Psychiatry. 1996;9: 1138-1142.

39.   Model, K.E.. The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on Hospital Emergency Room
      Drug Episodes: 1975-1978. Journal of the American Statistical Association 1993;88:
      737-747.

40.   Moffitt, R. Program Evaluation with Nonexperimental Data. Evaluation Review.
      1991;15: 291-314.

41.   Moore, M.J. and Cook, P.J.. Habit and Heterogeneity in the Youthful Demand for
      Alcohol. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #5152, Cambridge MA,
      June 1995.

42.   Najman, JM, Behrens, BC, Andersen, M, Bor, W, O’Callaghan, M, Williams, G. Impact
      of family type and family quality on child behavior problems: a longitudinal study.
      Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1997;36: 1357-
      1365.

43.   Nelson, CR, Startz, R. The Distribution of the Instrumental Variables Estimator and its
      T-Ratio when the Instrument is a Poor One. Journal of Business. 1990;63:S125-S139.

44.   Pacula, RL. Does Increasing the Beer Tax Reduce Marijuana Consumption? Journal of
      Health Economics 17 (1998), 557-585.

45.   Peterson, JL, Zill, N. Marital Disruption, Parent-Child Relationships, and Behavioral
      Problems in Children. Journal of Marriage and the Family. 1986;48.

46.   Puttler, LI, Zucker, RA, Fitzgerald, HE, Bingham, CR. Behavioral Outcomes Among
      Children of Alcoholics During the Early and Middle Childhood Years: Familial Subtype
      Variations. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research; 1998;22:1962-1972.

47.   Richardson, GA, Day, NL, Macgauhey, PJ. The Impact of Prenatal Marijuana and
      Cocaine Use on the Infant and Child. Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology. 1993;36:302-
      318.




                                               24
48.   Saffer, H. and Chaloupka, F. State Drug Control Spending and Illicit Drug Participation.
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7114, Cambridge MA, May
      1999.

49.   Sher, KJ, Walitzer, KS, Wood, PK, Brent, EE. Characteristics of children of alcoholics:
      putative risk factors, substance use and abuse, and psychopathology. Journal of
      Abnormal Psychology. 1991;190: 427-448.

50.   Sokol, RJ, Clarren, SK. Guidelines for use of terminology describing the impact of
      prenatal alcohol on the offspring. Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research. 1989;
      13: 597-598.

51.   Staiger, D, Stock, JH. Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments.
      National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper #151, 1994.

52.   Stanger, C, Higgins, ST, Bickel, WK, Elk, R, Grabowski, J, Schmitz, J, Amass, L,
      Kirby,KC, Seracini, AM. Behavioral and emotional problems among children of cocaine
      and opiate dependent parents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
      Psychiatry. 1999;38:421-428.

53.   Stein, JA, Newcomb, MD, Bentler, PM. Differential effects of parent and grandparent
      drug use on behavior problems of male and female children. Developmental Psychology.
      1993;29:31-43.

54.   Tarter, RE, Blackson, T, Martin, C, Loeber, R, Moss, HB. Characteristics and Correlates
      of Child Discipline Practices in Substance Abuse and Normal Families. The American
      Journal on Addictions. 1993;2:18-25.

55.   Wacschlag, LS, Lahey, BB, Loeber, R, Green, SM, Gordon, RA, Leventhal, BL.
      Maternal smoking during pregnancy and the risk of conduct disorder in boys. Archives of
      General Psychiatry. 1997;54:670-676.

56.   Weitzman, M, Gortmaker, S, Sobol, A. Maternal Smoking and Behavior Problems of
      Children. Pediatrics. 1992;90:340-349.

57.   Wetherington, CL, Smeriglio, VL, Finnegan, LP (eds.). Behavioral Studies of Drug-
      Exposed Offspring: Methodological Issues in Human and Animal Research (RM 164)
      (1996) NCADI # M164 - NTIS PB# 96-177944.

58.   Yamada, T., Kendix, M. and Yamada, T. The Impact of Alcohol and Marijuana
      Consumption on High School Graduation. Health Economics, 1998.




                                             25
                                            Table 1
                    1988, 1992, 1994 Sample Means and Standard Deviations

                                                             Mean       Standard Deviation
Behavior Problems Index                                    (N=10,579)
Standardized total percentile score                          61.38            26.90

Maternal Substance Use
Number of days consumed alcohol in past month                 5.07             9.07
Had one or more binge drinking episodes in the                0.185            0.389
past month (1994 data only)
Used marijuana in the past year                               0.107            0.309
Used cocaine in the past year                                 0.029            0.406

Child Characteristics
Female                                                        0.496            0.500
African-American                                              0.319            0.466
Hispanic                                                      0.208            0.406
Age                                                           8.36             2.74
Weighed 5.5 pound or less at birth                            0.082            0.269

Family Characteristics
Mother’s Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT)              32.54            25.11
revised percentile score
Age of mother                                                30.65             3.01
Number of grades completed by mother                         12.14             2.17
Mother is married                                             0.596            0.491
Mother is employed                                            0.594            0.491
Family income                                               $35,609          $25,111
Family size                                                   4.44             1.51
Child’s father lives in household                             0.602            0.459
Mother is Baptist/Methodist                                   0.360            0.479
Mother is Catholic                                            0.332            0.385

Identifying Instruments
State excise tax on beer                                     $0.479           $0.478
Marijuana is decriminalized                                   0.327            0.469
Cocaine price                                               $98.44           $22.74
Number of outlets licensed to sell liquor on or off           2.87             6.53
premises in state per capita
% Population in state living in dry county                    4.58             8.18
Total spending on police drug enforcement per               $28.83           $81.12
capita




                                                      26
                                               Table 2
                 Mother’s Illicit Drug Use and Behavior Problems Index (BPI) Scores

                        Average % Point Change in BPI          Average % Point Change in BPI
                               Score, 1988-1992                       Score, 1992-1994
                             (standard deviation)                   (standard deviation)
                                      [N]                                    [N]
  all children                       1.04                                   -3.98
                                   (24.87)                                (22.74)
                                    [3842]                                 [6908]
 mother’s illicit       marijuana            cocaine           marijuana            cocaine
   drug use
used both years              6.53               -4.22              -3.76               -4.11
                           (22.19)             (7.57)             (21.64)             (12.37)
                            [184]                [27]              [296]                [33]
 ceased use in              -3.91               3.33               -5.10               -3.84
   later year              (21.01)            (23.64)             (19.51)              21.39
                            [306]              [131]               [220]                [83]
 started use in              3.06               3.62                1.44                6.51
   later year              (18.05)            (18.58)             (21.58)             (19.25)
                            [122]                [33]              [335]                [86]
  never used                 1.12               .973               -4.25               -4.12
                           (25.49)            (25.05)             (22.93)             (22.81)
                           [3230]             [3651]              [6057]              [6706]




                                                 27
                                     Table 3
                     Effects of Number of Days Drink on BPI
                             1988, 1992, 1994 Sample

                                                       Child Specific Family Specific
                             OLS            TSLS        Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Drink                        0.064          -0.987          0.101          0.160
                            (1.97)         (-1.54)         (3.67)         (2.76)
Female                      -4.980          -5.026                        -5.542
                           (-9.86)         (-9.48)                       (-5.30)
Black                       -1.364          -2.057
                           (-1.86)         (-2.35)
Hispanic                    -0.501          -2.366
                           (-0.64)         (-1.69)
AFQT                        -0.013           0.009                         -0.144
                           (-0.94)          (0.43)                        (-2.83)
Low birth weight             2.563           2.561                          4.542
                            (2.71)          (2.59)                         (2.35)
Child's age                  0.797           0.744                          0.966
                            (7.81)          (6.67)                         (4.69)
Mother's age                -0.098          -0.050                         -1.376
                           (-0.79)         (-0.38)                        (-6.35)
Mother's education          -1.006          -1.004         -1.622          -0.058
                           (-6.74)         (-6.41)        (-2.49)         (-0.12)
Married                     -3.012          -4.439         -0.820          -0.739
                           (-3.92)         (-3.74)        (-0.75)         (-0.41)
Employed                    -1.521          -0.832         -1.330          -0.598
                           (-2.82)         (-1.18)        (-1.79)         (-0.49)
Family income               -0.00002        -0.00001        1.91E-07       -6.66E-06
                           (-4.61)         (-1.34)         (0.05)         (-0.66)
Family size                  0.248           0.060          0.1389         -0.331
                            (1.37)          (0.27)         (0.44)         (-0.81)
Father in household         -3.121          -3.743          2.673          -2.617
                           (-3.77)         (-3.95)         (2.79)         (-1.57)
Baptist/Methodist           -0.469          -0.573
                           (-0.75)         (-0.87)
Catholic                    -2.544          -1.574
                           (-3.23)         (-1.55)
1992                        -2.783           7.509
                           (-3.29)          (1.18)
1994                        -8.574          -8.837
                         (-10.39)        (-10.04)
N observations             10,579          10,579          7,546          2,498
N groups                                                   3,138           347
R-squared                   0.07
F-test on instruments                      4.92
Hausman test                               2.55
Note: T-statistic in parentheses and intercept not shown. The critical value for
the test of the instruments with 6 degrees of freedom is 2.10 at the 5 percent level
and is 2.80 at the 1 percent level. The critical value for the Hausman test with 1
degree of freedom is 3.84 at the 5 percent level.



                                         28
                                     Table 4
                        Effects of Binge Drinking on BPI
                                1988, 1994 Sample

                                                       Child Specific Family Specific
                            OLS            TSLS         Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
Binge                       2.290          -3.823          -0.265         -0.044
                           (2.97)         (-0.22)         (-0.17)        (-0.02)
Female                     -5.166          -5.179
                          (-8.80)         (-8.77)
Black                      -1.980          -2.506
                          (-2.34)         (-1.45)
Hispanic                   -0.764          -1.369                          -5.247
                          (-0.85)         (-0.70)                         (-4.19)
AFQT                       -0.013          -0.018                          -0.096
                          (-0.79)         (-0.84)                         (-1.55)
Low birth weight            2.452           2.509                           5.137
                           (2.25)          (2.35)                          (2.23)
Child's age                 0.646           0.673                           0.721
                           (5.57)          (4.76)                          (2.94)
Mother's age                0.142           0.093                          -1.205
                           (0.98)          (0.46)                         (-4.81)
Mother's education         -0.770          -0.836          -1.323           0.040
                          (-4.40)         (-3.19)         (-1.40)          (0.07)
Married                    -1.579          -2.216           0.667           1.464
                          (-1.68)         (-1.08)          (0.36)          (0.62)
Employed                   -0.719          -0.558          -0.293           0.483
                          (-1.14)         (-0.71)         (-0.23)          (0.32)
Family income              -0.0001         -0.0001         -1.10E-04       -1.01E-04
                          (-5.90)         (-6.16)         (-4.00)         (-2.55)
Family size                 0.345           0.329           0.4090         -0.306
                           (1.63)          (1.50)          (0.79)         (-0.62)
Father in household        -3.572          -3.676           5.389          -3.726
                          (-3.97)         (-3.86)          (2.62)         (-1.74)
Baptist/Methodist          -0.047          -0.205
                          (-0.07)         (-0.24)
Catholic                   -2.412          -2.294
                          (-2.47)         (-2.17)
1994                       -8.832          -8.777
                          (-9.82)         (-9.60)
N observations             7,733           7,733           4,711          1,794
N groups                                                   3,138           347
R-squared                   0.08
F-test on instruments                      2.44
Hausman test                               0.02
Note: T-statistic in parentheses and intercept not shown. The critical value for
the test of the instruments with 6 degrees of freedom is 2.10 at the 5 percent level
and is 2.80 at the 1 percent level. The critical value for the Hausman test with 1
degree of freedom is 3.84 at the 5 percent level.




                                         29
                                    Table 5
                        Effects of Marijuana Use on BPI
                            1988, 1992, 1994 Sample

                                                       Child Specific Family Specific
                             OLS            TSLS        Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Marijuana                    7.618        -11.091           4.271          5.044
                            (9.17)         (-0.69)         (3.62)         (2.54)
Female                      -4.927          -5.064                        -5.517
                           (-9.79)         (-9.58)                       (-5.27)
Black                       -1.173          -1.745
                           (-1.61)         (-1.95)
Hispanic                    -0.140          -1.303
                           (-0.18)         (-1.03)
AFQT                        -0.016          -0.005                         -0.141
                           (-1.17)         (-0.32)                        (-2.78)
Low birth weight             2.446           2.732                          4.537
                            (2.60)          (2.82)                         (2.35)
Child's age                  0.794           0.793                          0.975
                            (7.81)          (7.48)                         (4.74)
Mother's age                -0.066          -0.137                         -1.388
                           (-0.54)         (-0.99)                        (-6.41)
Mother's education          -0.956          -1.079         -1.563           0.054
                           (-6.42)         (-5.83)        (-2.39)          (0.11)
Married                     -2.528          -3.928         -1.306          -1.303
                           (-3.29)         (-2.74)        (-1.20)         (-0.74)
Employed                    -1.358          -1.656         -1.288          -0.790
                           (-2.53)         (-2.71)        (-1.74)         (-0.64)
Family income               -0.00002        -0.00002        2.00E-06       -3.71E-06
                           (-4.45)         (-4.19)         (0.47)         (-0.37)
Family size                  0.300           0.145          0.1379         -0.292
                            (1.66)          (0.64)         (0.44)         (-0.72)
Father in household         -2.972          -3.430          3.843          -1.518
                           (-3.60)         (-3.67)         (4.20)         (-0.93)
Baptist/Methodist           -0.479          -0.471
                           (-0.77)         (-0.74)
Catholic                    -2.461          -2.520
                           (-3.14)         (-3.16)
1992                        -1.845          -2.618
                           (-2.36)         (-2.53)
1994                        -8.425          -8.831
                         (-10.25)          (-9.73)
N observations             10,579          10,579          7,546          2,498
N groups                                                   3,138           347
R-squared                   0.08
F-test on instruments                      4.94
Hausman test                               0.07
Note: T-statistic in parentheses and intercept not shown. The critical value for
the test of the instruments with 6 degrees of freedom is 2.10 at the 5 percent level
and is 2.80 at the 1 percent level. The critical value for the Hausman test with 1
degree of freedom is 3.84 at the 5 percent level.




                                         30
                                      Table 6
                          Effects of Cocaine Use on BPI
                             1988, 1992, 1994 Sample

                                                       Child Specific Family Specific
                             OLS            TSLS        Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Cocaine                      6.418        -36.251           2.855         11.765
                            (4.26)         (-1.59)         (1.41)         (3.61)
Female                      -4.996          -4.910
                           (-9.90)         (-9.34)
Black                       -1.366          -1.628
                           (-1.87)         (-2.10)
Hispanic                    -0.516          -1.168                         -5.584
                           (-0.66)         (-1.34)                        (-5.34)
AFQT                        -0.014          -0.001                         -0.150
                           (-0.98)         (-0.05)                        (-2.95)
Low birth weight             2.475           3.059                          4.576
                            (2.62)          (3.01)                         (2.37)
Child's age                  0.790           0.811                          0.972
                            (7.76)          (7.50)                         (4.73)
Mother's age                -0.076          -0.204                         -1.395
                           (-0.61)         (-1.42)                        (-6.46)
Mother's education          -0.994          -1.076         -1.590           0.038
                           (-6.66)         (-6.66)        (-2.43)          (0.08)
Married                     -2.881          -4.322         -1.362          -1.174
                           (-3.75)         (-3.90)        (-1.25)         (-0.67)
Employed                    -1.444          -1.678         -1.315          -0.513
                           (-2.68)         (-2.90)        (-1.77)         (-0.42)
Family income               -0.00002        -0.00002        1.91E-06       -4.64E-06
                           (-4.54)         (-3.70)         (0.45)         (-0.47)
Family size                  0.239           0.229          0.1209         -0.331
                            (1.32)          (1.17)         (0.38)         (-0.81)
Father in household         -3.160          -3.152          3.740          -1.588
                           (-3.82)         (-3.61)         (4.09)         (-0.97)
Baptist/Methodist           -0.480          -0.451
                           (-0.77)         (-0.69)
Catholic                    -2.488          -2.471
                           (-3.16)         (-3.07)
1992                        -1.999          -3.071
                           (-2.54)         (-3.12)
1994                        -8.485          -9.181
                         (-10.29)          (-9.97)
N observations             10,579          10,579
N groups                                                   7,546          2,498
R-squared                   0.07                           3,138           347
F-test on instruments                      7.79
Hausman test                               0.08
Note: T-statistic in parentheses and intercept not shown. The critical value for
the test of the instruments with 6 degrees of freedom is 2.10 at the 5 percent level
and is 2.80 at the 1 percent level. The critical value for the Hausman test with 1
degree of freedom is 3.84 at the 5 percent level.




                                         31
                               Table 7
        Effects of Drink, Marijuana and Cocaine Use on BPI
                       1998, 1992, 1994 Sample

                                       Child Specific Family Specific
                            OLS         Fixed Effect   Fixed Effect
                            (1)             (3)             (4)
Drink                       0.022           0.104          0.156
                           (0.66)          (3.79)         (2.69)
Marijuana                   7.154           4.223          3.179
                           (8.11)          (3.49)         (1.55)
Cocaine                     2.196           1.366         10.312
                           (1.39)          (0.66)         (3.06)
Female                     -4.934                         -5.607
                          (-9.80)                        (-5.37)
Black                      -1.159
                          (-1.59)
Hispanic                   -0.097
                          (-0.13)
AFQT                       -0.017                          -0.160
                          (-1.22)                         (-3.14)
Low birth weight            2.423                           4.727
                           (2.58)                          (2.45)
Child's age                 0.794                           0.961
                           (7.81)                          (4.69)
Mother's age               -0.062                          -1.337
                          (-0.51)                         (-6.18)
Mother's education         -0.955          -1.524           0.089
                          (-6.42)         (-2.34)          (0.18)
Married                    -2.459          -0.720          -0.311
                          (-3.20)         (-0.66)         (-0.17)
Employed                   -1.368          -1.301          -0.750
                          (-2.54)         (-1.76)         (-0.61)
Family income              -1.95E-05        3.01E-07       -6.88E-06
                          (-4.51)          (0.07)         (-0.69)
Family size                 0.301           0.129          -0.278
                           (1.66)          (0.41)         (-0.68)
Father in household        -2.971           2.746          -2.416
                          (-3.60)          (2.87)         (-1.45)
Baptist/Methodist          -0.478
                          (-0.77)
Catholic                   -2.483
                          (-3.17)
1992                       -2.020
                          (-2.38)
1994                       -8.394
                        (-10.21)
N observations            10,579           7,546            2,498
N groups                                   3,138            347
R-squared                  0.08
Note: T-statistic in parentheses and intercept not shown.




                                  32
                                                            Table 8
                                                      First Stage Results

                                           Number of Days             Binge        Marijuana      Cocaine
                                              Drink
Beer tax                                            -0.293             -0.004         -0.028        -0.011
                                                   (-1.57)            (-0.41)        (-3.84)       (-2.76)
Marijuana decriminalization                         -0.050             -0.011          0.018         0.008
                                                   (-0.29)            (-1.14)         (2.75)        (2.20)
Cocaine price                                       -0.011             -0.0002         0.0003       -0.0001
                                                   (-2.30)            (-0.74)         (1.80)       (-0.85)
Number of outlets                                   -0.004              0.0004        -0.0002       -0.0004
                                                   (-0.37)             (0.62)        (-0.41)       (-1.69)
Percent dry                                         -0.037             -0.001         -0.0005       -0.001
                                                   (-3.71)            (-1.92)        (-1.25)       (-4.22)
Spending on police                                   0.0001            -0.0002         0.0001        0.00002
                                                    (0.06)            (-2.87)         (2.08)        (1.14)
Female                                              -0.041             -0.002         -0.008         0.002
                                                   (-0.27)            (-0.23)        (-1.29)        (0.60)
Black                                               -0.596             -0.085         -0.024        -0.003
                                                   (-2.67)            (-6.75)        (-2.74)       (-0.65)
Hispanic                                            -1.986             -0.101         -0.064        -0.020
                                                   (-8.26)            (-7.37)        (-6.87)       (-3.89)
AFQT                                                 0.020             -0.001          0.001         0.0003
                                                    (4.62)            (-3.34)         (3.42)        (3.07)
Low birth weight                                    -0.025              0.010          0.016         0.014
                                                   (-0.09)             (0.63)         (1.41)        (2.22)
Child's age                                         -0.046              0.004          0.0001        0.001
                                                   (-1.52)             (2.61)         (0.06)        (0.88)
Mother's age                                         0.043             -0.008         -0.004        -0.003
                                                    (1.17)            (-3.72)        (-2.64)       (-3.85)
Mother's education                                  -0.001             -0.011         -0.007        -0.002
                                                   (-0.03)            (-4.18)        (-3.90)       (-2.11)
Married                                             -1.341             -0.103         -0.073        -0.033
                                                   (-5.81)            (-7.45)        (-8.18)       (-6.66)
Employed                                             0.696              0.027         -0.014        -0.004
                                                    (4.29)             (2.90)        (-2.27)       (-1.25)
Family income                                        0.00001           -1.57E-07      -2.34E-08      3.92E-08
                                                    (7.12)            (-0.78)        (-0.46)        (1.40)
Family size                                         -0.179             -0.003         -0.008        -0.0003
                                                   (-3.29)            (-0.88)        (-3.96)       (-0.23)
Father in household                                 -0.564             -0.017         -0.024         0.001
                                                   (-2.26)            (-1.32)        (-2.50)        (0.13)
Baptist/Methodist                                    0.100             -0.021          0.007         0.006
                                                    (0.52)            (-1.97)         (0.87)        (1.48)
Catholic                                             0.850              0.018         -0.003        -0.001
                                                    (3.59)             (1.25)        (-0.36)       (-0.17)
1992                                                 9.504                            -0.035        -0.028
                                                  (36.14)               --           (-3.42)       (-5.04)
1994                                                -0.617              0.003         -0.014        -0.021
                                                   (-2.16)             (0.20)        (-1.24)       (-3.35)
R-squared
                                                    0.26               0.05           0.05          0.03
Note: T-statistic in parentheses and intercept not shown.




                                                               33
