                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FDI IN THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE JAPANESE ECONOMY


                                          Magnus Blomström
                                            Denise Konan
                                           Robert E. Lipsey


                                         Working Paper 7693
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7693

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2000 by Magnus Blomström, Denise Konan, Robert E. Lipsey. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
FDI in the Restructuring of the Japanese Economy
Magnus Blomström, Denise Konan, Robert E. Lipsey
NBER Working Paper No. 7693
May 2000
JEL No. F23

                                             ABSTRACT

    This paper examines how inward and outward foreign direct investment (FDI) have influenced
the restructuring of the Japanese economy and can be expected to continue to do so in the future. We
find that outward investment has helped Japanese firms to sustain foreign market shares and
contributed to the restructuring of the Japanese economy away from older industries. By shifting
from exporting to affiliate production, there has been a geographical reallocation of the activities of
Japanese firms, particularly those of multinational manufacturing firms. However, Japanese outward
FDI is still not very large relative to the Japanese economy, despite the rapid growth since the mid-
1980s, and there is still scope for significant increase when compared with the levels of most other
OECD countries. Inward FDI will presumably have an even stronger impact on the restructuring of
the Japanese economy. Although the stock of inward foreign direct investment is still very small,
there are important changes under way. Deregulation has opened up much of the industrial and
service sectors to foreign multinationals.

   Magnus Blomström                                Denise Konan
   European Institute of Japanese Studies          University of Hawaii at Manoa
   Stockholm School of Economics                   2424 Maile Way, SSB 542
   P.O. Box 6501                                   Honolulu, HI 96822
   SE-113 83 Stockholm, Sweden                     USA
   and NBER                                        konan@hawaii.edu
   gmb@hhs.se

   Robert E. Lipsey
   NBER
   365 Fifth Ave., Suite 5318,
   New York, NY 10016
   and CUNY
   rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu
                                            1. Introduction1

Both outward and inward foreign direct investment (FDI) play an important role in restructuring

economies. Outward investment is a way of maximizing the rents on the accumulated knowledge

and skill of a country’s firms, or preserving them as long as possible when the country itself has

lost its comparative advantage in their industries, and the industries, or parts of them must

relocate. Inward investment may bring new firm specific skills and new industries to countries

that lack them or preserve the rents on workers’ skills in sectors where domestic firms have lost

their firm specific advantages. In this paper we will analyze the role outward and inward FDI can

play in the coming restructuring of the Japanese economy.

        The paper begins with a brief description of the major changes in the economic structure

of Japan in the last 20 years and discusses some important factors that may influence the future

development of the Japanese economy. Among the factors included here are the implications of

institutional changes, such as the continuing deregulation of the Japanese economy and

economic changes, such as the aging of the population, the rise in per capita income, and the

increasing education and labor force participation of women. With this as a background, we

examine what role outward and inward FDI can play in this restructuring process.

        With respect to outward FDI, we will ask what types of production (e.g. labor intensive,

skill intensive etc.) and activities Japanese firms have moved abroad in the past and what type

they are likely to move in the future. And what are the motivations for these re-locations? How

are they related to, for instance, changes in relative production costs in Japan vis-á-vis foreign

countries or in the availability of skills?




1
 The research reported here is part of the NBER program in International Studies. Blomström’s work on the study
was supported by HSFR.
       A different role is envisioned for inward investment. So far, we have seen relatively little

activity by foreign multinationals in Japan, but because of gradual deregulation we expect that to

change in the future. Inward FDI will bring foreign firms’ skills and technologies to Japan in

areas where Japanese firms, partly because of the protected environment in which they have

developed, are relatively uncompetitive. These Japanese firms may be forced by the intensified

competition to shrink or disappear.


     2. The Japanese Economy: Recent Changes and Future Developments
Every fast growing economy has to go through significant structural transformations, shifting

production and employment from low to high productivity activities. The remarkable economic

performance during the 20th century, particularly between 1950 and 1990, is a testimony of

Japan’s ability to adapt and restructure. Japan grew rapidly after World War II, with an average

annual growth rate of eight per cent from 1953 to 1973 and over 10 per cent in the 1960s. As

Wolff (2000b) documents, Japan was able to transform from a mid-tech based economy in 1970

to a high-tech region by the mid-1990s. Japan’s rate of transformation was much more rapid than

that of its primary competitors, the United States and Germany.

       Production shifted from an agricultural and light manufacturing base before WWII to

heavy industry and, increasingly, to services. Employment trends reflect these shifts in Japan’s

economy. In 1954, primary sectors (agriculture and mining) accounted for 38 per cent of

employment, while manufacturing comprised only 17.8 per cent. By 1970, primary production

had fallen in relative terms to 17.8 per cent of the labor force and manufacturing had risen to 27

per cent of employment. As in other developed countries, the workforce has continued to move

sharply out of agricultural production and toward services (see Table 1). Manufacturing’s share




                                                3
of overall employment has actually fallen since 1977, in spite of Japan’s enormous success as an

exporter of manufactured goods.

       Within the manufacturing sector there were also major changes in structure. In the 1950s,

manufacturing was dominated by textile and other light industry. Iron and steel production and

the shipbuilding industry rose to prominence in the 1960s, followed by the chemical sector. By

the 1970s, electronics and automobile production dominated manufacturing activities. Since the

1970s, electrical machinery and chemicals, particularly the former, continued to grow much

faster than manufacturing production in general (see Table 2). Transport equipment did not even

quite keep up with the average in manufacturing. Food and tobacco and iron and steel declined in

importance relative to other manufacturing industries, and textiles shrank in absolute size.

Although these are very broad groupings, it is tempting to see in these changes a shift to more

technology-intensive sectors.

       Another mirror that reflects changes in the Japanese and world economies is the

composition of trade. An advantage of trade data is that they are available in more detail than

production or employment, especially for the world as a whole or for other individual countries

with which we might wish to compare Japan.

       For world trade as a whole, the major changes between 1977 and 1995, as shown in Table

3, were a large growth in the share of Electrical machinery and large declines in Foods and

Metals, both relatively declining industries within Japanese manufacturing production as well.

World trade as a whole has been moving to computers and electrical and electronic equipment

and away from primary production and from capital goods used in primary production.

       The path of development of the composition of Japanese exports has been similar in

many ways, but often steeper (see Table 4). The two predominantly primary industry groups,




                                               4
Foods and Metals, declined faster as parts of Japanese exports than as part of world exports.

Japan already showed a revealed comparative disadvantage in exports of Foods in 1977. The

relative descent of Metals in 1995 is particularly striking, as Japan had been a relatively strong

exporter of metals, particularly steel, in 1977. It would not be surprising if the decline of Metals

continued in the future.

       The individual industries for which the share of Japanese exports grew the most were all

industries for which shares in world exports grew, but Japan seemed to be leading the way in this

shift. Among the most rapidly declining industries in Japanese exports, three of the four were

also declining in world exports, but not as quickly as in Japan. Thus, we can summarize the

trends in trade by saying that as the world was shifting out of primary production and trade and

into more technologically advanced products, Japan was doing the same, but more sharply,

leading the way.

       Another way to describe the shifts in Japanese trade structure is to compare them with the

trade structure, and changes in it, for the United States, the highest country in per capita income

and presumably the world's technological leader (again Table 4). The shares of the seven major

industry groups in Japanese exports in 1995 were closer to those in US exports than they were in

1977 in five cases and further away in only two. The sum of the absolute differences in shares

between Japan and the US in the seven industry groups was 57.5 percentage points in 1977, but

by 1995, the Japanese export shares had moved much closer to the US shares of 1977, the sum of

the differences being reduced to 41.0. Thus, the distribution of exports by the US appears to

serve as a leading indicator of the future changes in the structure of Japanese exports. By 1995,

the total of the percentage differences was down to 33.3. Thus, the Japanese export pattern was




                                                 5
not only catching up to the earlier US pattern, but was following some of the changes that were

taking place in the US distribution.


2.1 The Future

Turning to the changes that we expect in the underlying characteristics of Japan’s economy in

the next few decades, a closer look at demographic trends is crucial. Japanese demographics and

family practices are interacting in a dramatic manner. Japan has recently achieved the longest life

expectancy of all countries. Fully one-third of the Japanese are expected to be over sixty-five

years of age in 2040, double the level of 1995. The size of the total population is expected to

peak around 2010. Simultaneously, rates of fertility have dropped to 1.4 per woman, in part due

to a delay in womens’ decisions to marry. These demographic influences will presumably result

in a severe labor shortage early in the twenty-first century at a time when the aging population

will place severe pressure on health and welfare facilities. As Mason and Ogawa (2000b) point

out, Japan will likely experience a slowing in the traditionally high savings rate as the population

continues to age. This, in turn, implies a dramatic slowdown in investment and long-term growth

rates unless offsetting increases in productivity emerge.

       Yet, throughout history Japan has risen to challenges by restructuring its culture and

economy. As we discuss above, Japan has rapidly adjusted its industrial activities during this

century to move from agriculture and low-tech manufacturing to high tech industries.

Blomström, et al. (2000b) provide details on numerous adjustments that will likely be

forthcoming in the twenty-first century, many of which will have implications for inward and

outward FDI. Likewise, FDI will act as an additional catalyst for adjustment to the new demands

of the global information age. In this section, we highlight three of the main structural

adjustments that are underway in the Japanese economy.



                                                 6
       A major structural change is the liberalization of the labor market and the greater

inclusion of women in the labor force. The conventional wisdom is that low unemployment rates

and job turnover rates, attributable to a system of ‘life-time employment’ and worker devotion to

the firm, contributed to Japan’s rapid growth. Firms invested heavily in costly worker education

that focused on providing broad exposure to manufacturing activities, increasing productivity

and firm-specific innovations. The system also acted as a type of private pension plan that

essentially underpaid young workers with the promise of job security and a generous senior

employee package. Ito (1996) asserts that the lifetime employment system is facing problems

similar to pay-as-you-go retirement systems in other countries as the population rapidly ages.

Also changing, according to Ito, is the need for very narrowly and highly specialized workers in

high technology and service sectors, such as telecommunications, computer information and

software, and finance. In response, the broad-based, firm-specific worker training in

manufacturing will shrink. As the labor force within high-growth, high-technology sectors

expands, the demand for specialized education and the job turnover rate will rise. Within the

twenty-first century, labor markets will become increasingly flexible. Unemployment rates will

be closer to US levels, reflecting a more competitive business environment. Labor practices will

also undergo fundamental changes with performance and merit increasingly determining

advancement.

       In response to an increasing labor shortage, we anticipate that the twenty-first century

will also bring a new role for Japanese women. Women have traditionally been underutilized

given their level of education. While the increase in women’s engagement in the labor force has

been quite rapid, Mason and Ogawa (2000b) report a 1997 female participation rate of only 50

per cent (relative to 77.7 per cent amongst males). Women, especially if married, currently tend




                                               7
to work part-time. Yet, gender discrimination in the labor market seems to be easing in response

to market conditions. Thus, a conceivable scenario would be for Japanese female participation

rates to increase in response to labor shortages and more closely resemble patterns in other

OECD countries.

        The increasing role for women in the labor market will tend to make child-rearing even

more challenging. Thus, we foresee a persistent pressure on the Japanese labor force to be highly

productive and competitive in order to maintain a high living standard. Japan may seek to ease

its highly restrictive immigration policies to expand the workforce. More likely in our view, as

we discuss in the next section of this paper, Japanese firms will increasingly relocate their less

skilled labor activities overseas.

        A second structural adjustment in the Japanese economy is that of regulatory reform.

Twentieth-century Japan has been characterized by a high level of governmental involvement

and regulation in most industries (see Carlile and Tilton, 1998). Japan’s post-war development

strategy relied on a public-private partnership. The government sought to modernize the

economic base by selecting promising industries and actively nurturing capacity by limiting

competition, supporting research, development, and technology transfers, and encouraging the

extension of credit. Industries with a potential to achieve economies of scale and scope were

particularly favored and permitted to form horizontal and vertical cartels that cooperated on

pricing, R&D, production, etc. The government also aimed to protect special interests, such as

rice farmers and small retail shops, against competition through a complex system of licensing,

regulation, and quality control standards.

        This close partnership between business interests and the Japanese government is in

direct contrast to the Western, and particularly the American model, which is grounded in a




                                                8
tradition of strong antitrust policy, market competition, and private ownership. Japan has viewed

this approach as encouraging waste as firms may use real resources to drive others out of

business or may duplicate R&D costs. Yet, in the face of a stagnant economy and an increasingly

integrated global economy, Japan has been under increasing pressure to modify the existing

regulatory framework and promote greater market competition.

       We anticipate that the Japanese regulatory environment will increasingly converge

towards the industrial policies of other advanced industrial nations, as we enter the twenty-first

century. These reforms will act to create new markets, stimulate competition, attract foreign

investment and technology transfer, and improve consumer welfare. While the exit of declining

firms and industries will be hastened, this should eventually free resources for use in more

globally competitive sectors and should promote longer-term growth and stability. Deregulation

promises to particularly valuable in non-tradable services, such as insurance, travel (airlines),

telecommunications, and utilities. Both business and consumers will be the ultimate

beneficiaries.

       Finally, global economic conditions will continue to restructure the Japanese economy.

Japan has committed to further liberalization of its markets to trade under the WTO. While

export expansion led the economic growth of the twentieth century, we anticipate that import

competition and inward FDI will play a leading role in increasing productivity in Japan in the

twenty-first. As Lawrence and Weinstein (1998) found, using OECD data, productivity in

Japanese import sectors has grown more rapidly than in export sectors. Imports act to create a

more competitive domestic business environment. We anticipate that, as import barriers continue

to fall and as domestic distribution systems become more transparent and converge to OECD

standards, the import share of Japanese GDP will rise hence improving domestic productivity.




                                                9
       We also anticipate that deregulation and a greater openness of the Japanese economy will

generate inward FDI, discussed below. The competitive pressure from such investment can play

role similar to that of import competition, enhancing productivity growth (see Blomström and

Sjöholm, 1999).

       In conclusion, while it is impossible to predict in detail the future development of the

Japanese economy or any other, there is little doubt that the economy will change. In order to

guess at the future role of FDI in these changes, it is necessary to make some forecast of their

direction. We find it likely that Japan will continue to grow in per capita income and to move

further in deregulating the economy, and will therefore become more like other economies, such

as the United States.


                3. The Role of Japanese Outward Direct Investment

What role has increasing outward FDI played in the restructuring of the Japanese economy?

Outward FDI is not very large relative to the Japanese economy, and it showed little sign of

growth, in relative terms, before the mid-1980s, despite the increases in the Japanese wage level

and in the strength and size of Japanese firms (Lipsey, et al., 1998). After the rise in the value of

the Yen that began in 1985, a new trend appeared: a sharp rise in the importance of production

and employment outside Japan by Japanese firms. Employment in Japanese affiliates abroad,

which had been below 2 per cent of aggregate home employment since the early 1970s, rose to

over 5 per cent by 1996. In manufacturing, overseas employment, 5 to 6.5 per cent of home

employment before 1985, rose to 19 per cent in 1996. Value added in Japanese manufacturing

affiliates abroad roughly doubled in size relative to total manufacturing value added in Japan

between 1980 and 1992 (Lipsey, et al., 1998).




                                                 10
       Within multinational corporations (MNCs), employment abroad rose from under 40 per

cent of home employment in 1977 and 1980 to 55 per cent in 1992, and the affiliate share of

production within Japanese manufacturing multinationals rose from 6.5 to 16.5 per cent

(Ramstetter, 1991 and 1996).

        While overseas manufacturing affiliates were becoming more important relative to their

parents and to total manufacturing in Japan, the parents’ share of Japanese manufacturing was

shrinking. Value added in Japanese manufacturing parent firms fell from around 60 per cent of

value added in Japanese manufacturing in 1980 and 1983 to about 50 per cent in 1992. There has

apparently been a geographical reallocation of the activities of Japanese firms, and particularly

those of multinational manufacturing firms. The reallocation must have changed the

characteristics of the economy as a whole or it resulted from underlying changes in the economy.

       Japan’s share of world manufacturing exports rose over 60 per cent between 1970 and

1986 and then, by 1995, declined by a quarter. During the period of rising Japanese export

shares, foreign production affiliates were small relative to aggregate Japanese employment and

output, but they were of importance in some individual sectors. In Mining, and in three

manufacturing sectors close to primary products, Food products, Non-ferrous metals, and Wood,

paper and pulp, Japanese affiliates were export-oriented, usually to the extent of half or more of

their sales, and were focussed on exporting to the Japanese market (Ramstetter, 1991). That

concentration reflected the traditional Japanese concerns about raw material and food supplies

and kept at least part of import sources under Japanese control.

       In Foods, Textiles and apparel, and Wood, paper and pulp, overseas affiliates were the

main sources of whatever share Japanese MNCs had of markets outside Japan. In two of those

industry groups that share had traditionally been small, but Textiles and apparel were a different




                                                11
case. Japanese exports alone had accounted for 12 per cent of world exports in 1970 and Japan

had a strong export comparative advantage at that time. As Japan’s share of world exports of

these products fell to 7.5 per cent in 1977 and 2 per cent in 1986, and Japan lost its comparative

advantage in this industry, Japanese affiliates took over part of the Japanese share in overseas

markets. By 1977, they were already supplying more of those markets than their parents, and by

1986 they supplied twice as much. Thus, they helped to retain for Japanese MNCs some of the

market share they might have lost if they had depended entirely on exporting from Japan.

        The changes that took place in the location of the production from which Japanese MNCs

served foreign markets are shown in Table 5. By 1977, the first year for which we have affiliate

data, the affiliates had already taken over half or more of the Japanese MNCs’ foreign markets in

the declining industries, Foods, Textiles and apparel, and Wood, paper and pulp. In the next

decades, still in the period of Japanese trade ascendancy, the affiliate share in these industries

grew still further.

        In the Chemicals sector, never one of Japanese export comparative advantage, and one in

which Japanese parent exports hardly grew from 1977 to 1986, affiliates were initially

unimportant. However, by 1986 they supplied two thirds of Japanese MNCs’ foreign sales.

        Most of Japanese and Japanese MNC exports and affiliate sales are in the Metals,

Machinery, and Transport Equipment groups, and affiliates accounted for less than 25 per cent of

overseas markets for Japanese MNCs in 1977. That affiliate share grew in all these industries

even as Japan’s world export shares were growing, but the smallest increase in affiliate shares

was in Electrical Machinery, the sector in which Japan’s comparative advantage was greatest.

        While the affiliate shares of MNC markets most closely reflect the decisions of parent

firms, these decisions affect the country as a whole, outside of the MNCs. The outcome for the




                                               12
country can be seen in Table 6, which shows how all Japanese firms, including non-MNC firms,

served their foreign markets. That calculation can be extended to 1995, because it does not

require parent data. The period of declining Japanese export shares in most closely approximated

in our data by 1986-1995.

       If the adjustment required by the Japanese economy in this decade was a decline in the

role of manufacturing, the overseas affiliates contributed to it in every industry by supplying

larger and larger shares of the foreign markets served by all Japanese manufacturing firms,

MNCs and others. While the affiliate share for manufacturing as a whole grew only from 15 to

23 per cent during the high growth period, it increased from 23 to 40 per cent in the low growth

era, and to 40 per cent or more in every industry except Non-electrical Machinery.

       Even in those industries in which Japan retained its comparative advantage in 1995, the

two machinery groups and Transport Equipment, the share of affiliates in serving Japan’s foreign

markets increased. The shift from exporting to affiliate production and sales was particularly

large in Transport Equipment: from an affiliate share of 16 per cent in 1986 to 45 per cent in

1995. The move to affiliate production in this case sustained Japanese exports. Of the increase of

$36 billion in exports from Japan, $31 billion were imports from Japan by manufacturing

affiliates in the Transport Equipment industry, presumably mostly components for production

there. Of the total growth in foreign market sales in this industry of $148 billion, exports from

Japan accounted for only the $36 billion mentioned above; the rest came from affiliate sales net

of their imports from Japan. Thus, the affiliates expanded the total Japanese market share in the

industry, sustained exports from Japan, and permitted a shift in Japanese home production to

inputs into the production process.




                                               13
       Table 7 describes, for the whole range of manufacturing industries, the role of affiliate

production and sales in the period of decline in Japanese home country export shares. More than

half the growth in Japanese firms’ sales in foreign markets, whether from exports from Japan or

Japanese production abroad, came from the foreign production. The foreign production share

was close to or above half in all industries but one, Non-electrical Machinery. The home country

share was highest in the industry groups that contained the more sophisticated or research-

intensive industries, but not by a huge margin.

       As was the case for older industries in the period of rising Japanese export share, before

1986, the affiliates were helping Japan to sustain foreign market shares at a time when Japan’s

market shares were declining, and especially in Japan’s less competitive industries.

       Another area where we find significant Japanese outward FDI is in banking, but here we

find some interesting differences from manufacturing. Overseas branches of Japanese banks have

been much more important than foreign banks in Japan. The total assets of overseas branches of

Japanese banks reached a peak, in absolute terms, in 1990, after much more than doubling in the

previous eight years (Bank of Japan, 1997, pp. 94-98). After 1990, these assets declined by

almost a third, and then recovered somewhat, but they remained, in 1997, well below the 1990

level. Until 1990, Japanese banks were growing at home, as well as abroad, and even faster, so

that the assets abroad were declining relative to those at home during the latter part of the 1980s.

After 1990, the rate of decline was faster abroad than at home, so that the ratio of foreign to

domestic assets fell by almost half from 1985 to 1997.

       That process, first of rapid expansion abroad, and then of contraction, is illustrated by the

changes in the position of Japanese banks in the United States, as reported in the Reserve

Board’s Reports of Conditions and Income. From 1985 to 1990, assets of US offices of Japanese




                                                  14
banks more than doubled, and grew from 6.6 to almost 12 per cent of total assets of all banks in

the United States. This share of business loans grew even faster, from about 8.5 per cent in 1985

to 19 per cent in 1990. The expansion was fed by high Japanese saving rates and restrictions on

competition by foreign institutions for Japanese saving rather than by any technological

superiority or high operating efficiency on the part of Japanese banks. After 1990, the absolute

amount of Japanese bank assets in the United States fell sharply, and their share in total assets

even more rapidly, falling to about 5.5 per cent in June 1998, well below the 1985 level. The

firm comparative advantage of Japanese banks apparently disappeared with the decline in their

domestic assets and the need to restore capital at home.


3.1 Future Trends

A continuation of the trends of the last twenty years in the Japanese economy would point to

continued relative decline of manufacturing and growth in service industries. However, a larger

share for foreign firms in somewhat liberalized finance and trade sectors might produce

reductions in employment in these areas even as output grows, if these sectors are presently as

inefficient as is often said.

        Within manufactur ing, and therefore in commodity trade, the declines in Japanese export

shares and the growth in affiliate shares in many old industries, such as Foods, Textiles and

apparel, and Metals, do not have much further to go. One exception is the Iron and steel industry,

although foreign affiliates have not sustained Japanese MNC shares much in that case.

        Manufacturing exports are, and will probably be in the future, increasingly concentrated

in Machinery and in Transport equipment, mainly motor vehicles. Even if these remain the bulk

of Japanese exports, the trend in Electrical machinery and Transport equipment has been, and




                                                15
will probably continue to be, toward supplying more of foreign markets from affiliate

production. That trend has hardly begun for Non-electrical machinery so far.

       A comparison of Japanese affiliates with US majority owned foreign affiliates points to

some differences that suggest directions for the future evolution of Japanese FDI. One is the

much smaller involvement of the Japanese affiliates in Non-electrical machinery, which includes

computers and parts, despite Japan’s comparative advantage in that industry. The revealed

comparative advantage ratio for Japanese affiliates in this industry is 0.48, as compared to 1.40

for US affiliates, although the ratios for the two home countries are close, from 1.32 to 1.42. The

likely future path is a rapid growth for Japanese affiliates in this industry.

       The second difference is that in Non-electrical machinery and Transport equipment,

exports/sales ratios are much lower in Japanese affiliates than in US affiliates, 35 as against 54

per cent and 11 as against 53 per cent. The gap between US and Japanese affiliates is larger in

both developed and developing country locations, especially in Transport equipment. US

affiliates in developed countries exported 54 per cent of their output and Japanese affiliates only

14 per cent. The shares in developing countries were 43 and 7 per cent.

       Both the lack of Japanese affiliate production in Non-electrical machinery and the low

export ratios of Japanese affiliates in Electrical machinery and Transport equipment probably

reflect the relative immaturity of the Japanese affiliates. Japanese manufacturing MNCs seem to

be behind US MNCs in dividing up their output into segments and producing each segment in

the most efficient, or economical location. The future should see more movement in this

direction, especially if home labor market restrictions are loosened. The reallocation of

production to affiliates should help the parent firms to adjust to the changing conditions of




                                                  16
production in Japan and improvements in host countries, and to hold on to or expand their

markets in the face of high home production costs.

       Much of the reduction in Japanese banking operations abroad, and its timing, must have

reflected cyclical conditions in Japan. But the development may also be, to some extent, a

response to expectations of future liberalization at home. Until some time in the 1980s, Japanese

banks were awash in cheap funds from Japan’s high saving rate and the banks’ monopoly

position at home. With the future promising probably lower saving by an aging population and

more competition for funds from foreign financial firms entering the Japanese market, the

Japanese banks may have concluded that their problems were not temporary and that large

foreign networks would no longer be profitable.


                                4. The Role of Inward FDI

Japanese outward FDI takes place in industries of existing Japanese firms´ comparative

advantage, typically also the comparative advantage of Japan itself, present or possibly past.

Inward FDI would be expected to come into industries in which foreign firms have some firm

comparative advantage over Japanese firms. They might be export industries in which Japan

already has some comparative advantage as a location or could have with the addition of some

foreign firms' technology, or they might be non-tradable industries, or sectors of them, in which

Japanese firms are backward in some respects.

      Inward FDI may affect host countries both directly and indirectly. Investments by foreign

companies will directly influence macro variables like capital formation, employment, tax

revenues, and trade. Indirectly, foreign investment may also influence the structure of the host

economy, as well as the conduct and performance of locally owned firms. Although the direct

effects of foreign direct investment may be important in certain situations and/or countries, it is


                                                17
generally accepted that a significant share of the long-run impact of FDI is likely to occur in the

form of indirect effects or “spillover” (see Blomström, 1989). This is because FDI, apart from

being a financial capital flow, also involves the capitalization of technology, knowledge, skills,

and other resources that represent the MNCs’ intangible assets.

      Spillovers can occur because MNC affiliates import and demonstrate technologies that are

not used in the host country, and because their operations (or mere presence) may increase the

level of competition and force local firms to search for more efficient methods of production.

Among many possible channels for technology spillovers, the most concrete may be linkages

with foreign MNCs and hiring of employees trained in MNCs. Recent studies have confirmed

that the nature and significance of spillovers appear to vary between countries and industries, and

that the positive effects of FDI are likely to increase with the level of local capability and

competition (see e.g. Blomström, et al., 2000a). This suggests that there is a great potential for

FDI spillovers in the Japanese economy in the future.

      Historically, inward FDI has played an important role in the economic restructuring

process in Japan (Sohn, 1998). Although always small, inward FDI was prominent in key

industrial sectors in Japan before World War II and had a significant impact in the modernization

of its industrial base in the inter-war period (see Takeshi and Udagawa, 1990). The Japanese

government actively encouraged multinational entry in heavy and chemical industries, most

notably in petroleum processing, rubber tires, automobiles, and electrical machinery. The impact

was notable in the restructuring of Japan’s economy toward high value-added manufacturing.

Western investors revolutionized the country’s industrial base by introducing technology of

advanced production, firm organization, and management. From textile MNCs was gained a

sense of quality control, western standards and design, and marketing strategies. The foreign




                                                18
automotive industry brought techniques of mass production and vertical corporate organization.

Modern methods were widely disseminated and blended with Japanese cultural practices (see

UNCTAD, 1995).

      Inward investment is still very low in Japan, as is well documented in the literature (see

e.g. Yoshitomi and Graham, 1996). An often-cited figure is that foreign firms in Japan account

for only one per cent of Japanese sales. However, a more careful look at the numbers would

place sales of foreign affiliates at 5.3 to 5.7 per cent of all sales (Weinstein, 1997). These figures

are about half of that of the United States, and are well below international averages. Foreign

firms’ shares of Japanese production measured by value added, are also low in an international

comparison (see Lipsey, et al., 1998).

      Low foreign involvement in the Japanese economy is due to a combination of factors that

have been discussed over the years. Until the early 1970s, Japan’s policies toward inward FDI

were extremely restrictive. Although these restrictions were largely eliminated in 1980, inward

FDI is still relatively small, leading some (e.g. Encarnacion, 1992) to suggest that private barriers

to FDI have replaced public barriers. Others, however, have argued that these findings are the

result of general entry barriers (e.g. Ramstetter and James, 1993). For instance, the cost of doing

business in Japan is exceedingly high due to high rental costs, high taxation of corporate profits,

and complicated governmental regulations. Rigidities in the labor market, such as an expectation

of ‘lifetime’ employment and high living standards, result in very high implicit wages.

       Foreign entry is further limited by the difficulty of acquiring ownership in existing

Japanese firms. Cross-ownership of shares within keiretsu, vertically related groups of firms, are

thought to discourage hostile mergers and acquisitions as a low level of stocks are publicly

traded (Dunning, 1996). Furthermore, governmental regulations and subsidies favor small and




                                                 19
medium-sized enterprises, while multinational activity tends to arise predominantly in large

enterprises (Weinstein, 1997).


4.1 The Future

Inward FDI will play more of a role than in the past in the sectors we expect to grow in Japan.

These include high-tech sectors in manufacturing and financial services, in which Japanese firms

are relatively backward. Foreign firms will also benefit from the ongoing deregulation of the

Japanese economy. These reforms will act to create new markets, attract foreign investment, and

stimulate competition. We can already see the beginning of this structural change.

       Compared with foreign rivals, many Japanese firms are either too small or too dependent

on their home market to survive. By paring away jobs and unprofitable businesses, they are

restructuring to regain competitiveness (see e.g. Whittaker, 1997). This process – known as

risutora – is rapidly changing those sectors of the Japanese economy that are open to

competition. Mergers and acquisitions, which also involve foreign owned multinationals, make

up a big part of this restructuring. In 1998, over 900 mergers took place in Japan, which is more

than twice as many as five years earlier, and the number seems to have increased since then. The

foreign acquisitions of Japanese firms grew more than six-fold in value the same year. There is

still a long way to go, however, in comparison with the United States, where over 11,000

mergers were announced in 1998. The banking crisis is also eroding the cross-shareholdings

within the keisetsu: the major banks are trying to reduce their risk exposure by reducing their

holdings of stocks.

       Developments in the auto industry can illustrate these changes as well. The companies

that were first to respond to the new challenges, primarily Honda and Toyota, are still at the top

of the world league, both technologically and financially. The laggards are now in the midst of



                                               20
the restructuring process. Ford’s stake in Mazda, Renault’s deal with Nissan, and Daimler-

Chrysler’s with Mitsubishi, are three examples of the mergers and acquisitions that are reshaping

Japan’s industry.

          One sector in which the liberalization of the Japanese economy is expected to have the

greatest impact is that of banking and other finance. These are not industries, for which FDI data

are plentiful, especially banking, which is something of an orphan in the US FDI data collection

system.

          US depository institutions, mainly commercial banks, clearly held a smaller toehold in

Japan at the latest FDI census data, 1994, than in most other developed countries. For example,

the ratio of assets of US depository institutions to GDP was lower in Japan than in the 9 other

large developed countries for which we have data and lower also than that in Korea, not a

country noted for welcoming inward FDI (US Department of Commerce, 1998). The same was

true for sales and employment in these institutions. Japan has apparently not been an easy market

for US banks to penetrate, at least via FDI.

          The US depositary institutions were not only small in Japan in 1994, but had been

decreasing in size relative to Japanese GDP since 1982, whether we measure size by assets,

sales, or the direct investment stock, calculated at historical cost (US Department of Commerce,

1985). The assets of US - owned banks in Japan declined even more over these 12 years relative

to the assets of Japanese domestically licensed banks (Bank of Japan, 1997). Thus, there was no

apparent move into the Japanese market up to 1994 by US banks.

      Since 1994, the story is somewhat different. The assets of Japanese branches and

subsidiaries of US banks rose from .24 per cent of those of Domestically Licensed Japanese

Banks in 1994, to .40 per cent at the end of 1997. Although this US bank share was tiny in




                                                21
comparison to the assets of the domestically licensed Japanese banks, there is some suggestion of

an increase in importance of the US banks, although the large fluctuations make it hard to say we

can see a trend. The rise in importance of the US banks owes almost as much to the decline in

assets of the local banks, as to growth in the US banks.

        Another indicator of changes in the finance sector is the US investment position in Japan

in that sector, although it is risky to assume a close relationship between the investment stock

and activity. Within the banking sector, there was relatively slow growth in the US investment

stock until 1997. In that year, the stock jumped by about 50 per cent, possibly foreshadowing

larger future moves in response to a loosening of controls. Further evidence of change in the

banking sector is given by Japanese data on the assets of foreign banks in Japan. The absolute

size of these assets increased in most years until a peak in 1990, fell thereafter in every year until

a low point in 1994, and then began to rise again. The largest increase, by about 50 per cent, as in

the data for US banks, took place in 1997. Relative to total Japanese bank assets, the foreign

bank asset levels jumped from a low of 3.2 per cent in 1994 to 3.7, 4.6, and, in 1997, 6.6 per cent

of Japanese bank assets. Thus, the data covering all banks confirm the impression that some

barriers have been lifted and that foreign banks, have begun to increase their role in the Japanese

financial sector.

        The “Other Finance” category involves far more US investment in Japan than the

banking sector, but it is hard to know what the appropriate sector within Japan is for comparison.

If we compare the US investment stock with the assets of Japanese insurance companies, a

procedure that underestimates the US role, because assets are usually much larger than the

investment stock, we find little change in the ratio through the 1980s. US investment grew

rapidly from 1982 to 1988, but the Japanese insurance sector also grew rapidly. After 1988,




                                                 22
however, the US investment grew faster, and the ratio more than doubled, suggesting that some

liberalization may have been affecting this sector. However, the US direct investment data for

Finance are so heavily suppressed that it is impossible to use them to identify just what parts of

the sector are receiving the US investment.


                                       5. Conclusions

We expect both outward and inward FDI to play an increasingly important role in the

restructuring of the Japanese economy in the future. Outward FDI is still not very large relative

to the Japanese economy, despite the rapid growth since the mid-1980s, so there is still scope for

significant increases before it reaches the levels of other OECD countries. The outsourcing and

relocation of production will particularly affect labor intensive manufacturing operations, not

least because of demographic factors. On the domestic scene, this will facilitate the necessary

restructuring of the Japanese economy towards more advanced activities with higher value

added.

          Inward FDI will presumably have an even stronger impact on the restructuring of the

Japanese economy. Although the stock of inward foreign direct investment is still very small,

there are important changes under way. Deregulation has opened up industries as well as service

sectors to foreign multinationals. In combination with the economic crisis, this has begun to

weaken the cross-shareholding relationships within the keiretsu groups, which facilitates mergers

and acquisitions between Japanese and foreign firms. The consequences of increasing foreign

participation in the Japanese economy are likely to be highly beneficial. The level of competition

and the inflow of foreign technology will increase, with higher productivity growth as a major

result.




                                               23
REFERENCES


Bank of Japan (1986), Economic Statistics Annual 1986, Research and Statistics Department,
        Bank of Japan.
Bank of Japan (1996), Economic Statistics Annual 1996, Research and Statistics Department,
        Bank of Japan.
Bank of Japan (1997), Economic Statistics Annual 1997, Research and Statistics Department,
        Bank of Japan.
Blomström, M. (1989), Foreign Investment and Spillovers, London: Routledge.
Blomström, M. and F. Sjöholm (1999), ‘Technology Transfer and Spillovers: Does Local
        Participation with Multinationals Matter?’, European Economic Review, 43: 915-923.
Blomström, M., M. Zejan, and A. Kokko (2000a), Foreign Direct Investment: Firm and Host
        Country Strategies, London: Macmillan.
Blomström, M., B. Gangnes, and S. La Croix (2000b), Japan's New Economy: Continuity and
        Change in the 21st Century, Oxford: Oxford University Press (forthcoming).
Carlile, L.E. and M.C. Tilton, Eds. (1998), Is Japan Really Changing its Ways? Regulatory
         Reform and the Japanese Economy, Washington D.C.: Brookings.
Dunning, J. (1996), ‘Explaining Foreign Investment in Japan: Some Theoretical Insights’, in M.
       Yoshitomi and E. Graham (Eds.), Foreign Direct Investment in Japan, Cheltenham:
       Edward Elgar.
Encarnacion, D. (1992), Rivals Beyond Trade: America versus Japan in Global Competition,
        Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Ito, T. (1996), ‘Japan and the Asian Economies: A Miracle in Transition’, Brookings Papers on
          Economic Activity (2), 205-272.
Japan, Institute for International Trade and Investment (1999), Analytical Research based on
         Data from the Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Survey Research on Harmonizing
         Globalization Based on the 1997 Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Tokyo,
         Institute for International Trade and Investment.
Lawrence, R.Z. and D. Weinstein (1998), ‘The Role of Trade in East Asian Productivity Growth:
       The Case of Japan’, in J. Stiglitz (Ed.). Rethinking the East Asian Miracle, Washington:
       The World Bank.
Lipsey, R.E., M. Blomström, and E. Ramstetter (1998), ‘Internationalized Production in World
        Output’, in R.E. Baldwin, R.E. Lipsey, and J. D. Richardson (Eds), Geography and
        Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mason and Ogawa (2000), ‘Population, Labor force, Saving and Japan’s Future’, in M.
       Blomström et. al. (2000b).
MITI (1998), data received directly from the Ministry of International Trade and Industry.




                                               24
Ramstetter, E. (1991), ‘Regional Patterns of Japanese Multinational Activity in Japan and Asia’s
        Developing Countries’, Empirical Studies in Regional and International Economics,
        The Institute of Economic and Political Studies, Kansai University.
--------------- (1996), ‘Estimating Economic Activities by Japanese Transnational Corporations:
           How to Make Sense of the Data?”, Transnational Corporations, The United Nations,
           Aug., Vol. 5, No.2.
Ramstetter, E. and W.E. James (1993), ‘Multinationals, Japan-US Economic Relations, and
        Economic Policy: The Uncomfortable Reality’, Transnational Corporations, 2 (3), 65-
        93.
Sohn, Y. (1998), ‘The Rise and Development of the Japanese Licensing System’, in L. E. Carlile
        and M. C. Tilton (Eds), Is Japan Really Changing its Ways? Regulatory Reform and the
        Japanese Economy, Washington D.C.: Brookings.
Takeshi, Y. and M. Udagawa. Eds. (1990), Foreign Business in Japan Before World War II,
         Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
UNCTAD (1995), World Investment Report 1995: Transnational Corporations and Economic
     Restructuring, New York: United Nations.
US Department of Commerce (1985), US Direct Investment Abroad: 1982 Benchmark Survey
       Data, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington DC, December.
US Department of Commerce (1998), US Direct Investment Abroad: 1994 Benchmark Survey,
       Final Results, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington DC, May.
Weinstein, D. (1997), ‘Foreign Direct Investment and Keiretsu: Rethinking US and Japanese
        Policy’, in R. Feenstra (Ed.), Effects of US Trade and Promotion Policies, Chicago:
        Chicago University Press.
Whittaker, D.H. (1997), Small Firms in the Japanese Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge
        University Press.
Wolff, E.N. (2000), ‘Has Japan Specialized in the Wrong Industries?’, in Blomström et. al.
        (2000b).
Yoshitomi, M. and E. M.Graham, Eds. (1996), Foreign Direct Investment in Japan, Cheltenham:
        Edward Elgar.




                                              25
Table 1: Employment: 1997/1977
All Industries                                      1.23
Services                                            1.83
Wholesale and Retail Trade
              & Eating & Drinking Places            1.24
Manufacturing                                       1.08
Agriculture & Forestry                               .55

Source: Bank of Japan (1997) p. 363, and (1986) pp. 303-304.




                                             26
Table 2: Manufacturing Producer Shipments: 1997/1976
All Industries                         1.83
Electrical Mach.                       6.49
Chemicals                              2.36
Transp. Equip.                         1.65
Food & Tobacco                         1.23
Iron & Steel                           1.14
    Textiles                            .65

Source: Bank of Japan (1997) p.358. (1996) p. 356.




                                              27
Table 3: Shares of World Exports, 1995/1977, Selected Groups
            Industry Groups
                  Electrical Machinery                         1.76
                  Foods                                         .77
                  Metals                                        .75

            Industries
                  Electronic components                        4.27
                  Computer & other office equip.               3.30
                  Misc. plastic products                       2.37
                  Household audio & video equip.               1.66
                  Farm & garden mach.                           .46
                  Construction & mining mach.                   .52

            Source: NBER World Trade Database




                                           28
                                               Table 5

                  Share (%) of Japanese Affiliates in Total Foreign Sales by Japanese
                                         MNCs, 1977-1988

                                               1977       1980        1986       1988

                Total                             19         20         28         36
                Foods                             87         85        100         93
                Chemicals                         25         27         66         59
                Metals                            22         20         37         45
                Nonelectrical Machinery           12         13         28         23
                Electrical Machinery              21         21         30         35
                Transport Equipment                6          7         14         26
                Other Manufacturing               41         42         48         52
                  Textile & Apparel               51         57         63         67
                  Wood, paper and pulp            50         61         68         68
                  Other                           27         31         38         44

Note: Total foreign sales by Japanese MNCs are the sum of manufacturing parent exports, and
sales by foreign manufacturing affiliates, minus affiliate imports from Japan and affiliate exports
to Japan from affiliate production, measured as total affiliate exports to Japan multiplled by the
ratio of affiliate imports from Japan to total affiliate sales. Affiliate shares are derived from the
difference between total foreign sales and parent exports. Manufacturing affiliate sales in 1986
and 1989 are from Japan, ITI (1999). Other data are from Ramstetter (1991).




                                                  30
                                                Table 6

                Share (%) of Japanese Affiliates in Total Foreign Sales by Japan and
                                  Japanese Affiliates, 1977-1995

                                        1977      1980      1986   1988   1989    1995

             Total                         15          13     23    31      33         40
             Foods                         44          28     59    73      74         83
             Chemicals                     16          16     37    52      51         51
             Metals                        16          14     29    39      38         46
             Nonelectrical Machinery        5           5     12    11      15         15
             Electrical Machinery          20          19     28    38      37         42
             Transport Equipment            4           5     16    25      29         45
             Other Manufacturing           32          27     33    44      48         52
               Textile & Apparel           36          29     35    46      43         45
               Wood, paper and pulp        46          42     46    58      50         58
               Other                       24          24     30    41      50         53
Note: Foreign sales by Japan and Japanese affiliates are the sum of exports of manufactures
products from Japan and sales by foreign manufacturing affiliates, minus affiliate imports from
Japan and affiliate exports to Japan, measured as for Table 11.5. Affiliate shares are derived
from the difference between total foreign sales and Japanese exports. Exports of manufactured
products from Japan are from the NBER World Trade Database. Manufacturing affiliate sales in
1977 and 1980, manufacturing affiliate imports from Japan and exports to Japan from 1977 to
1988 are from Ramstetter (1991). Manufacturing affiliate sales from 1986 to 1995 are from ITI
(1999). Manufacturing affiliate imports from Japan in 1989 and 1995 are adjusted from MITI
(1998). Manufacturing affiliate exports to Japan in 1989 and 1995 are adjusted from MITI
(1998) and Japan, ITI (1999).




                                                  31
                                              Table 7


                    Share (%) of Affiliate Production in the Growth of Japanese
                        Firms' Sales of Manufactures in Foreign Markets

                                                        1986-1995

                    Total                                   51.2
                    Foods                                   93.0
                    Chemicals                               55.7
                    Metals                                  64.9
                    Nonelectrical Machinery                 17.4
                    Electrical Machinery                    49.6
                    Transport Equipment                     67.0
                    Other Manufacturing                     65.2
                      Textile & Apparel                     67.3
                      Wood, paper and pulp                  67.7
                      Other                                 64.6


Note: The growth of Japanese firm’s sales of manufactures in foreign markets is the difference
between the growth of exports from Japan from 1986 to 1995 and the growth of Japanese sales to
foreign markets in the same period. The data are those underlying Table 11.6.




                                                32
