                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               QUANTIFYING QUALITY GROWTH


                                                Mark Bils
                                             Peter J. Klenow


                                          Working Paper 7695
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7695

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000




For helpful comments we are grateful to William Nordhaus, Matt Shapiro, and workshop participants at
Michigan, Columbia, NYU, Duke, the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Minneapolis, and Richmond,
and the NBER Summer Institute and EFG meeting. We thank the BLS for providing unpublished data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2000 by Mark Bils and Peter J. Klenow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Quantifying Quality Growth
Mark Bils and Peter J. Klenow
NBER Working Paper No. 7695
May 2000
JEL No. O33, O47

                                            ABSTRACT


     We introduce an instrumental variables approach to estimate the importance of unmeasured
quality growth for a set of 66 durable consumer goods. Our instrument is based on predicting which
of these 66 goods will display rapid quality growth. Using pooled cross- relatively sections of
households in the 1980 through 1996 U.S. Consumer Expenditure Surveys, we estimate "quality
Engel curves" for 66 durable consumer goods based on the extent richer households pay more for
a good, conditional on purchasing. We use the slopes of these curves to predict the rate of quality-
upgrading. Just as if households are ascending these quality Engel curves over time, we find that the
average price paid rises faster for goods with steeper quality slopes. BLS prices likewise increase
more quickly for goods with steeper quality slopes, suggesting the BLS does not fully net out the
impact of quality-upgrading on prices paid. We estimate that quality growth averages about 3.7%
per year for our goods, with about 60% of this, or 2.2% per year, showing up as higher inflation
rather than higher real growth.


Mark Bils                                                     Peter J. Klenow
Department of Economics                                       Graduate School of Business
University of Rochester                                       University of Chicago
Rochester, NY 14627                                           1101 East 58th Street
and NBER                                                      Chicago, IL 60637
bils@troi.cc.rochester.edu                                    and NBER
1. Introduction

        As people get richer they consume not only more goods but better goods. Quantifying

such quality growth is difficult. Because of exacting data requirements, the hedonic techniques

pioneered by Griliches (1961) and Adelman and Griliches (1961) are still only applied to a

limited number of goods (e.g., cars, houses, computers). Shapiro and Wilcox (1996, p. 124)

describe the measurement of quality change as necessitating "house-to-house combat", i.e.,

detailed good-by-good studies. The Boskin Commission (1996) cites only a handful of studies in

arriving at its estimate that unmeasured quality change biases the U.S. CPI upward by about

0.6% per year.1

        We introduce an instrumental variables approach to estimating the rate of quality growth.

We apply this approach to estimate the overall importance of unmeasured quality growth for 66

durable consumer goods (see Table 1 for a list of the goods). Our instrument is based on

predicting which of these 66 goods will display relatively rapid quality growth.

        Our approach can be briefly described as follows. The growth rate in unit prices for any

good reflects both growth in the average quality of the good and the true rate of price inflation

(the rate of price increase holding quality constant):



(1)              Unit-price inflation œ Rate of quality growth € True inflation .



Ideally, the government controls for quality changes, producing a measure of inflation equal to

the true rate of inflation. But suppose that the government can capture only part of quality

changes, with a fraction . of quality-driven price increases inadvertently recorded as price

inflation:



1 Including studies on new goods as well as higher quality within a category, the Boskin Commission cites
Randolph (1988) on housing, Gordon on durable goods (1990), Trajtenberg (1990) on medical imaging devices,
Berry, Kortum and Pakes (1996) on new cars, Griliches and Cockburn (1994) on prescription drugs, Cutler et al.
(1996) on heart attack treatment, Hausman on breakfast cereal (1997a) and cell phones (1997b), and Nordhaus
(1997) on lighting.

                                                       1
(2)              Measured inflation œ True inflation € .(Rate of quality growth) .



(1) and (2) imply that measured inflation can be related to unit-price inflation as



(3)           Measured inflation œ .(Unit-price inflation) € (" • .)(True inflation).



Our approach is to estimate . from regressing measured inflation on unit-price inflation, as in

(3), with (" • .)(True inflation) as an error term. But we first instrument for unit-price inflation,

as dictated by equation (1), with one or more variables that predict rapid quality growth, yet are

arguably uncorrelated with true inflation.

         We construct such an instrument by exploiting "quality Engel curves" that we estimate

from pooled cross-sections of household data (1980 to 1996 U.S. Consumer Expenditure

Surveys). Whereas a traditional Engel curve traces out total expenditures on a good against

permanent income or wealth (which we proxy with overall consumption), a quality Engel curve

traces out the unit price of a good against overall consumption.2 Our premise is that, across

households at a point in time, those paying higher prices are buying higher quality goods

(perhaps bundled with more retail services). Not surprisingly, richer households buy more

expensive goods so that the estimated slopes are all positive and significant. Averaging across

the goods, the quality portion comprises 56% of the overall Engel Curve, suggesting a potentially

important role for quality growth in consumption growth.

         Our instrument is based on the relative steepness of the quality Engel curves across the 66

goods. For instance, we see that richer households buy much more expensive automobiles than

poorer households, whereas richer households spend only modestly more than poorer households

in purchasing a vacuum cleaner. Thus, as households on average become richer, we predict

faster quality growth for automobiles than for vacuums. Assuming goods with steeper Engel


2 The overall Engel curve is the product of the quality Engel curve and a quantity Engel curve, where the latter
traces out the number of units bought against overall consumption.

                                                         2
curves do not display systematically faster or slower true inflation over time, a good's relative

Engel curve provides our instrument for quality growth (and unit-price inflation) for equation (1).

         We find that our estimated quality Engel curve slopes are highly correlated with unit price

changes for the 66 goods (correlation coefficient of .51). That is, those goods with steeper

quality Engel curves display faster rising average unit prices over 1980 to 1996. This is precisely

what one would expect if households are climbing up their quality Engel curves over time. We

estimate that quality-upgrading occurs at the rate of about 3.7% per year on average for the 66

goods.

         Since the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) makes explicit adjustments for quality

change in constructing its price indices, the quality-upgrading that we find reflected in unit price

changes need not show up in BLS price changes at all. (That is, estimating equation (3) could
        ^ œ 0.) We find, however, that goods with steeper quality Engel curves do display
produce .

faster rising BLS prices. We estimate that, over 1980-1996, the BLS deflators adjusted for only

about 40 percent of the predicted differences in quality growth across goods, with the remaining

60 percent showing up as higher BLS inflation. The BLS netted off a little under 1.5% per year

for quality growth for our 66 goods from 1980-1996. If this represents only 40 percent of all

quality growth during the period, then the BLS understated quality growth and overstated

inflation by 2.2% per year for our 66 goods.

         The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we lay out a simple model in which rising

household purchasing power generates rising demand for quality. This model features cross-

sectional quality Engel curves specific to each good that provide an instrument for our IV

approach to estimating quality growth. In section 3 we present the time-series behavior of unit-

price and BLS-price inflation rates for our 66 goods. In section 4 we estimate quality slopes for

the 66 goods using household data. In section 5 we exploit the quality slopes estimated off of

cross-sectional data to predict the rate of quality upgrading over time, and test the extent to which

BLS prices (improperly) rise with quality upgrading. Section 6 concludes.




                                                3
2. A Model for Estimating Quality Engel Curves and Predicting Growth in Quality

       The typical model of quality improvements (e.g., Aghion and Howitt, 1992) focuses on

firm incentives to design higher quality goods. The preference side of the model is usually kept

simple. Consumers prefer higher quality, but are willing to substitute with infinite elasticity

among different qualities. We will present evidence that, in contrast, different levels of quality

are imperfect substitutes in the eyes of consumers. Richer households typically buy more

expensive, higher quality versions of goods. In this section we lay out a simple model which has

this feature. We derive quality Engel curves that relate the quality of good purchased (measured

by price paid) to a consumer's wealth and consumption. In turn, the relative slopes of the quality

Engel curves predict which goods should exhibit faster rates of quality improvement over time.


Household Quality Choices
       Households maximize lifetime utility given by



                                         Y0 œ ! " > ?> .
                                                    _

                                                    >= !



" is the discount factor. ?> is utility derived during period >. We abstract from uncertainty,

allowing for a constant growth rate of real income and expenditures.

       Utility derived in any period is given by


                                              Ú
                                       !  Û
                                                      3 •"Ó"•"Î5
                            - "•1/5 •"  N   µ Òq 3
                                            v                       if q3 ž 0 .
                                       i=1Ü 0
                      ?   œ 1•1/5 €          3    1•1/53
                                                                    if q3 œ 0


A time subscript is implicit. The household chooses the quality, indicated by q3 , of N different

durable, indivisible goods (i = 1, ... , N). The household may choose not to own durable good i at




                                                4
all, in which case q3 = 0.3 The household also buys an effective amount (quality times quantity) c

of a composite divisible, nondurable good. We separate out divisible goods because these are the

ones for which "unit prices" (the price paid for a unit of the good, such as for a single

refrigerator) are observable in the Consumer Expenditure Surveys of U.S. households. /~3 is the

preference "intercept" for good i, and the 53 's and 5 govern the curvature of utility for the goods.

We assume that 5 ž 0 and 53 ž 0 a i.

         We assume that good 3 has a deterministic life of 73 periods. Therefore, a household owns

good i if it purchased the good in this or one of the preceding (73 • "Ñ periods. We do not treat 73

as a choice dimension of quality. We assume consumers keep the good for the full 73 periods.

Thus consumers do not trade in used goods, which we think is realistic for most of the goods we

examine. This requires that the desired growth in quality over the life 73 of a good is not so fast

that consumers would choose to discard a working durable to upgrade its quality.

         The household budget constraint is



                                              c € ! H3 x 3 œ y
                                                      N

                                                     i=1



where:                                              x3 œ z3 q3 .


The price of nondurable consumption c is normalized to one. y is household expenditure, which

in turn equals income minus the change in assets. H3 is 1 if the household purchases durable 3 in

the current period, and 0 otherwise. x3 is the unit price of good 3 relative to the price of the

nondurable.

         For a given type of product (say televisions) the household faces a menu of quality-price

combinations from which to choose. The menu slopes upward, so that higher quality versions


3Subtracting 1 inside the brackets means utility from the good is positive only if q3 ž 1. i.e., it is not worth
buying the good unless one buys a sufficiently high quality version. This contributes to some households not
owning certain goods at all, as does ~
                                     / 3 œ 0 for some households. This functional form also allows utility to be
positive even when 53 • 1.

                                                          5
are more expensive.4 Facing the menu, the household chooses whether to buy a good and, if so,

what quality level to buy. The unit price x3 reflects both the quality-adjusted price and the level

of quality: z3 represents price holding quality q3 constant. We assume that the relative price of

differing qualities of a good are determined by relative production costs, given competitive

pricing.5 Moreover, this rate of transformation between lower and higher quality versions is

unaffected by relative or total quantities produced. (Rosen, 1974, considers somewhat more

general assumptions.)

         Consumers must decide whether to consume good i and, if so, at what quality. We focus

on the latter of these decisions, treating quality q3 as a continuous choice variable. Conditional

on good i being purchased, the household equates the ratio of marginal utilities of q3 (derived

over the subsequent 73 periods) and c to the ratio of their prices:


                                              µ   •"Î53 "•" 73
                                              v3 q3    Ð "•" Ñ
                                                   - 5
                                                     •"Î           œ z3 .


Rearranging and taking natural logs yields



(4)                                ln q3 œ )3 ln - • 5)3 ln D3 € ln v3


4 We define quality in price terms, so that a doubling of quality doubles price. Our results are robust to assuming
a more general elasticity, 93 , of price with respect to quality, i.e., x3 œ z3 q93 . What is important for the
consumer's problem is the extent of diminishing returns to spending on quality. These diminishing returns can
either reflect diminishing utility flow from quality because 53 • _ , or a rising price of quality from 93 ž 1.
          We have also considered the possibility that the relative price of quality for good i rises or declines over
time through changes in the parameter 93 . Changes in 93 will be reflected in a changing slope of the quality Engel
curve discussed below. We find, however, that for most of our 66 goods we cannot reject constancy of the quality
Engel curve from 1980 to 1996. (See section 4.)
5 Our results are unlikely to reflect departures from competitive pricing. For one, we find in section 4 that if
Household A has twice the nondurable consumption of Household B, Household A typically pays about 76
percent more for a consumer durable. It is unlikely that much of this difference reflects the rich paying higher
price markups, conditional on quality. In fact, Goldberg (1996) finds no correlation between the price a
household pays for a particular car model and the household's income, financial assets, education or occupation.
Secondly, our IV estimates are robust to richer consumers paying higher markups for the same good, provided the
impact of wealth on the markup does not vary much across goods. Thirdly, if differences across goods in the
slopes of the quality Engel curves largely reflect richer households paying a higher markup for certain goods,
rather than purchasing a higher quality, then we should not find that our quality slopes systematically predict
which goods exhibit faster unit-price and BLS-price inflation from 1980 to 1996.

                                                          6
                                )3 œ 553 , and v3 œ Š 3 "•"             ‹
                                                          µ              5)3
                                                          v ("•" 73 )
where:                                                                         .



Expression (4) shows that, conditional on buying good i, a household will want to buy a higher

quality version the richer they are (the higher is c), the lower the quality-adjusted price of the

good (the lower is z3 ), and the greater their preference for the good (the higher is v3 ).

         From (4), the elasticity of demand for quality with respect to c is )3 . We call this the

slope of the "quality Engel curve" for good i, or "quality slope" for short. It maps out how a

household's demand for quality (expressed in price units) rises as its consumption of nondurables

rises. Good i's quality slope is steep if there is little curvature in preferences with respect to q3

(i.e., if 53 is high).

         Note that the quality slope is important not only for how quality responds to consumption

c, but also to shifts in D3 , the price of good i holding quality constant. Suppose the cost of

producing good i increases one percent, raising D3 by one percent. If there is no response in the

level of quality bought, the unit price of i rises by one percent. But equation (4) shows that this

increase in D3 will induce the quality of good i purchased to fall by 5)3 percent. Thus, if 5)3 ž ",

an increase in D3 actually results in a fall in the unit price of good i.


Predicting Growth in Quality
         We draw a distinction between how quality upgrading affects inflation in unit prices

versus BLS-measured prices. The growth rate of unit prices reflects the sum of quality growth

and "true inflation" (the growth in prices holding average quality constant):



                                         ?x3 œ ? q3 € ?D3 .


(Here ?x denotes the growth rate • i.e. log first difference • of x. Time subscripts are implicit.)

In contrast, BLS inflation rates aim to measure price changes holding quality constant. We refer


                                                   7
to the BLS inflation rate for good i as ?p3 . If the BLS measure is perfectly unaffected by

changes in quality, then it equals ?D3 . If, instead, the BLS is able to net out only a fraction

(1 • .) of quality growth, then ?p3 is given by



                                     ?p3 œ ?D3 € . ?q3 .


These two equations yield the relation between BLS and unit-price inflation



(5)                              ?p3 œ .?x3 € Ð" • .Ñ?D3 .


       Our strategy is to estimate . by regressing BLS-price inflation on unit-price inflation, as

in (5), treating Ð" • .Ñ?D3 as an error term. Of course, unit-price inflation is clearly correlated

with true inflation ?D3 , as unit-price inflation reflects the sum of quality upgrading and true

inflation. The key is to instrument for unit-price inflation with variables that predict a good's rate

of quality upgrading but are arguably orthogonal to its true inflation rate. We exploit differences

across goods in the slopes of their quality Engel curves ()3 's) to construct these instruments.

       From equation (4) the growth rate of quality for good i is given by



                                ?q3 œ )3 ?- • 5)3 ?D3 € ?v3 .


?- refers to the average growth rate of c for the economy (weighting individual household

growth rates equally). ?v3 reflects common growth in preferences for good i. The above

expression says that goods with steeper quality slopes (larger )3 's) should exhibit faster growth in

average quality in response to economy-wide income and consumption growth (?c ž 0).

Quality should also rise faster for goods with declining relative prices (?z3 • 0). This is

particularly true if the good has a steep quality slope.




                                                 8
           Substituting the expression above into (5), unit-price inflation equals



(6)                                   ?x3 œ )3 ?- € Ð"–5)3 Ñ?D3 € ?v3 .


The first term says that goods with steeper quality slopes display faster growth in unit prices in

response to economy-wide consumption growth, reflecting their faster growth in quality. This

suggests differences across goods in the quality slopes )3 as a relevant instrument for differences

in unit-price inflation ?x3 in (5). Below we estimate separate quality slopes for 66 consumer
durables using cross-sections of the Consumer Expenditure Survey. We find important

differences across goods in their estimated quality slopes. Furthermore, these differences are

excellent predictors of which goods display faster unit-price inflation. The correlation between a

good's quality slope and its rate of unit-price inflation is 0.51.

           Our identifying assumption is that differences in the estimated quality slopes across goods

()3 's) are uncorrelated with quality-adjusted relative price shifts across goods (?D3 's):



(7)                                       cov()i , ?z3 ) = 0                    across i.


If (7) holds, then )3 is a valid instrument for ?x3 in equation (5).6

           The conjectured relationship between the unit price x3 , the BLS price p3 , and nondurable

consumption c is depicted in Figure 1 for two goods (vacuums and cars). In period 0, unit and

BLS prices are normalized to be equal for each good (x! = p! ). From period 0 to period 1

growth in nondurable consumption generates an increase in quality and unit price for good i

equal to )3 ?- . The figure is drawn such that )3 is larger for cars than for vacuums; cars exhibit

the relatively steeper quality slope. (This is consistent with estimates below.) For this reason,

the increase in x3 from x! to x1 is much larger for cars than vacuums. In contrast, if the BLS price


                                               ! )i Ðln z3t •ln z3t•5 Ñ
                                                                          • [ R" ! )l ][ R"k !Ðln zlt • ln zlt•5 Ñ] • = 0.
                                               N


                                       lim Œ
                                                                                 N          N
6   More formally, the condition is            3="

                                      R5 p_              R5
                                                                                l=1        l=1


                                                                   9
reflects only quality-adjusted prices, then the growth in p3 , from p! to p1 , should not be

predictably greater for cars than vacuums. Figure 1 actually depicts no changes in quality-

adjusted prices, or ?z3 œ 0 for both cars and vacuums; there are no shifts in the curves, so the

BLS prices should not change at all. But to the extent . is greater than zero, faster growth in x3

for cars than vacuums will be mirrored in faster growth in p3 . As drawn, two-thirds of the faster

growth in the quality and unit price of cars relative to vacuums shows up as faster BLS inflation

for cars. This would identify a value for . of 2/3.

       We can construct another instrument for quality growth by interacting the change in

quality-adjusted prices with )3 . To see this, first rewrite equation (6), ignoring constant terms, as



          ?x3 œ )3 Ð? - • 5? DÑ • 5Ð)3 • ) ÑÐ? D3 • ? DÑ € Ð" • 5) Ñ? D3 € ?v3 ,


            "!                                                                  "!
               N                                                                   N
where ) œ   N     )3   denotes the average value of )3 across goods, and ?D œ   N    ?D3   denotes the
              3œ"                                                                 3œ"

average true inflation rate across goods. This expression suggests the interaction term

Ð)3 • )Ñ?D3 as a second relevant instrument for the growth rate of unit prices. It captures the

feature that quality will respond most dramatically to a change in D3 for a good with an especially

steep quality slope. Validity of Ð)3 • )Ñ?D3 as an instrument requires an assumption that

parallels equation (7), but with the quality slopes uncorrelated with Ð?D3 Ñ2 rather than with ?D3 .

       Construction of the instrument Ð)3 • )Ñ?D3 is complicated by the fact that ?D3 is only

equal to BLS inflation for good i if . œ !. But, rearranging equation (5), ?D3 can be related to

                                                   "•. Š?p3   • .? x3 ‹. This construction is
                                                    "
BLS inflation and unit-price inflation, equaling

conditioned on a value for ., the parameter of interest. Therefore, its use in constructing another

instrument entails nonlinear estimation of .. We return to these issues in Section 5.

       Given an estimate for ., we can also calculate a measure of quality growth and

unmeasured quality growth for our set of consumer durables. If the BLS succeeds in precisely

netting out the impact of quality change, then an estimate of quality change is provided simply by



                                                  10
the growth rate in unit prices for good i minus its BLS rate of price increase. When . ž !,
                                  "
however, quality growth equals Ð "•. Ñ times this difference:


                                                ?x3 •?p3
(8)                                     ?q3 œ    "•.       .


Given a value of ., it is straightforward from (8) to estimate the amount of quality growth across
                                                                               .(?x3 •?p3 )
our 66 goods. The extent of unmeasured quality growth is similarly given by       "•.       .




                                                11
3. Comparing Unit-Price and BLS-Price Inflation

Consumer Expenditure Data
         We construct measures of unit-price inflation for each of 66 consumer durables based on

household spending reported in the 1980 to 1996 Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CEX)

conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.7 As discussed in the next section, we also use

cross-sections of the CEX as our data for estimating quality Engel curves for each of the goods.

         The CEX has a rotating sample of about 5,000 households. Each household is

maintained in the sample for a year, encompassing four quarterly surveys. The CEX asks

respondents how much they spent over the previous quarter on a wide array of goods and

services. Expenditures are typically assigned to a particular month in the quarter. If an

expenditure can be associated with a particular unit purchase, then we can assign a unit price to

the purchase of that good. From all the goods surveyed by the CEX, we chose 66 goods for

which purchases tend to be quite distinct.8 We were also restricted by the requirement that the

BLS produce a price deflator for the good for all or much of the 1980 to 1996 period. The goods

are listed in Table 1.

         These 66 goods constitute 81.3% of a household's spending on durables as reflected in the

December 1997 weights for constructing the CPI. They represent 12.4% of the overall CPI. (We

report the CPI weight for each good in column 1 of Table 3, which we discuss further below.)


7 The Bureau of Labor Statistics conducts two separate surveys of consumer expenditures: an interview survey
and a diary survey. Our data are based on the interview surveys.
8 If a respondent purchases more than one of the same category of good in the same month (e.g., bicycles) the
survey may report them separately. But it is conceivable that the amounts can be lumped together. If so, then our
quality Engel curve estimates may be biased upward. This would not compromise the validity of our instruments
if it merely scaled up all of our estimates proportionately.
          For the years 1994 to 1996 the CEX asks households to state explicitly the number of items purchased
for each of the clothing categories, as well as for watches and jewelry. Thus for years 1994 to 1996 we can
compare these responses to the quantities we obtain by summing the number of itemized purchases in each
category of goods. For these goods we find a tendency for our base calculations to understate somewhat the
number of goods purchased, consistent with some lumping. But of much more relevance to our work, the extent
of this discrepancy is typically only very weakly related to household nondurable consumption. Based on these
comparisons for years 1994 to 1996, we rescale the quantities for each of the clothing categories, watches, and
jewelry to correct for the extent our quantities systematically deviate from the responses to the more direct
question on number of items purchased. We also condition on family total nondurable consumption, as well as
additional controls (e.g., age of household head), in rescaling these quantities. These corrections also modify the
unit prices. Our results are not sensitive to these small adjustments.

                                                        12
         The first column of Table 1 reports, for the pooled 1980 to 1996 cross-sections, the

number of households who reported purchasing each good. These numbers provide the sample

sizes for estimating the quality slopes in Section 4. The second column presents the fraction of

the sample buying. This ranges from a low of 1.7% for sewing machines to a high of 63.3% for

women's footwear. The final column reports what fraction of those purchasing a good report

more than one purchase in the 12-month period. This fraction is highest for boys' and girls'

footwear.


Unit-price inflation
         We measure increases in unit prices for the 66 goods as follows. Expenditures are

grouped by year of purchase. We can then construct for each good the average price paid across

households by year for 1980 to 1996.9 Across the 66 goods we have 1,469,561 unit-price

observations. We then divide each unit price by the CPI for nondurables in the same year (our

numeraire). To minimize the impact of outliers in a particular year, we calculate a three-year

centered moving average of these prices. Finally, we calculate the annual percentage rate of

inflation for each good based on comparing this moving average for 1995 to its value for 1981.10

         The resulting inflation rates appear in the first column of Table 2. The CPI-weighted

average unit prices for these 66 durables rose by 0.97% per year relative to the CPI for

nondurables. The most extreme declines were for microwave ovens (-9.2%) and heaters (-4.1%).
The most extreme increases were for trucks (3.7%), sports and exercise equipment (2.8%), and

jewelry (2.8%).




9 Expenditures are weighted by a CEX sampling weight for each household. For 12 of the 66 goods we actually
calculate inflation rates at a slightly finer level of aggregation than in Table 2. For instance living room furniture
is separated into tables versus chairs; men's and boy's sleepwear, as well as sweaters, are separated for men's
versus boy's; winter sporting goods are separated from water sporting goods. We aggregated goods in these 12
cases largely in order to be consistent with BLS categories. We aggregate on the basis of expenditure shares in
the CEX. Similarly, in Section 4, the quality Engel curves for these 12 goods are estimated including a dummy
variable to control for the finer category of good being purchased, e.g., is the good men's sleepwear or boys'
sleepwear.
10 For two of the goods, calculators and typewriters, data begin in 1982; for telephones data begins in 1983.


                                                          13
BLS Inflation

        BLS price indices are not the same as CEX unit prices for a number of reasons. One

important reason is that the BLS collects prices on goods at a finer level of detail than the CEX

categories and leaves the weight on each item unchanged from period to period. In contrast,

average unit prices reflect current (and therefore changing) weights.11 If people switch toward

more expensive CPI models within a CEX category, then the average unit price for the category

should rise but the BLS price index for the category need not. The BLS fixed weighting scheme

means it does not register a price change when consumers switch among items with different, but

themselves unchanged, prices. This is true even if the BLS collects prices on only a single model

in a CEX category.

        Although the fixed-weight scheme could prevent quality upgrading from contaminating

BLS price changes, the protection is not complete because many models disappear, forcing the

BLS to price different items from one period to the next. The items which disappear may be

replaced with higher quality goods, and the associated quality improvements may not be fully

netted out from the BLS inflation rate. Moulton and Moses (1997) describe BLS "item

substitution" procedures in detail. They report that about 30% of BLS items disappear at least

once every year (p. 323). Moreover, in the three years which have been studied, replacement

items contributed disproportionately to the overall CPI inflation rate. Even excluding apparel, in

which items tend to get marked down before being replaced by full-priced items, replacement

items represented 2.6%, 2.7%, and 3.2% of price quotes in 1983, 1984, and 1995, but accounted

for 20%, 34%, and 31% of the non-apparel inflation rate in those years (see their Tables 5 and 6,



11 In 1996 the BLS collected price quotes for goods in around 200 categories, most corresponding to the CEX
categories. On a monthly basis, they collected about 100,000 price quotes across 44 geographical areas.
According to Moulton (1996), the mean number of price quotes per category-area was 13 in May of 1996. There
were not 13 distinct models per category, however, since some were the same model at different outlets. The BLS
does not tabulate the number of distinct models for which prices are collected per category.
          A more minor distinction between BLS and unit prices is that the BLS only updates the establishments at
which it collects prices every five years. Thus a shift toward, say, discount outlets would tend to make CEX unit
prices rise more slowly than BLS prices. Both Shapiro and Wilcox (1996) and the BLS estimate such "outlet
bias" to be about 0.1% per year.

                                                       14
p. 338-340). These figures indicate that item substitutions coincide with disproportionately rapid

BLS inflation and, perhaps, unmeasured quality improvements.

       The item substitution rate is even higher for the consumer durables that we examine than

for the average item in the CPI. Column 2 of Table 3 contains the monthly item-substitution

rates for the 66 goods we study. These numbers were made available to us by the BLS, and are

for 1997. The substitution rate varies from 2.4% per month for calculators and typewriters to

38.3% for women's and girls' dresses, and averages 13.8% across the goods when each good is

weighted by its share of the December 1997 CPI (the weights are given in column 1). In contrast,

the monthly substitution rate for all items in the CPI was 3.8% in 1997.

       Conditional on the need for an item substitution, the BLS follows one of three

procedures. In roughly one-half of these cases (see Shapiro and Wilcox, 1996, p. 99) the BLS

finds a replacement item it judges to be "comparable" to the old item, and makes no quality

adjustment. Column 3 of Table 3 reports the percent of substitutions judged comparable for our

goods. It is the most common procedure, occurring 46% of the time for our goods (weighted by

their CPI share). In certain cases the BLS makes a direct quality adjustment, involving either

hedonic pricing or the manufacturer's estimate of the cost of producing the new item relative to

the displaced item. Column 4 reports that this occurs only 22% of the time for our goods. It is

most common for trucks, cars, and mens' suits. In the rest of the cases the BLS scales the entry

price of the replacement item so that the item's inflation rate matches that of other items in the

same category for that month. This usually entails scaling the entry price down, and therefore

netting out some of the higher price of the new good as reflecting superior quality. For 1995,

Moulton and Moses (p. 343) find that BLS quality adjustments reduced the CPI inflation rate by

between 0.28% and 0.44%. Column 5 of Table 3 reports that this procedure was used in 32% of

item substitutions for our goods. For the majority of the item substitutions for our goods (78%),

the BLS made no direct quality adjustment. This underlines the possibility that many item

substitutions could involve unmeasured improvements in quality that should have been (but were

not) netted out of the BLS inflation rate for those goods.


                                                15
        To summarize, if the BLS deflator perfectly measured price per unit of quality, then .

would be zero. If the BLS understated quality improvements and overstated inflation, then .

would be positive. As stressed by Triplett (1997), however, the BLS could have actually

overstated quality improvements and understated inflation, in which case . would be negative.

        In Table 2 we compare the BLS measures of price inflation to our constructed measures

of unit-price inflation good by good. The rate of unit-price inflation, as discussed above, appears

in Column 1. The rate of BLS inflation appears in Column 3. The BLS rates of inflation, like

our unit-price inflation rates, are expressed relative to the BLS rate of inflation for nondurables.

To be comparable to our construction of the unit prices, the BLS inflation rates are also based on

a 3-year moving average of deflators. Across the 66 goods the correlation between the unit-price

changes in Column 1 and the BLS price changes in Column 3 is 0.48. Figure 2 plots each good's

rate of BLS-price inflation versus its rate of unit-price inflation. Microwaves is clearly an outlier

in terms of both inflation rates. Dropping microwaves from the sample reduces the correlation

between the two inflation rates from 0.48 to 0.33.

        BLS deflators are not available for the full 1980-1996 period for all 66 goods. For 26

goods the BLS sample period is shorter than 1980 through 1996 (see the notes to Table 2).

Column 2 provides the rate of unit-price inflation for the time period that the BLS price deflator

is available. Comparing Columns 2 and 3, the BLS-price inflation rates are systematically lower

than the unit-price inflation rates, presumably reflecting BLS adjustments for quality

improvements. The last column in Table 2 reports the rate of inflation in unit prices minus the

rate of BLS inflation. We calculate this difference using unit-price inflation over the same period

that the BLS inflation rate is available (i.e., we calculate it as Column 2 minus Column 3). The

mean difference across the 66 goods is 1.46% lower inflation per year in BLS prices than in unit

prices (both BLS prices and unit prices are CPI-share-weighted). An interpretation of this is that

the BLS, on average across these goods, incorporates quality growth of 1.46% per year.12


12The unit-price and BLS-price inflation rates also differ because the BLS weights (on outlets and on goods
within CEX categories) move only gradually, whereas current weights are embedded in average unit prices.

                                                      16
4. Estimating Quality Engel Curves from cross-sections of households

         We employ CEX cross-sections of households for 1980 to 1996 to estimate a separate

quality Engel curve for each of the 66 goods in Table 4. The estimate of a good's quality slope )3

is based on how the unit-price that a household pays for a good, say televisions, is related to a

household's total nondurable consumption.

         Starting from equation (4), it is straightforward to solve for the unit price paid by a

household for good i. Adding a household subscript j, and ignoring terms that do not vary across

households, we have



(9)                                 ln sx 34 œ )3 ln s
                                                     c 4 € ln v3j € %34 ,


                                                     s
                                                     B                 s
                                                                       -
where:                                 %34 œ ln Ð B34 Ñ • )3 ln Ð - 4 Ñ .
                                                   34               4




sx 34 and sc 34 denote a household's reported values for x34 and c34 .13 The distinction between the

reported and true values for x34 and c34 contributes the error term %34 . In arriving at (9) we are

assuming that households face the same quality-adjusted prices z3 . In pooling cross-sections of

households from different years of the CEX, we add dummies for year, region, and city (vs. rural)

to control for likely differences in prices across time and space. In addition to heterogeneity in
c4 , we allow for heterogeneity in the household's preference for each good by including a number

of household characteristics as control variables. The household characteristics are number of

persons and number of children in the household, average age of the household head and that age

squared, and dummy variables for single male-headed households, and for single female-headed

households. We interpret these variables as shifting v3j in (9).14 For five of the goods (carpeting,

13  Conditional on a household reporting more than one purchase of a good, we average the expenditures to arrive
at a unit price.
14 Additional variation in this preference parameter is another potential source of error in equation (9). Selection
of household j into the sample of purchasers of good i based on the household's value of v34 could bias the
estimates of )3 downward. If poorer households are less likely to buy a good, then poorer households in the
sample of purchasers will be those with a high preference for the good (a standard Heckman self-selection
problem). It is not clear how this selection will bias the </6+>3@/ estimates of )3 across goods, which is central to

                                                         17
curtains and drapes, window coverings, lamps and lights, and hardwood flooring), we are

concerned that richer households may buy a larger size or quantity, as well as higher quality. For

these goods we also control for the number of rooms in the household's home.

         We define cj in (9) to be a household's total nondurable consumption. Our measure of

nondurables is more narrow than that in the National Income and Product Accounts. More

exactly, we exclude clothing and footwear from nondurables. To the extent there is measurement

error in a household's response for cj , as allowed for in (9), then an OLS estimate of )3 will be

biased toward zero. For this reason we instrument for s
                                                      c 4 as follows. For each household we
separate spending on nondurables in the first and second interview quarters from those in the

third and fourth interview quarters. We treat s
                                              c 4 as nondurable consumption measured for the
latter two quarters, then instrument for this consumption with the household's measured

consumption in the first two interview quarters. Consistent with there being measurement error,

the coefficient obtained by instrumenting is modestly higher for each good than the coefficient

obtained with OLS.

         Results for the quality Engel curves with estimation by two-stage least squares are

presented in the first column of Table 4. Standard errors are in parentheses. The elasticities vary

considerably. The steepest quality Engel curves are for jewelry, window coverings, rugs, and

cars. A one percent increase in nondurable spending is associated with about a one percent

increase in purchase price for these goods. At the other extreme, prices for microwave ovens,

sewing machines, vacuums, and lawn and garden equipment each exhibit unit-price elasticities

with respect to total nondurables of 0.25 or less.

         We tested the stability of the quality slopes over time by adding a variable interacting ln c

with a linear time trend. The coefficient on this trend term was not significantly different from


our constructed instrumental variable. Such selection, if important, will also occur over time. As economy-wide
income and consumption rise, the amount of quality-upgrading in the average purchase price of a good will,
similar to the cross-section pattern with respect to c, be biased down by the entry into the markets of consumers
with a relatively low preference for the good. Thus it is not clear whether one should employ selection-corrected
or uncorrected estimates of )3 in constructing the instrumental variable for quality growth.

                                                       18
zero at the .05 level for 57 of the 66 goods (two were significantly negative, seven were

significantly positive). So typically we cannot reject stability of the quality slopes.

         We also explored the appropriateness of the log-linear formulation. We compared our

log-linear estimates to nonparametric (kernel) estimates, and found no distinct patterns of

convexity or concavity, nor any distinct patterns of floors or ceilings.15 Figures 3 and 4 illustrate

by comparing the linear and nonparametric Engel curves for cars and vacuums, respectively.

Cars are a high expenditure share good among those with the steepest quality slopes. Vacuums

are a relatively high expenditure share good among those with the flattest quality slopes. The

linear estimates track the nonparametric estimates quite well, especially over the (-.5, +.5) range

containing 88% of the log consumption observations.

         We next compare our quality slopes to the steepness of the overall Engel curve for each

good. In the second column of Table 4 we report quantity Engel curves for each of the 66 goods.

These are constructed as follows. For each good a household's quantity of purchases of the good

is regressed on ln c as well as the time and household control variables employed in estimating

the quality Engel curves. Again, nondurable consumption in quarters 3 and 4 is instrumented by

consumption in quarters 1 and 2. The sample here, however, is the full sample of 65,189

households, not just those purchasing the good. So that the regression response in quantity can

be interpreted as an elasticity, we first divide a household's purchase quantity of good 3 by the

mean purchase quantity for good 3 in the sample. As Table 4 shows, the quantity Engel curves

also differ sharply across goods. All goods display elasticities of at least .28. 14 goods display

quantity Engel curves with elasticities greater than 1.

         The final column of Table 4 presents the size of the quality Engel curve relative to the

sum of responses in quality and quantity (i.e., relative to the overall Engel curve that incorporates

how both quality and quantity increase as nondurable consumption rises). The share accounted


15 Specifically, for the kernel estimation we used the default in Eviews: an Epanechnikov kernel with bandwidth
0.15*(max lnc • min lnc), local linear regression, linear binning, and 100 gridpoints. After estimation but before
plotting, we trimmed the top and bottom 1% of the ln c observations.

                                                       19
for by the quality Engel curve ranges from a low of 23% for microwaves to a high of 74% for

trucks. On average the quality response to consumption is actually more important in magnitude

than the quantity response: when weighted by expenditures, the average share accounted for by

the quality Engel curve is 56%. This means that, absent changes in the quality-adjusted prices of

our 66 goods compared to nondurable consumption, we would expect 56% of rising real

consumption of our durable goods to take the form of rising quality. We take this as supporting

an important role for quality upgrading in models of growth.




                                              20
5. Estimating Quality Changes

Quality Engel curves and unit-price inflation
        We first ask if a good that exhibits a large unit price response to consumption cross-

sectionally (a steep quality slope) also displays a faster increase in unit prices over time. The

answer, it turns out, is yes. We then estimate to what extent these predictable, quality-induced

variations in unit-price inflation contaminate BLS estimates of a good's price inflation.

        There is a strong positive relation, as conjectured, between the magnitude of a good's

quality Engel curve and its rate of unit-price inflation. The correlation equals 0.51, suggesting

the quality slope is a highly relevant instrument. Figure 5 plots the rates of unit-price inflation

against the quality slope for the sample of 66 goods. Microwave ovens is an outlier because of

its very low rate of unit-price increase. A very strong positive relation remains, however, if we

remove microwaves, with the correlation equaling 0.48.

        Recall that equation (6) predicts a good's unit-price inflation rate should be higher the

steeper its quality slope )3 . In Table 5 we report results from Weighted Least Squares regressions

(with the weights equaling December 1997 CPI shares). The dependent variable is average unit-

price inflation over 1980-1996 for good i, and the independent variable is the quality slope

estimated for good i from 1980-1996 cross-sections of the CEX. Hence there is one observation

per consumer durable category, for 66 observations in the full sample. As shown in Row 1 of

Table 5, the hypothesis that unit-price inflation is unrelated to )3 is easily rejected with a t-

statistic of 5.8. To check robustness we re-estimated after eliminating microwaves and trucks

from the sample. These were the only goods with rates of unit-price inflation two or more

standard deviations from the mean of –0.44% per year. Row 2 of Table 5 shows that, excluding

these two goods, the coefficient on )3 falls slightly from .0424 to .0413 and the t-statistic rises

considerably to 12.1. We also re-estimated after eliminating jewelry, rugs, and window

coverings from the sample (the goods exhibiting an estimate of )3 two or more standard

deviations from the mean value of 0.57). Row 3 shows that the resulting coefficient and t-

statistic are virtually the same as with the full sample.


                                                 21
         Since cars and trucks are outliers in terms of their CPI weight in the regressions, together

receiving 48% of the weight (39% for cars, 9% for trucks), in Row 4 of Table 5 we report results

omitting them. The results change modestly (coefficient .0321 vs. .0424 in the full sample, t-

statistic 5.2 vs. 5.8), but they do not hinge on the vehicle categories and their large weighting.

Running unweighted least squares on the full sample yields similar results: a coefficient of .0411

with a t-statistic of 4.7. Finally, one could argue that the apparel categories (16 of the 66, with

21% of the CPI weight) are not fully independent observations, so Row 5 uses only the 50 non-

apparel categories. The coefficient is modestly lower than the baseline estimate (.0366 vs.

.0424), and the t-statistic is lower in line with the smaller sample and coefficient (3.4 vs. 5.8), but

the coefficient remains highly significant.

         Could the coefficient from this regression (e.g., the .0424 baseline estimate) plausibly

reflect consumers upgrading quality faster for goods with steeper quality slopes? From (6), we

anticipate a coefficient on the quality slope equal to Ð?- • 5?DÑ.16 Assuming no unmeasured

quality change for nondurables, ?- equals 1.26% per year from 1981 to 1995.17 Now, the BLS

prices of our durables typically fell relative to the BLS price of nondurables. The BLS prices for

our goods fell by 0.82% per year on average (weighting goods by their CPI shares). For

illustration suppose that 5 equals 1 (utility is logarithmic in nondurable consumption). Then

?- • 5?D, the impact of the quality slope on inflation in unit prices, should equal .0208

( œ "Þ26% • (–0Þ82%)).

         Note, however, that this discussion has assumed that there is no unmeasured quality

growth for durables. To fill the gap between .0208 and the coefficient of .0424 in Table 5 would

require unmeasured quality growth of 2.16% per year on average across our durable goods (if

5=1). This is in line with the degree of unmeasured quality we estimate for our goods below

(2.2 to 2.4% per year).


16 This discussion assumes that )3 is uncorrelated with both ?D3 and ?v3 . Orthogonality of )i and ?z3 is required
for validity of )3 as an instrument, but orthogonality of )3 with ?v3 is not.
17 Each percent of unmeasured quality growth in nondurables understates both ?- and ?z by one percent. So, for
5 œ 1, it has precisely offsetting effects on the two terms in Ð?- • 5?zÑ.

                                                       22
        We also note that, by multiplying the coefficient in this regression by the average value of

)3 of 0.76, we arrive at an estimate of the average rate of quality upgrading for our goods in

response to growth in consumption and falling quality-adjusted prices for these goods. For the

coefficient of .0424, the average implied quality growth is 3.2% per year. Again, this is

reasonably close to what we estimate below (3.7 to 3.8%).

        Now, we are assuming that a good with a steep quality slope exhibits fast unit-price

inflation because of higher than average growth in its quality. This good will also typically

exhibit a steep overall (quantity plus quality) Engel curve; for this reason, the demand for

resources to produce this good should be rising. If the industry exhibits constant returns to scale

then this will not affect the price per unit of quality for the good. If returns to scale are not

constant, however, then steepness of the overall Engel curve will affect the good's price per unit

of quality. One test of our assumption of constant returns is to see how price responds to a

good's quantity Engel curve (those we reported in Table 4), as a steep quantity Engel curve also

predicts rising demand for the product over time. Repeating the first row regression, now

including the good's quantity Engel curve, yields an insignificant coefficient on the quantity

Engel curve of –Þ!!89 (standard error Þ!066). The coefficient on the quality Engel curve falls,

but remains highly significant at .0350 with a standard error of .0091 and t-statistic of 3.9.

        We conclude that a good's quality slope robustly predicts its unit-price inflation rate. A

1% point steeper quality slope suggests roughly 4% faster unit-price inflation for the good.


Quality Engel curves and BLS-price inflation
        We are now prepared to estimate the parameter ., which is the share of quality growth

which gets misdiagnosed as inflation. Our estimate of . is identified by combining equations

(5), (6), and (8) with conditions that the residual ?D3 be orthogonal to our instruments )3 and

Ð)3 • )Ñ?D3 . Estimation is by GMM; and the results appear in Table 6. We first estimate .

employing only the quality slope as an instrument (Row 1). We clearly reject the hypothesis that

. œ ! (t-statistic 4.9). Moreover, the estimate of . is sizable, equaling 0.618 with a standard



                                                 23
error of 0.125. This means that BLS prices rise by 62% as much as do unit prices in response to

quality-upgrading predicted by a good's quality slope. If the BLS quality adjustments averaging

1.46% per year across our goods miss 62% of quality growth, then true quality growth should be

3.8% per year Ð œ 1.46%Î(" • Þ618)Ñ.

         Table 6, Row 2 presents results adding as an instrument the interaction between Ð)3 • )Ñ

and ?D3 . The estimate of . is modestly reduced to 0.601 with a standard error of 0.119 and a t-

statistic of 5.0.18 The implied average growth in quality across our 66 goods is then 3.7%

Ð œ 1.46%Î(" • .601)Ñ. This exceeds the actual 1.46% BLS adjustment by 2.2% per year,

implying that BLS inflation for our goods is biased upward by 2.2% per year.

         How do our estimates of bias compare to other estimates in the literature? The Boskin

Commission (1996) estimated quality bias of 0.6% per year for the overall CPI, but 1.0% per

year for the consumer durable sub-component (our calculation from the breakdown in their Table

2). Gordon (1990) estimated that the BLS price index for consumer durables was overstated by

at least 1.5% per year from 1947 to 1983, and at least 1.0% per year from 1973-1983. Gordon

considered his estimates lower bounds for at least two reasons. First, Gordon stressed that BLS

techniques also fail to account for improved quality from greater durability (e.g., of automobile

tires) and increased energy efficiency (e.g., of appliances). Second, Gordon assumed zero bias in

the consumer durables that he did not examine (about one half of expenditures on durables).

         Our estimate of . could be overstated if quality-adjusted price changes are positively

correlated with our quality slopes. That is, if goods with steep quality Engel curves happen to

have slower rates of cost-reducing technological progress, then their prices will be rising for a

18 Suppose we calculate ?B based on the periods BLS prices are available, rather than using the entire 1980 to
                              3
1996 period. Using this alternative measure of ?B3 to construct the instrument Ð)3 • )Ñ?D3 has very little effect.
The estimate of . becomes .622 (standard error .122, t-statistic 5.1). Using this alternative measure in the first-
stage regression (6), as well as in constructing the instrument Ð)3 • )Ñ?D3 , leads to a . estimate of .657 (standard
error .163, t-statistic 4.0).
     16 of our 66 goods are types of clothing or shoes. But our estimates are not particularly sensitive to the
inclusion of these goods. Dropping these 16 goods drops the estimate of . to .562 (standard error .146, t-statistic
3.9).
     Finally, we also tested whether the . coefficient sytematically differs in size for those goods that the BLS
implicitly makes a large quality adjustment. (That is, goods with a large value in the final column of Table 2.)
We find no significant interaction.

                                                         24
reason in addition to quality-upgrading. Put more simply, our identifying assumption in equation

(7) may not hold. To address this possibility we re-estimated adding the change in the share of

CEX households buying each good as a control variable. More households should be buying

goods whose quality-adjusted relative price has fallen. Including this variable actually increases

our estimate of . slightly, from .601 to .612 (t-statistic still 5.0). Secondly, we re-estimated

excluding goods with rates of BLS-price inflation more than two standard deviations away from

the mean of –1.33% per year. This eliminated five goods from the sample (microwaves, TVs,

radios, telephones, and luggage) and lowered the estimate of . to .477 (standard error .104, t-

statistic 4.6). This would imply inflation bias of 1.3% per year, versus the 2.4% implied by

estimation of . with the full sample of goods.

       To summarize, differences in quality slopes successfully predict differences in unit-price

inflation rates. Much of these differences pass through into differential rates of BLS-price

inflation. Our preferred estimate of . is about .60, which implies about 2.2% upward bias in

BLS inflation for our consumer durables because of failure to fully net out quality growth. As a

cautionary note, although we can reject the hypothesis of . œ ! with considerable confidence,

our estimate of . is associated with a nontrivial standard error. The two standard error bands

contain .363 and .849. This translates into a fairly wide confidence interval in assigning a

particular number to unmeasured quality growth. We can say, with greater confidence, that our

estimates imply that at least one-third of quality upgrading was mismeasured as inflation, and

that this generated a bias of at least 0.83% per year (the point estimate minus two standard

errors, and the associated inflation bias).




                                                 25
6. Conclusion

       We estimated quality Engel curves across 66 consumer durables from pooled cross-

sections of households in the 1980 through 1996 U.S. Consumer Expenditure Surveys. We then

used these to predict the speed of quality-upgrading for these goods. Just as if households were

ascending their quality Engel curves over time, we found that the average price paid rose faster

for goods with steeper quality Engel curves. BLS prices likewise increased more quickly for

goods with steeper quality Engel curves, suggesting the BLS did not fully net out the impact of

quality-upgrading on prices paid. We estimated quality growth of about 3.7% per year for our

goods, with roughly 60% of this, or 2.2% per year, showing up as higher inflation rather than

higher real growth. Even incorporating alternative samples and sampling error, our estimates

imply that at least one-third of quality growth flows through into measured inflation, biasing

consumer durables inflation upward by at least 0.80% per year.




                                               26
                    Figure 1


ln                                          Cars
price
                                     •
                                     x1
                          •
                          p1


        •
        p 0 = x0
                                            Vacuums
                                     •
                          •          x1
        •                 p1
        p 0 = x0


                                                   ln c
                   p = BLS Price

                   x = Unit Price

              µ    = (∆pcars− ∆pvacuums)/
                     (∆xcars− ∆xvacuums)
                                     Figure 2
                4

                2       corr = .48

                0
BLS Inflation




                -2

                -4

                -6

                -8
                  -10          -5               0    5

                              Unit Price Inflation
                                                                Figure 3

                                                     Quality Engel Curve for CARS
                                        1.0
real price of car purchased (in logs)




                                        0.5



                                        0.0


                                                   OLS
                                        -0.5

                                                          Kernel

                                        -1.0
                                            -1.0         -0.5       0.0         0.5         1.0

                                               household real nondurable consumption (in logs)
                                                                  Figure 4

                                                      Quality Engel Curve for VACUUMS
                                           0.3
real price of vacuum purchased (in logs)




                                           0.2                                       OLS


                                           0.1


                                           0.0


                                           -0.1

                                                            Kernel
                                           -0.2
                                               -1.0        -0.5        0.0         0.5         1.0

                                                  household real nondurable consumption (in logs)
                                                  Figure 5
                                  5
1980-1996 Unit Price Inflation




                                  0




                                  -5


                                                             corr = .51

                                 -10
                                    0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0    1.2

                                                 Quality Slope
                     TABLE 1: Percent Buying Individual Consumer Goods

                                           (1)               (2)                (3)

              Good                    Number Buying    Fraction Buying   Fraction Buying 2+
                                                                          (of those buying)


            Carpeting                     4835              7.4%                0%
       Curtains and Drapes                9251              14.2               20.1
      Mattress and Springs                5911               9.1               10.5
       Bedroom Furniture                  6649              10.2               17.2
              Sofas                       5347               8.2                8.4
     Living Room Furniture                8731              13.4               30.5
 Kitchen/Dining Room Furniture            5131               7.9               12.5
  Baby Furniture and Equipment            4915               7.5               35.8
        Outdoor Furniture                 5731               8.8               14.2
   Refrigerators and Freezers             4365               6.7               12.9
        Clothes Washers                   3205               4.9               10.3
         Clothes Dryers                   2235               3.4               11.4
        Stoves and Ovens                  2563               3.9               15.1
        Microwave Ovens                   3567               5.5                5.2
    Window Air Conditioners               1435               2.2                5.1
           Televisions                   10,346             15.9               11.0
              Radios                      8224              12.6               15.2
             Stereos                      4953               7.6               12.7
               Rugs                       5757               8.8               15.6
       Window Coverings                   5256               8.1               14.2
              Clocks                      5218               8.0               11.3
        Lamps and Lights                  8695              13.3               18.9
          Telephones**                    9379              14.4               18.6
  Lawn and Garden Equipment               8112              12.4               20.0
          Power Tools                     6247               9.6               25.6
            Vacuums                       5045               7.7                8.7
        Sewing Machines                   1202               1.8                4.4
   Small Kitchen Appliances              20,270             31.1               33.6
             Heaters                      6530              10.0               12.0
         Hard Flooring                    1088               1.7               33.8
        Office Furniture                  2311               3.5               13.8
          Hand Tools                     10,298             15.8               34.5
          Men’s Suits                     8663              13.3               23.1
  Men’s Coats and Sportscoats            18,837             28.9               35.9
   Men’s and Boys’ Sleepwear              9592              14.7               28.9
   Men’s and Boys’ Sweaters              18,378             28.2               40.3
           Men’s Pants                   34,812             53.4               55.8
Boys’ Coats, Suits, and Sportscoats       9124              14.0               44.0
   Women’s and Girls’ Coats              27,068             41.5               47.1
   Women’s and Girls’ Dresses            34,502             52.9               57.9
  Women’s Sweaters and Vests             26,358             40.4               48.9
    Women’s Skirts and Pants             38,565             59.2               65.3
  Women and Girls’ Sportswear            21,695             33.3               48.4
       Women’s Sleepwear                 22,475             34.5               41.0
         Women’s Suits                   11,373             17.4               29.9
              TABLE 1: Percent Buying Individual Consumer Goods (continued)

                                                  (1)                      (2)                          (3)

                Good                        Number Buying            Fraction Buying         Fraction Buying 2+
                                                                                              (of those buying)


           Men’s Footwear                       30,682                     47.1                     47.5
      Boys’ and Girls’ Footwear                 20,525                     31.5                     76.6
         Women’s Footwear                       41,274                     63.3                     62.8
               Watches                          17,489                     26.8                     26.1
               Jewelry                          25,439                     39.0                     55.5
               Luggage                           6614                      10.1                     19.4
                 Cars                           13,483                     20.7                     13.5
                Trucks                           4489                       6.9                      7.2
                 Tires                          25,597                     39.3                     34.7
       Eyeglasses and Contacts                  18,901                     29.0                     32.6
    Sports & Exercise Equipment                 16,989                     26.1                     47.3
               Bicycles                          5401                       8.3                     19.5
         Camping Equipment                       3237                       5.0                     28.9
   Fishing and Hunting Equipment                 6903                      10.6                     45.4
   Winter/Water Sports Equipment                 6523                      10.0                     34.5
        Playground Equipment                     1263                       1.9                     10.5
         Musical Instruments                     4814                       7.4                     36.5
       Photographic Equipment                    6665                      10.2                     17.3
      Personal Care Appliances                  10,389                     15.9                     25.3
             Calculators*                        4625                       7.1                     11.3
            Typewriters**                        1610                       2.5                      5.6

               Mean                             11,321                     17.4                     26.3
              Median                             6784                      10.4                     20.1
         Standard deviation                      9911                      15.2                     17.3
             Maximum                            41,274                     63.3                     76.6
             Minimum                             1088                       1.7                      0.0


SAMPLE: Cross-sections of households in the 1980-1996 U.S. Consumer Expenditure Surveys.

* 1982-1996. The 1980 and 1981 Consumer Expenditure Surveys did not include this item.
** 1983-1996. The 1980, 1981, and 1982 Surveys did not include this item.

OBSERVATIONS: 65,189 household-years.

Fraction Buying = % of households buying 1 or more of the good in a 12 month span.

Fraction Buying 2+ (of those buying) = % of buying households who buy more than 1 in a 12 month span.
                         TABLE 2: Changes in Unit Prices vs. BLS Prices

                                          (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)

                                      1980-1996     Subperiod     Subperiod     Column (2) –
              Good                    Annual %      Annual %      Annual %       Column (3)
                                      Change in     Change in     Change in    (= Implied BLS
                                      Unit Prices   Unit Prices   BLS Prices   Quality Change)


            Carpeting                    2.17%         2.17%        -1.69%           3.86%
       Curtains and Drapes               0.35          0.35         -0.06            0.41
      Mattress and Springs              -0.37         -0.37         -0.36            0.29
       Bedroom Furniture                 1.09          1.09         -0.17            1.26
              Sofas                     -0.64         -0.64         -0.95            0.31
     Living Room Furniture              -0.09         -0.09         -0.60            0.51
 Kitchen/Dining Room Furniture          -0.58         -0.58         -1.53            0.76
 Baby Furniture and Equipment            1.60          1.60         -2.51            4.10
        Outdoor Furniture               -0.66         -0.66         -0.60           -0.06
   Refrigerators and Freezers           -1.47         -1.47         -1.90            0.43
        Clothes Washers                 -2.53         -2.53         -2.60            0.07
         Clothes Dryers                 -1.70         -1.70         -1.96            0.26
        Stoves and Ovens                -1.39         -1.08         -1.85            0.77
        Microwave Ovens                 -9.22         -7.81         -6.26           -1.55
    Window Air Conditioners             -2.19         -0.48         -1.81            1.32
           Televisions                  -1.67         -1.67         -6.35            4.68
              Radios                    -2.35         -2.35         -4.62            2.27
             Stereos                    -3.13         -3.13         -1.70           -1.43
               Rugs                     -0.01         -1.06         -0.38           -0.68
       Window Coverings                 -1.00         -1.00         -0.24           -0.75
              Clocks                    -1.68          0.33         -1.10            1.43
        Lamps and Lights                -1.26         -1.26         -0.95           -0.30
           Telephones                   -0.75          1.03         -4.66            5.69
  Lawn and Garden Equipment              0.54          0.54         -1.40            1.94
          Power Tools                   -0.29         -0.29         -0.40            0.11
            Vacuums                     -1.59         -1.59         -1.46           -0.12
        Sewing Machines                 -2.70          0.21         -0.43            0.64
   Small Kitchen Appliances             -1.32         -0.84         -2.19            1.35
             Heaters                    -4.09         -2.04         -1.44           -0.60
         Hard Flooring                   2.49          2.49         -0.02            2.52
        Office Furniture                 0.33         -1.59         -0.17           -1.42
          Hand Tools                     1.01         -0.12          0.46           -0.58
          Men’s Suits                    0.32          0.32         -0.26            0.58
  Men’s Coats and Sportscoats           -0.45         -0.45         -0.63            0.18
   Men’s and Boys’ Sleepwear            -0.08         -0.08         -1.04            0.96
   Men’s and Boys’ Sweaters              0.35         -0.14         -0.77            0.63
           Men’s Pants                   0.44          0.44         -0.98            1.41
Boys’ Coats, Suits, and Sportscoats      0.71          0.71         -1.81            2.53
   Women’s and Girls’ Coats             -1.65         -1.65         -1.77            0.12
  Women’s and Girls’ Dresses             0.58          0.58         -1.73            2.30
  Women’s Sweaters and Vests            -0.17         -0.92         -2.70            1.78
   Women’s Skirts and Pants             -0.36         -0.37         -3.10            2.73
  Women and Girls’ Sportswear           -0.73         -0.73         -1.44            0.71
       Women’s Sleepwear                -0.44         -0.70         -2.24            1.54
         Women’s Suits                  -0.04         -0.04         -0.74            0.69
                  TABLE 2: Changes in Unit Prices vs. BLS Prices (continued)

                                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

                                         1980-1996           Subperiod            Subperiod         Column (2) –
               Good                      Annual %            Annual %            Annual %            Column (3)
                                         Change in           Change in           Change in         (= Implied BLS
                                         Unit Prices         Unit Prices         BLS Prices        Quality Change)


         Men’s Footwear                      0.20%               0.20%              -0.76%               0.96%
    Boys’ and Girls’ Footwear                0.31                0.31               -1.32                1.63
       Women’s Footwear                      0.10                0.10               -1.61                1.71
             Watches                        -1.29               -0.68               -0.41               -0.27
             Jewelry                         2.75                1.58                1.28                0.30
             Luggage                         0.02                0.19                3.06               -2.86
               Cars                          1.75                1.75               -0.35                2.10
              Trucks                         3.73                0.83                0.16                0.67
               Tires                        -0.94               -0.94               -3.19                2.25
     Eyeglasses and Contacts                 0.44               -0.49                0.20               -0.69
  Sports & Exercise Equipment                2.77                2.36               -3.09                5.46
             Bicycles                       -1.59               -1.59               -1.76                0.17
       Camping Equipment                     0.36                0.47               -0.12                0.59
 Fishing and Hunting Equipment               1.24                1.23               -0.09                1.32
 Winter/Water Sports Equipment               2.49                2.49               -1.59                4.08
      Playground Equipment                   0.55               -1.36                1.54               -2.90
       Musical Instruments                  -2.13               -2.13                0.00               -2.12
     Photographic Equipment                 -0.95               -0.95               -0.79               -0.16
    Personal Care Appliances                -0.77               -0.77               -1.62                0.85
           Calculators                      -1.22                0.28               -4.02                4.30
           Typewriters                      -2.47               -0.77               -1.83                1.06

              Mean                          -0.44                -.39               -1.33                0.94
             Median                         -0.36                -.41               -1.21                0.68
        Standard deviation                   1.86                1.53                1.57                1.74
            Maximum                          3.73                2.49                3.06                5.69
            Minimum                         -9.22               -7.81               -6.35               -2.90

          Weighted Mean                      0.97                0.64               -0.82                1.46

The “unit price” is the average of all purchases made in each year across households. The unit prices for the 66
goods are based on 1,469,561 price observations. The period is 1982-1996 for calculators, and 1983-1996 for
telephones and typewriters.

The Weighted Mean is calculated using the CPI shares in 1997.

Subperiods are because the following years were not covered by the BLS price series:
        1980-81: Stoves and ovens; microwave ovens.
        1980-82: Window air conditioners; small kitchen appliances; heaters; hand tools;
                   womens’ skirts and pants; womens’ sleepwear; girls’ coats and jackets.
        1980-83: Rugs; clocks; mens’ and boys’ sweaters; womens’ sweaters and vests; trucks.
        1980-84: Luggage; sports and exercise equipment; playground equipment.
        1980-85: Telephones; hunting and fishing equipment; calculators; typewriters.
        1980-86: Watches; jewelry; eyeglasses and contacts.
        1990-96: Sewing machines. 1992-96: Camping equipment. 1993-96: Microwave ovens.
        TABLE 3: BLS Item Substitutions and Methods of Quality Adjustment, 1997

                                          (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)

               Good                    Weight in      Item             % of         % “Direct”    % “Linked”
                                       December    Substitution    Substitutions     Quality     to inflation of
                                       1997 CPI       Rate        “Comparable”     Adjustments    other items


             Carpeting                   .021%        11.8%             0%             11%             89%
        Curtains and Drapes              .052          6.5              57              0              43
        Mattress and Springs             .158          6.9              49              0              51
      Other Bedroom Furniture            .203          6.3              36              0              64
                Sofas                    .225          7.7              50              0              50
        Living Room Tables               .179          4.5              33              0              67
  Kitchen/Dining Room Furniture          .146          7.0              32              0              68
  Baby Furniture and Equipment           .044          8.0              62              0              38
         Outdoor Furniture               .025         19.4              62              0              38
     Refrigerators and Freezers          .084          9.6              91              0               9
          Clothes Washers                .057          8.5             100              0               0
           Clothes Dryers                .035          5.4              94              0               6
         Stoves and Ovens                .038          9.5              89              0              11
         Microwave Ovens                 .043         12.2              93              0               8
     Window Air Conditioners             .015          5.3              75              0              25
            Televisions                  .128         14.1              62              0              37
               Radios                    .023         14.7              42              0              58
               Stereos                   .075         15.4              41              0              59
                Rugs                     .062          7.0              58              3              39
         Window Coverings                .060          2.5              77              0              23
               Clocks                    .011         11.3              44              0              56
         Lamps and Lights                .049         10.5              62              0              38
            Telephones                   .012          4.8              33              0              67
   Lawn and Garden Equipment             .085          9.8              86              1              13
            Power Tools                  .035          3.2              64              0              36
   Vacuums, Sewing Machines *            .042         10.6              76              2              22
Small Kitchen Appliances, Heaters *      .072          8.0              56              0              44
           Hard Flooring                 .007          2.9              25              0              75
          Office Furniture               .122          7.4              31              0              69
            Hand Tools                   .026          3.7              56              0              44
            Men’s Suits                  .193          4.7              51             39               9
   Men’s Coats and Sportscoats           .119         12.0              67             11              22
    Men’s and Boys’ Sleepwear            .044          5.9              94              0               6
     Men’s and Boys’ Sweaters            .043         20.2              54             16              30
            Men’s Pants                  .212          5.4              79             11              10
 Boys’ Coats, Suits, and Sportscoats     .035         22.0              76              0              24
     Women’s and Girls’ Coats            .192         26.3              56             18              27
   Women’s and Girls’ Dresses            .284         38.3              56             21              23
   Women’s Sweaters and Vests            .072         27.7              61             20              19
     Women’s Skirts and Pants            .394         14.4              63             21              16
  Women’s and Girls’ Sportswear          .086         29.1              75              7              19
        Women’s Sleepwear                .068         24.9              82              0              18
           Women’s Suits                 .168         32.4              57             23              20
    TABLE 3: BLS Item Substitutions and Methods of Quality Adjustment (continued)

                                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)

                Good                      Weight in           Item              % of            % “Direct”      % “Linked”
                                          December         Substitution      Substitutions       Quality       to inflation of
                                          1997 CPI            Rate          “Comparable”       Adjustments      other items


         Men’s Footwear                       .224%            7.9%              82%                4%               14%
   Boys’ and Girls’ Footwear                  .154             15.1               83                 0                17
      Women’s Footwear                        .341             11.4               79                 3                18
            Watches                           .078              8.7               77                 0                23
            Jewelry                           .323              7.5               66                 3                31
            Luggage                           .035             10.9               60                 0                40
              Cars                           4.811             16.5               30                35                35
             Trucks                          1.120             15.6               23                50                26
              Tires                           .256              2.5               83                 0                17
    Eyeglasses and Contacts                   .335              2.9               50                13                37
 Sports and Exercise Equipment                .210              8.1               47                 2                51
            Bicycles                          .181             10.3               78                 0                22
Camping, Fishing, Hunting Equip.*             .046              7.5               55                 2                43
 Winter/Water Sports Equipment                .163              8.3               45                 2                53
     Playground Equipment                     .001             37.5                0                 0               100
      Musical Instruments                     .062              5.3               56                 4                41
    Photographic Equipment                    .048              7.0               74                 0                26
   Personal Care Appliances                   .011              8.9               71                 0                29
   Calculators, Typewriters *                 .004              2.4              100                 0                 0

               Mean                                            11.2               61                5                 34
              Median                                            8.4               61                0                 30
         Standard Deviation                                     8.2               22                10                22
             Maximum                                           38.3              100                50               100
             Minimum                                            2.4               0                 0                  0

          Weighted Mean                                        13.8               46                22                 32

   ALL Price Quotes in the CPI                                 3.8                48                27                 25
   Non-Residential Price Quotes                                3.3                58                13                 29
   Non-Residential, Non-Vehicle                                3.0                63                 8                 29

* Four pairs of categories had to be combined due to lack of finer BLS data.

Item Substitution Rate = fraction of price quotes for which a substitute replaced the previous month’s item.
(Since these are monthly, the fraction of items with some replacement during the year is much higher.)

“Comparable” substitutions: the replacement item is treated as the same as the previous month’s item for pricing
purposes. Thus no quality adjustment is made.

“Direct” quality adjustments: the price of the replacement item is divided by a measure of its quality relative to
the previous month’s item. Quality is measured using hedonics or the manufacturer’s estimate of the cost of
producing the replacement item relative to the previous item (gross of a markup).

The “Link” Method: the price of the replacement item is multiplied by the gross inflation rate of other items in the
same category and divided by the ratio of its price to the price of the previous month’s item.
                                      TABLE 4: Engel Curve Slopes

                                                (1)                 (2)             (3)

              Good                            Quality           Quantity          Quality/
                                                                            (Quality + Quantity)


            Carpeting                         .77 (.08)         .60 (.04)           56%
       Curtains and Drapes                    .93 (.04)         .39 (.03)           70
      Mattress and Springs                    .62 (.04)         .65 (.04)           49
       Bedroom Furniture                      .70 (.05)         .75 (.04)           48
              Sofas                           .76 (.04)         .53 (.04)           59
     Living Room Furniture                    .75 (.04)         .63 (.03)           54
 Kitchen/Dining Room Furniture                .84 (.06)         .67 (.04)           56
 Baby Furniture and Equipment                 .46 (.04)         .45 (.05)           50
        Outdoor Furniture                     .93 (.05)        1.00 (.04)           48
   Refrigerators and Freezers                 .46 (.04)         .35 (.04)           57
        Clothes Washers                       .28 (.04)         .37 (.05)           43
         Clothes Dryers                       .32 (.05)         .67 (.06)           32
        Stoves and Ovens                      .41 (.06)         .48 (.06)           46
        Microwave Ovens                       .16 (.03)         .53 (.05)           23
    Window Air Conditioners                   .26 (.08)         .31 (.07)           46
           Televisions                        .41 (.03)         .50 (.03)           45
              Radios                          .37 (.03)         .65 (.03)           37
             Stereos                          .34 (.04)        1.05 (.04)           25
               Rugs                          1.07 (.05)         .85 (.04)           56
       Window Coverings                      1.11 (.06)         .56 (.04)           66
              Clocks                          .74 (.04)         .50 (.04)           60
        Lamps and Lights                      .81 (.04)         .80 (.03)           50
           Telephones                         .59 (.03)         .73 (.03)           45
  Lawn and Garden Equipment                   .25 (.05)         .57 (.03)           30
          Power Tools                         .29 (.04)         .60 (.04)           32
            Vacuums                           .24 (.04)         .75 (.04)           25
        Sewing Machines                       .19 (.10)         .36 (.08)           35
   Small Kitchen Appliances                   .39 (.02)         .65 (.02)           38
             Heaters                          .41 (.03)         .28 (.04)           60
         Hard Flooring                        .64 (.15)         .30 (.11)           68
        Office Furniture                      .71 (.07)        1.11 (.06)           39
          Hand Tools                          .55 (.03)         .58 (.03)           49
          Men’s Suits                         .68 (.02)        1.52 (.03)           31
  Men’s Coats and Sportscoats                 .61 (.02)        1.24 (.02)           33
   Men’s and Boys’ Sleepwear                  .37 (.02)         .97 (.03)           27
   Men’s and Boys’ Sweaters                   .46 (.01)        1.13 (.02)           29
           Men’s Pants                        .45 (.01)         .71 (.01)           39
Boys’ Coats, Suits, and Sportscoats           .48 (.02)         .68 (.03)           41
   Women’s and Girls’ Coats                   .57 (.01)        1.08 (.02)           34
  Women’s and Girls’ Dresses                  .67 (.01)         .96 (.01)           41
  Women’s Sweaters and Vests                  .50 (.01)        1.11 (.02)           31
    Women’s Skirts and Pants                  .52 (.01)         .89 (.01)           37
  Women and Girls’ Sportswear                 .47 (.01)        1.28 (.02)           27
       Women’s Sleepwear                      .44 (.01)         .97 (.02)           31
         Women’s Suits                        .72 (.02)        1.44 (.03)           33
                               TABLE 4: Engel Curve Slopes (continued)

                                                     (1)                        (2)                          (3)

                 Good                             Quality                    Quantity                      Quality/
                                                                                                     (Quality + Quantity)


           Men’s Footwear                         .52 (.01)                  .57 (.01)                       48%
      Boys’ and Girls’ Footwear                   .50 (.01)                  .43 (.02)                       54
         Women’s Footwear                         .62 (.01)                  .70 (.01)                       47
               Watches                            .68 (.02)                  .70 (.02)                       49
               Jewelry                           1.13 (.02)                 1.06 (.02)                       52
               Luggage                            .90 (.04)                 1.54 (.04)                       37
                 Cars                             .94 (.03)                  .39 (.02)                       71
                Trucks                            .93 (.06)                  .33 (.04)                       74
                 Tires                            .42 (.02)                  .67 (.02)                       38
       Eyeglasses and Contacts                    .27 (.02)                  .75 (.02)                       26
    Sports & Exercise Equipment                   .59 (.03)                 1.30 (.03)                       31
               Bicycles                           .43 (.05)                  .67 (.04)                       39
         Camping Equipment                        .50 (.06)                  .95 (.06)                       34
   Fishing and Hunting Equipment                  .66 (.04)                  .59 (.04)                       53
   Winter/Water Sports Equipment                  .81 (.05)                 1.45 (.04)                       36
        Playground Equipment                      .68 (.13)                  .71 (.08)                       49
         Musical Instruments                      .37 (.07)                  .90 (.05)                       29
       Photographic Equipment                     .65 (.04)                  .97 (.04)                       40
      Personal Care Appliances                    .34 (.02)                  .90 (.03)                       28
             Calculators                          .35 (.04)                  .81 (.04)                       30
             Typewriters                          .57 (.09)                  .68 (.07)                       46

                Mean                                 .57                        .76                          43
               Median                                .54                        .69                          41
          Standard deviation                         .23                        .31                          13
              Maximum                               1.13                       1.54                          74
              Minimum                                .16                        .28                          23

           Weighted Mean                             .76                       .62                           56


SAMPLE: Cross-sections of households in the 1980-1996 U.S. Consumer Expenditure Surveys. (1982-1996 for
calculators, and 1983-96 for telephones and typewriters.)

OBSERVATIONS: 65,189 household-years for the Quantity regressions. For the Quality regressions,
observations are household-years with purchases of the good. Thus the number of observations varies by good for
the Quality regressions. See Table 1 for the number of observations for each good.

The Weighted Mean is calculated using the CPI shares in December 1997.

Across the 66 goods in the table, the correlation between the Quality and Quantity slopes is 0.20.
              TABLE 5: Predicting Changes in Unit Prices


      Regressor è                  θi                          # of
                             (Quality Slope)     Adj. R2   observations
   WLS Regressions ê



                                  .0424
   Full sample of goods          (.0072)            .93        66
                                 t = 5.8




   Minus 2+ SD ∆Lnxi              .0413
        extremes                (.0034)             .98        64
(Excludes microwave ovens       t = 12.1
       and trucks)



 Minus 2+ SD θi extremes          .0425
 (Excludes jewelry, rugs,        (.0075)            .93        64
  and window coverings)          t = 5.7



   Minus CPI Weight               .0321
 extremes (Excludes cars         (.0062)            .31        64
       and trucks)               t = 5.2




     Minus Apparel                .0366
 (Excludes the 16 clothes        (.0106)            .93        50
  and shoes categories)          t = 3.4
                TABLE 6: Estimates of µ, Quality Growth, and Inflation Bias


                                                  Average             Upwards
  Instrument Set ê                   µ         Quality Growth       Inflation Bias         Adj. R2




           θi                     .618
                                (.125)               3.8%                2.4%                 .56
                                t = 4.9




    θi, (θi - θ)∆zi               .601
                                (.119)               3.7%                2.2%                 .57
                                t = 5.0



# of observations = 66.

µ = the fraction of quality growth that shows up as inflation in the BLS price deflators.

θi = the quality slope for good i.

∆zi = the growth rate of the quality-adjusted relative price of good i (relative to the price of
nondurable consumption).

ESTIMATION METHOD:
The estimating equation is ∆pi = µ⋅∆xi + (1-µ)⋅∆zi. (This is equation (5) in the text.)
Here µ is estimated by GMM using the instruments listed above. That is, µ is estimated by
exploiting the orthogonality of ∆zi to the instruments given.

AVERAGE QUALITY GROWTH:
The difference between the unit price inflation rates ∆xi and the BLS inflation rates ∆pi
is an estimate of the BLS’s quality adjustments. Across our 66 goods, these quality
adjustments averaged 1.46% per year (when the goods are weighted by their 1997 CPI share).
Thus if the BLS adjustments are capturing only (1-µ) of total quality growth, total quality
growth must be 1.46/(1-µ).

UPWARDS INFLATION BIAS:
The BLS misses the fraction µ of total quality growth, which equals 1.46⋅µ/(1-µ).
                                      References

Adelman, Irma and Zvi Griliches (1961), "On an Index of Quality Change," Journal of the American
 Statistical Association 56, 535-548.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt (1992), "Growth and Creative Destruction," Econometrica.

Berry, Steven, Samuel Kortum and Ariel Pakes (1996), "Environmental Change and Hedonic Cost
 Functions for Automobiles," NBER Working Paper #5746.

The Boskin Commission Report (1996), "Toward A More Accurate Measure Of The Cost Of Living,
 Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee from the Advisory Commission To Study
 The Consumer Price Index, available at http://gopher.ssa.gov/history/reports/boskinrpt.html.

Cutler, David M., Mark McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler (1996), "Are Medical
 Prices Declining?" NBER Working Paper #5750.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou (1996), "Dealer Price Discrimination in New Car Purchases: Evidence
 from the Consumer Expenditure Survey," Journal of Political Economy 104, 622-654.

Gordon, Robert J. (1990), The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, University of Chicago Press.

Griliches, Zvi (1961), "Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis of Quality
 Change," in The Price Statistics of the Federal Government, 73, 137-196.

Griliches, Zvi and Iain Cockburn (1994), "Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical Price Indexes,"
 American Economic Review, 84(5), 1213-1232.

Hausman, Jerry A. (1997a), "Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition," in
 Timothy Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The Economics Of New Goods, Chicago,
 University of Chicago Press.

Hausman, Jerry (1997b), "Cellular Telphones, New Products, and the CPI," Journal of Business and
 Economic Statistics 17(2), 188-194.

Moulton, Brent R. (1996), "CPI Strata With Small Sample Sizes," Bureau of Labor Statistics
 memoradum.

Moulton, Brent R. and Karin E. Moses (1997), "Addressing the Quality Change Issue in the Consumer
 Price Index," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity I, 305-366.

Nordhaus, William D. (1997), "Do Real-Output and Real-Wage Measures Capture Reality? The
 History of Lighting Suggests Not," in Timothy Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The
 Economics Of New Goods, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

                                            27
Randolph, William C. (1988), "Housing Depreciation and Aging Bias in the Consumer Price Index,"
 Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 6(3), 359-371.

Rosen, Sherwin (1974), "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
 Competition," Journal of Political Economy 82, 34-55.

Shapiro, Matthew and David Wilcox (1996), "Mismeasurement in the Consumer Price Index: An
 Evaluation," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996, 93-142.

Trajtenberg, Manuel. (1990), "Product Innovations, Price Indices, and the (Mis)Measurement of
 Economic Performance," NBER Working Paper #3261.

Triplett, Jack E. (1997), "Measuring Consumption: The Post-1973 Slowdown and the Research
 Issues," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 79, May/June, 9-42.




                                             28
