                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MERIT MOTIVES AND GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION:
                           PUBLIC FINANCE IN REVERSE


                                          Casey B. Mulligan
                                          Tomas J. Philipson


                                         Working Paper 7698
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7698

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000



We appreciate the comments of Gary Becker, Ralph Chami, Don Coursey, Tom DeLeire, Will Dow, Matt
Kahn, Bob Michael, Derek Neal, Charmaine Picard, Eric Posner, Sherwin Rosen, Xavier Sala-i-Martin,
seminar participants at Clemson University, Northwestern University, Rice University, The University of
Chicago, The University of Quebec at Hull, and the Health-, Aging-, and Productivity Groups of The NBER.
Research assistance of Peter Ho, Lars Lefgren, Rob McMillan, and Allison Schrager is also greatly
appreciated. Mulligan’s work is generously supported by a grant from the Smith-Richardson Foundation to
the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Casey B. Mulligan and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Merit Motives and Government Intervention: Public Finance in Reverse
Casey B. Mulligan and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 7698
May 2000
JEL No. H11, H22, H23, L51

                                            ABSTRACT


       A common view in public finance is that there is an efficiency-redistribution tradeoff in
which distortions are tolerated in order to redistribute income. However, the fact that so much
public- and private redistributive activity involves in-kind transfers rather than cash may be
indicative of merit motives on the part of the payers rather than a preference for the well-being of
the recipients. Efficiency-enhancing public policy in a merit good economy has the primary purpose
of creating distortions and may only redistribute income from rich to poor in order to create those
distortions – the reverse of the conventional efficiency-redistribution tradeoff. We discuss why the
largest programs on the federal and local level in the US – including Social Security, Medicare and
Medicaid, and Public Schooling – seem consistent with the reverse tradeoff rather than the classic
one. Transfers are not lump sum in a merit good economy, and explicitly accounting for this when
calculating tax incidence reduces the estimated progressivity of government policy. As one example,
we calibrate the conventional life-cycle model to show how the amount of over-saving induced on
the poor by Social Security hurts them at least as much as the “progressive” benefits help them.
When the distortions outweigh fiscal transfers in this manner, the classic efficiency-redistribution
tradeoff cannot justify the program and the program is far less progressive than conventional analysis
suggests.


Casey B. Mulligan                                     Tomas J. Philipson
Department of Economics                               The Harris School of Public Policy Studies, The
University of Chicago                                 Department of Economics, and The Law School
1126 East 59th Street                                 University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637                                     1155 East 60th Street
and NBER                                              Chicago, IL 60637
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu                               and NBER
                                                      t-philipson@uchicago.edu
1      Introduction
       Scholars and citizens alike often believe that governments ought to, and do, help the poor and
less fortunate through redistributive tax and spending programs. Many view this as the main
purpose of government activity and therefore argue that economic efficiency can be sacrificed for
redistributive purposes. This classic efficiency-redistribution tradeoff in public finance has guided
much of incidence analysis to establish the degree to which separate policies do indeed help the poor
at the expense of the rich, even though it is understood that such policies may distort behavior. For
example, although universal public health insurance is fully understood to be distorting by
economists, it is suggested that this “inefficiency” should be traded off with the gain in equity its
redistribution may create. As the argument goes, inefficiency is the price paid for redistributive
concerns of a society.1
       However, in undertaking redistribution governments rarely go as far as make unconditional
transfers to be spent by the beneficiaries on whatever they choose. Rather, the desire to take care
of the poor is translated into providing “necessities” such as health care, savings, food, and housing
or other goods or services. The rich seem to feel that they are willing to give up part of their income
to help out the poor, but only for specific purposes. Indeed, such merit good motives for transferring
income seem evidenced by the large amount of voluntary in-kind redistribution taking place in the
private non-profit sector, e.g. through churches or other organizations, which many times
complement or substitute for the mandatory provisions made through the public sector. What are
the distinct implications of merit good motives versus pure redistributive motives for the form and
quantity of government policy, for the extent by which policy helps the poor at the expense of the
rich; and are these differences quantitatively important?
       We argue that merit motives may induce the reverse tradeoff between redistribution and
efficiency than dictated by classic public finance. As opposed to the classic trade-off, the majority
of US government activity is many times more easily interpreted the exact opposite way under merit
motives; redistribution is the price paid for achieving distortions. By explicitly modeling merit
goods, we show how policy is likely to appear progressive in a study that treats most or all taxes and
transfers as lump sum – as do many of the empirical studies of tax incidence – even while taxes and
transfers are (optimally) not lump sum and policy does not enhance the welfare of the poor.
       To illustrate how these new implications of merit motives differ from classic public finance,


        1
         See e.g. Musgrave (1955), Mirrlees (1971), Rosen (1992), Atkesson and Stiglitz (1988).
                                                                          Policy Design and Incidence - 2


consider current government activity in the US: the two largest spending items on the federal level
are health care and retirement income, and the largest spending item on the local level is education.
First of all, all citizens are (sometime during their lives) eligible for these three programs regardless
of their economic status, and opting out of the program is either impossible or quite
disadvantageous. Second, rich individuals typically consume in excess of the publicly provided level,
and hence do not have their consumption distorted as much as do the poor for whom the mandatory
nature of the programs makes them consume more than they would in absence of the program. This
is an important implication of merit good motives, and its accordance with fact can be seen in Figure
1 below.

                         Figure 1: In-Kind Program Distortions by Family Income Decile


     100.00%


      90.00%


      80.00%


      70.00%
                                                                            Percentage of 16, 17, and 18 year
                                                                            olds that did not complete high
      60.00%
                                                                            school and is not currently enrolled
                                                                            Percentage of All Annuity Income
      50.00%                                                                from Social Security


      40.00%                                                                Percentage of Individuals with only
                                                                            Medicare and/or Medicaid Coverage

      30.00%


      20.00%


      10.00%


       0.00%
               0        2          4           6          8          10
                               Family Income Decile




Source: March, 1998 Current Population Survey (CPS). For Schooling, the dropout series includes
all individuals between the ages of 16 and 18 and income refers to parental income. For Social
Security, we included all individuals 65 years of age and older who knew the source of their income
                                                                       Policy Design and Incidence - 3


and who reported no Railroad Retirement Income. For Medicare, we included all individuals 65
years of age and older. The series are weighted to reflect the population distribution of income and
characteristics.

        Figure 1 suggests that these large programs cannot be binding for the rich, as they
supplement their consumption by private spending, but may be binding for the poor, as they do not
consume more than required. The rich, as opposed to the poor, attend school more years than
required, hold private pensions in addition to Social Security, and add private Medigap coverage to
Medicare. The upward distortion on the poor is an obvious implication of the in-kind subsidies
induced by merit motives but is also suggested by the considerably lower consumption of these
types of goods for individuals that are equally poor but live in poorer countries where consumption
is not affected by the public sector. Merit motives imply that these distortions imposed on poor are
enjoyed by the rich who consequently would be willing to compensate the poor through fiscal
transfers. Hence, we make the novel claim that the incidence of fiscal policy, in particular its
progressivity, is linked to the regressivity of regulatory policy – the poor need more progressive
budgetary policy in order to willingly accept the more regressive and distorting consumption of
merit goods.
        These merit good distortions have important and novel implications for positive and
normative incidence analysis. On positive grounds, they imply that so called “cross-hauling,” in this
case the simultaneous taxing of and spending on the poor, can be explained as being efficiency
enhancing under merit motives. In particular, efficiency in a merit good economy is enhanced when
income is taken from the poor and returned to them as an in-kind subsidy or as a distortionary
transfer. Compare this with the classic public finance analysis where cross-hauling should not
occur. When redistribution is motivated to enhance the welfare of the poor, there is little reason
to levy a distortive tax on the poor for the sole purpose of raising revenue for a program intended
to alleviate poverty.
        On normative grounds, the distortions imposed on the poor greatly alter the interpretation
of empirical analysis of policy incidence determining the degree to which fiscal policy favors the
poor at the expense of the rich. In particular, the value to the rich of the distortions on the poor leads
us to conclude that U.S. policy is less progressive than it appears from what we refer to as the
accounting method for calculating policy incidence which only accounts for fiscal resource flows
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 4


between the private and public sector and not the resulting distortions involved in generating those
flows. The accounting method has dominated empirical incidence analysis. For example, Pechman
(1985) and Musgrave et al (1974) find that poorer individuals receive larger transfers-net-of-taxes
than richer individuals in the US and UK. This accounting result does not derive from the tax side
– where the share of income paid in taxes is largely unrelated to income - but on the spending side
where transfer payments fall with income. Consequently, US fiscal policy has been labeled
progressive in an overall sense. The misleading nature of the accounting measures is most easily
understood by considering an extreme savings case when the poor are not allowed to consume at all
until retired at which point they received the fair accumulation of their lifetime savings. Such a
program would be neutral in an accounting sense but presumably be highly regressive in a utility
sense. This is the extreme version of a program whose more moderate cousin induces the behavior
exemplified by Figure 1; it hurts the poor who may over consume the merit good but the rich are
unaffected since they consume more than the mandatory amount.
       We quantitatively assess the degree to which the distortions on the poor are important for
U.S. government retirement programs such as Social Security. We show how valuing the
distortions affects incidence estimates and explain how those estimates are often inconsistent with
the classic efficiency-redistribution tradeoff being the source of distortions. This is because we show
that conventional life-cycle models imply that the over-saving imposed on the poor costs them at
least as much as they gain from the above-market-returns generated by fiscally progressive benefits.
These large distortions of mandatory savings programs partly result from the substantial amount
of evidence on the unwillingness of individuals to change their savings which makes the classic
tradeoff between redistribution and efficiency unable to justify such programs.
       Our paper relates to an old and well-established literature analyzing merit good motives and
the form of government intervention it induces.2 However, the analysis has been largely qualitative

        2
        For example, Musgrave(1957), Olsen (1980), and others in the literature show, how
corrective government policy and even in-kind transfers might enhance efficiency under merit
motives. Harberger (1984) integrates merit motives into cost-benefit analysis. There are
important normative, and sometimes philosophical, studies of merit goods by Sandmo (1983),
Besley (1988), Brennan and Lomansky (1983), Brennan and Walsh (1977), Head (1966),
Musgrave (1957, ch 1; 1998). These models, and ours, should not be confused of intra-family
merit good models, such as Chami (1998), where government policy can enhance efficiency
within the family.
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 5


and separated from classic public finance in which enhancing beneficiary utility is the main
motivation for the tradeoff between redistribution and efficiency. We extend this older analysis in
five ways. First, we suggest that optimal and actual policies mainly distort the behavior of the poor
but not the rich. Second, we show how the two approaches delivers different implications for the
efficiency-redistribution tradeoff – redistribution motivates policy in the classic model while
distortions motivates policy in ours. Third, we argue that the merit good approach better predicts
the observed simultaneous taxation of and spending on the poor than does the classic public finance
approach. Fourth, we show how quantitatively important the differences between the reverse
implications of merit motives and the standard ones of public finance are for evaluating major public
programs observed. For example, we argue Social Security changes the behavior of the poor at least
as much as it subsidizes them. Lastly, the merit model offers very different explanations for
differences over time and across countries of social spending.
       The paper is briefly outlined as follows. Section 2 builds a model of redistributive- and merit-
motivated public policy, and show how Pareto optimal regulations and fiscal transfers tend to be
offsetting. Section 3 shows how the main public programs have the features predicted by the merit
good model. Section 4 demonstrates the quantitative importance of the arguments made, in
particular the relative size of distortions to progressive redistribution towards poor, for the largest
federal program in the US, Social Security. Section 5 concludes.




2      Public Policy in Merit Good and Redistributive Economies
       This section states the merit good problem, characterizes the public policies that enhance
efficiency, and compares them with policies designed primarily to raise the utility of beneficiaries.
While merit motives turn out to be consistent with income redistribution, the optimal amount of
redistribution in a merit good economy is small relative to the amount by which the behavior of the
poor are distorted. Policy which redistributes little as compared to the amount it distorts the poor,
or policies which lower the utility of the poor, cannot be primarily motivated by altruism. Marginal
benefit tax rates increase with the size of the program when merit motives operate at the margin,
and decrease with program size when redistributive motives operate at the margin.
                                                                              Policy Design and Incidence - 6


2.1    Efficient and Laissez-Faire Allocations with Merit and Redistributive Motives
       Consider two equally sized groups labeled r for “rich” and p for “poor.” The rich care about
their own consumption (according to the function ur) as well as the utility of the poor (up) and
consumption of merit goods by the poor (according to the function v). The utility of the rich is

                        V r ' u r(c r , m r) % a ru p(c p , m p) % b rv(m p)                              (1)



where ucr, umr, vmr > 0 . Here c and m denote the consumption of the non-merit and merit good
respectively, labeled by superscripts of the groups consuming them. A merit good motive by the rich,
as represented by the constant br >0, is defined by the merit good of the poor entering into the
utility function of the rich and differs from altruism, as represented by the constant ar >0, which
concerns the level of utility of the poor. Examples of merit goods are high quality medical care,
retirement savings, safe housing, a clean environment, high quality schooling, museums, and safe
automobiles. The utility of the poor is

                                               V p ' u p(c p , m p)                                       (2)



where ucp > 0. We do not assume that the utility of the poor necessarily increases with consumption
of the merit good.
       A Pareto optimal allocation maximizes a weighted average of Vp and Vr, which in turn is a
weighted average of the three functions ur, up, and v, subject to aggregate resource and nonnegativity
constraints:



                             max u r(c r , m r) % au p(c p , m p) % b v(m p)
                        c , m r,c p,m p
                         r

                                                                                                          (3)
                                          c p % c r %q(m p %m r)# y p % y r
                                                 c r,m r,c p, m p $ 0




where yp and yr, the resources available to poor and rich, respectively, q is the marginal rate of
                                                                       Policy Design and Incidence - 7


transformation between merit and other goods, and the constants a and b are derived from the
constants ar and br and the relative weight placed on Vr in the social welfare function (3).3 The set
of all Pareto optimal allocations are the set of solutions to (3) for all a 0 [ar,4].
        Notice how our formulation of the merit good economy also includes what we call an
“altruistic” or redistributive motive, namely the desire to transfer incomes in order to raise the utility
of one group. The redistributive motive might be understood as deriving from two sources, the pure
altruism of the rich (parameterized by the constant ar) and the relative weight given to the poor’s
utility Vp in public decisions, which are parameterized together in the social welfare function (3) by
the constant a. Our formulation nests purely redistributive motives as a special case – the case of
b = 0. In general, our formulation includes a variety of possibilities for the relative importance of
merit and redistributive motives, and the ratio b/a indexes the relative importance of the former.
        A necessary condition of an efficient solution is then




                                         r         p         r
                                       um      um    b vm
                                             '     %      ' q                                         (4)
                                               uc a uc
                                         r       p      p
                                       uc




In other words, rich's marginal rate of substitution of merit for non-merit goods exceeds that for the
poor because the poor merit consumption has a positive external effect. This contrasts to the
competitive equilibrium solution when the marginal rates of substitution equates to the marginal rate
of transformation which is the same across groups

                                               r        p
                                              um       um
                                                   '        'q                                        (5)
                                               r        p
                                              uc       uc




           3
         b / br, a = ar + (1-")/", where " and (1-") are the relative social welfare weights on Vr
       p
 and V , respectively.
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 8


The rich are therefore not distorted in their tradeoff; both the efficient and market solution equates
it to the marginal rate of transformation. However, the poor are distorted in their tradeoff under the
efficient solution. The basic implication of merit motives is that the rich wants the poor to substitute
across goods, as opposed to uniformly increase their levels of consumption. For example, when merit
consumption confers positive external effects, b>0, under-consumption of the merit good follows
from that the poor do not take into account the benefit the rich receive from their consumption when
the rich care about the consumption of the poor. More generally, the first-order conditions imply
that the poor are distorted away from their optimal marginal rate of transformation proportionally
to our index of merit motives, b/a. The relative size of redistributive and merit motives is what
governs the amount of the distortion.
       Let a* be the laissez-faire ratio of rich to poor marginal utility.4 A few implications of these
optimality conditions are worth noting. First, since laissez-faire achieves the social optimum when
b = 0 and a = a*, policy has a redistributive motive if and only if a > a* and a merit motive if and only
if b > 0. Second, even without a purely redistributive motive (a#a*), the social optimum may have
the poor consuming more than their own income (cp+q mp > yp), the rich consuming less than their
own income, and the poor better off than under laissez-faire. Any income redistribution, or utility
improvement for the poor, is in this case a consequence of the rich’s motives to change the poor’s
behavior. Stronger merit motives then increases the optimal amount of redistribution in this sense.
In other words, policy motivated by merit motives redistributes only in order to change behavior,
which reverses the classical characterization of public policy in which distortions are tolerated in
order to create redistribution.
       Second, even though pure altruism (b = 0) and pure merit motives (a=a*) are both extreme
cases, only the latter shares the important characteristics with the intermediate cases. In particular,
pure merit motives can motivate policy that distorts the poor, redistributes, and raises the utility of
the poor. Pure altruism cannot, in our model, motivate policy that distorts the poor and is unlikely
to motivate policy making the poor worse off. The pure altruism model can be embellished to allow
for some distortion of the poor, and we do so in Mulligan (1999) and Mulligan and Philipson (2000),
but a basic implication of our analysis is that the relative importance of merit motives b/a can be

         4
        In other words, a* is the ratio of marginal utilities when each type i = r, p allocates its
 own consumption subject the constraint ci+q mi > yi.
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 9


measured according to the relative importance of distortions and redistribution. Another basic
implication is that policies improving the utility of the poor are consistent with merit motives, but
policies reducing their utility are inconsistent with redistributive motives. The poor may thus favor
merit-based policies that distort their behavior.
       Third,‘cross-hauling’, defined as the simultanious taxation and subsidization of a sub-
population (here the poor) is done by governments around the world. Cross-hauling is consistent
with merit motives but, when taxes are distorting, not with redistributive motives. In the two good
economy discussed above, such cross-hauling would take place when the poor non-merit good c was
taxed for the purpose of stimulating poor merit good consumption m. Cross-hauling is consistent
with purely redistributive motives when taxes and transfers are lump-sum, because all that matters
is the net tax. But, when transfers are distortive on either the spending or tax side, the poorest part
of the population should be tax-exempt under purely redistributive motives because larger gross
transfers, holding the net constant, are costly. In essence, the poor should not be taxed to pay for
antipoverty programs. However, as the figures above reveal, instead of the poor being tax-exempt,
they pay equal or larger shares of their income in taxes compared to the rich.


2.2    The Design and Incidence of Corrective Regulatory and Fiscal Policies


       Because distortions on the poor are valued by the rich, the empirically uncommon, but by
economist idealized, policy of lump sum transfers from rich to poor, cannot implement an efficient
allocation. That progressive lump sum transfers may be Pareto improving is a consequence of
altruism – not of merit good motives.5 Merit motives imply that lump sum transfers alone cannot
achieve efficiency because the poor still equates their marginal rate of substitution to the marginal
rate of transformation, which is less than the social marginal rate of substitution. The classical
analysis deems in-kind provision inefficient, and thereby cannot explain their prevalence without
resorting to imperfections in the transfer process, e.g. asymmetric information about eligibility, that
makes in-kind transfers desirable. Without such transfer imperfections, as is well-known, the
goods are worth less to recipients than the cost of providing them; an extra dollar spent on a



        5
            See also Hochman and Rodgers (1969), Rodgers (1973), and Harberger (1984).
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 10


program costs at least a dollar to collect in taxes but is valued less than a dollar by the beneficiaries
of the program. However, merit motives imply exactly this wedge between marginal benefits of
program participants and marginal costs and in addition predicts that public provision of such a
wedge may be efficiency enhancing compared to private provision. In-kind transfers will be under-
valued on the margin by recipients because the social value of the program, taking into account the
benefits of richer non-recipients, is equated to its social cost. Indeed, merit motives are consistent
with the extreme version of this wedge when in-kind programs provides less than zero value to the
beneficiary so that there is not universal take-up by program beneficiaries, e.g. through high-school
drop-outs.
       How do we expect public policy to be designed in a merit good economy, and how does the
design vary with the relative strength of merit and redistributive motives? The answer depends in
part on one’s theory of public decisions. We have characterized efficient allocations, and we
suppose that public policy tends to move the allocation in the direction of efficiency.6 Even so, there
are two relevant concepts of efficiency. The first is that post-fisc allocations must make all parties
better off as compared to pre-fisc allocations. The second, Kaldor-Hicks efficiency, is weaker,
requiring that all parties could be made better off with the appropriate set of lump sum transfers.
       Under both definitions of efficiency, the corrective policy involves distorting the poor’s
consumption in order to satisfy (4). Pigouvian pricing targeted at the poor is one example. Public
provision of the merit good for the poor, financed in appropriate amounts by both rich and poor,7
can also enhance efficiency according to both definitions. However, policies that require the poor
to pay for too much of publically provided merit good, or unfunded mandates requiring the poor to
consume a minimum quantity of the merit good, are efficiency enhancing only according to the
second definition. We do not take a stand on which concept of efficiency characterizes public
policies, but emphasize three points. First, public policies satisfying either concept can be derived




         6
         A few of the many positive theories of public decisions consistent with our supposition
 include Coughlin’s (1992) model of voting, Wittman’s (1995) theory of democracy, and Becker’s
 (1983) model of interest group competition.
         7
         And with the necessary safeguards to ensure that the publically provided merit good
 does not result in perfect substitution away from privately purchased merit goods.
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 11


from models of public decisions8. Second, when policies are Kaldor-Hicks efficient allocations, there
are even sharper differences between a merit good economy and an economy with only
redistributive motives. Third, while policies are efficient according to the first definition, the
amount of compensation for the poor is increasing the strength of the merit motive and decreasing
in the poor’s willingness to substitute the merit for the nonmerit good. In other words, a policy
substantially redistributing income may not reveal that policy motives are strongly redistributive
(a large), but only that regulations imposed on the poor are costly to them.
       The efficiency of various policy options can be studied by drawing a utility possibility
frontier (UPF) in the [Vp, Vr] plane for the economy characterized by (3). For simplicity, our
Figure 2 draws the frontier for the case ar=0 (ie, no pure altruism on the part of the rich),9 b > 0 (ie,
some merit motive), and traces out the frontier by varying the parameter a from 0 to infinity. A
competitive equilibrium is represented by the allocation A. It is in the interior of the set of feasible
utilities because the poor’s merit consumption confers positive external effects on the rich so that
the competitive equilibrium involves under-consumption by the poor.




         8
          Unanimous voting is likely to produce policies that are efficient according to the first
 definition. Becker’s (1983) model of interest group competition, as applied to our economy with
 ar=0, predicts that public policy produces allocations that are Kaldor-Hicks efficient but make the
 poor worse off (ie, do not satisify the first definition of efficiency) because the rich are more
 willing to pressure for unfunded mandates than the poor are to resist them.

        The case ar=0 minimizes some of the (possibily interesting) complexities of tracing out
         9

 a UPF such as the possibility that lump sum tax and transfers are preferred by both rich and
 poor. See Hochman and Rodgers (1969) for some analysis of these complexities.
                                       Policy Design and Incidence - 12




Figure 2 Utility Possibility Frontier in a Merit Good Economy
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 13




       If one considers the 4 quadrants induced in utility space by the competitive equilibrium
allocation A, moving into the northwest one involves compensating the poor less than the distortions
imposed on them by the increase in their merit good consumption. Allocations B is an example
where distortions are imposed without any transfers from the rich and would be the case for an
unfunded mandate such as mandatory individual savings accounts. Allocation C is the less extreme
case where such mandatory behavior is accompanied by fiscal progressive transfers towards the
poor. Because B is Kaldor-Hicks efficient but is achieved with no income redistribution, the distance
along the frontier between B and C can, roughly speaking, be interpreted as a measure of the amount
of income redistribution occurring at allocation C. In the quantitative analysis we argue that an
example of an intervention such as C would be Social Security when mandated savings are
accompanied by progressive benefits that are less than offsetting.
       Allocations B and C make the poor worse off, and are efficient only in the Kaldor-Hicks
sense. If we were to observe allocations like B or C, we conclude that redistributive motives cannot
be an important determinant of policy – even though there may be income redistribution as at C –
because the poor are worse off. If instead we were to observe an allocation like D, or somewhere
between B and D, it does not follow that merit motives are relatively unimportant because it may
be that public decisions produce allocations make all parties better off.10 In other words, whether
the poor are worse off is a very powerful test of the importance of merit motives. It may fail even
if, and pass only if, merit motives are important.
       Figure 2 also shows how income redistribution may be a consequence of distortions, the
reverse of the classic public finance view. To see this, suppose that public policy must make no
party worse off relative to laissez-faire. If we increase the cost of distortions to the poor (eg., by
decreasing their willingness to substitute c for m), then allocation B and the locus of unfunded
mandates move to the left relative to allocation A in the Figure, which increases the distance from
B to the northeast quadrant, which means that more income redistribution is required to achieve an



        As drawn, Figure 2 assumes that the constraint cp $ 0 does not bind, so an unfunded
        10

mandates can produce an allocation on the frontier without requiring the poor to spend more
than their income on the merit good. If it did bind, then there would not exist a frontier to the
northwest of A, and all Kaldor-Hicks efficient allocations would make the poor better off.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 14


efficient allocation making all parties better off.
       Merit motives, when they operate at the margin, offer a very different explanation for the
variation over time and across regions in the amount of social spending. We see from the formula
(4) that a greater taste for merit goods (ie, large b) increases the “implicit marginal tax rate” – the
gap between the social and private marginal rate of substitution for the poor. It also increases the
amount of redistribution. Implicit marginal tax rates are positively correlated with the amount of
social spending when the merit motive operates at the margin, because the extra redistribution is the
price paid for the additional distortion.
       Compare this with a classical explanation, where large amounts of social spending are
explained as a consequence of an intense taste for redistribution (ie, large a). We see in Figure 2
how, holding constant b, large a is associated with more redistribution. But we see from the formula
(4) that a greater taste for redistribution decreases the “implicit marginal tax rate.” In other words,
policies motivated by a relatively strong taste for redistribution do less to distort the poor. Hence,
implicit marginal tax rates are negatively correlated with the amount of social spending when the
redistributive motive operates at the margin. The relationship between implicit marginal tax rates
and the amount of social spending summarizes the essence of the merit and classical approaches to
the efficiency-redistribution tradeoff.




3      Important Government Programs Interpreted as Merit Good Provision


       There are perhaps two approaches to investigating the potentially offsetting trades taking
place between regulatory and fiscal policy as implied by merit motives. As discussed, whether such
trades occur depends on the model of government intervention, on which we do not take a stand in
this paper, and the relative importance of merit and redistributive motives. If the model predicts that
winners compensate losers then one would like to measure the overall incidence and distortions for
all programs and regulations, which due to data constraints is difficult. The more modest approach
is therefore to do it on a program-by-program basis, so that the transfers generated by a given
program would be compared to the distortions resulting from the regulations of that program. This
is what we do in the bulk of the paper, but at the point briefly discuss government policy incidence
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 15


in the aggregate.
       To consider policy incidence in the aggregate, we make use of several studies on the
relationship between taxes and government spending by income classes, and emphasize the
importance of cross-hauling in the fiscal process. For example, an influential study by Pechman
(1985) showed that US taxes, including all levels of governments, were fairly flat as a share of
income. The poor paid a slightly larger share if corporate income taxes and property taxes were
assumed to be pushed on to consumers by competition, but the rich paid slightly larger shares if
those taxes were borne by capital. Government spending was found not to have this pattern across
income classes; he found that poorer individuals received larger shares of their income from all levels
of governments. Consequently, net fiscal transfers was found progressive in that after the common
share of income paid to the government was deducted from the receipts, the poor faired better than
the rich. Figure 3 below (Musgrave et al (1974) , Figure 6, p 289) summarizes this progressive feature
of US fiscal policy induced by close to neutral taxes and progressive spending. Figure 4 (Pechman
(1985) , Figure 4-2) summarizes this same progressive feature of US fiscal policy in a later study.
                                                            Policy Design and Incidence - 16




Figure 3 Overall US Taxes and Transfers, 1968. [Source: Musgrave et al, (1974) Fig 6, p. 289]
                                                           Policy Design and Incidence - 17




Figure 4 Overall US Taxes and Transfers, 1980. [Source: Pechman (1985), Fig 4-2, p 54.]
                                                                       Policy Design and Incidence - 18




Fullerton and Rogers (1993) supports this basic finding using a life-time approach to the
measurement of incidence, as opposed to a static approach used by Pechman (1985). Their findings
thus again include supporting a close to flat-tax nature of income taxes, a progressive nature of
spending, making the overall fiscal effect fairly progressive.
        At this first level of aggregate measurement, it appears that the progressive nature of fiscal
policy and the regressive nature of in-kind programs are consistent with an overall merit good
contract. More precisely, one may compare the amount of total redistribution with the total value
of distortions imposed on the poor by all programs. Efficient allocations under merit-motives we
saw implied transfers from the rich to the poor in terms of stimulating the merit-good consumption.
In the Figure above, the binary representation of rich and poor is therefore revealed by the two
income classes defining those who obtain negative versus positive net-transfers. More precisely if
the net-transfers n(y) is a decreasing function of income that average to zero, then there will be a
group of lower incomes {y: n(y) > 0 } which are revealed to be the ‘poor’ with the remainder {y: n(y)
< 0 } revealed to be the ‘rich’. For example, in the first figure, the ‘poor’ are revealed to be the lowest
four deciles of the income distribution. Total redistribution is simply the triangular area in the
north-west part of the figure, measuring the total net-transfers for the poor. The distortion on the
poor would be both those induced by the in-kind nature of public spending as well as the excess
burden of the taxes collected from them. From the figures, we see that taxes as a share of income
are rather flat at about 30 % of income in 1968 and actually quite regressive conditional on the poor
in 1980 where the poorest part of the population have taxes in the range of 40 % of income.
Applying conventional estimates on the excess burden of taxation in the range of 50-100 % of
revenue11 it follows that the distortions on the poor is bounded below by about 15-30 % of their
income in 1968 and 20-40% of their income in 1980. Therefore, the triangle representing total
benefits to the poor must be less than those income shares of the poor to be explained by altruistic
redistribution.

         11
          Ballard et al (1985) estimate the “marginal excess burden” of the U.S. tax system to be
 between 0.17 and 0.56, and they find the marginal excess burden of the U.S. individual income
 tax (IIT) to be fairly representative of all U.S. taxes. Feldstein (1995) shows that these
 calculations and others in the literature ignore important forms of tax avoidance. He
 reestimates a marginal excess burden near unity for the IIT.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 19


       Part of the problem of explaining these figures as purely redistribution is that the poor have
the same (in 1968) or higher (in 1980) tax-rates than richer sub-populations. This ‘cross-hauling’
should not occur under purely redistributive motives at least not with a perfect transfer process; the
poor should be tax-exempt because what is desired are net-transfers to the poor and that is most
cheaply produced by not imposing distortions on them. However, both the excess burden of
taxation and the in-kind nature of the benefits induces distortions on the poor which are easily
explained as efficiency enhancing public policy under merit-motives.
       Hence, even the limited information we have about policy incidence in the aggregate can be
used to make some evaluation of the importance of merit relative to redistributive motives, because
cross-hauling is so clearly important. Ideally, we would also like to know the aggregate cost to the
poor of changes in their behavior and compare that the amount of income redistribution shown in
the Figures. It seems that this exercise must be done on a program-by-program basis (and also
account for cross-program interactions?), and hence computation of the aggregate is a colossal
research project. However, if one began the analysis with some of the more important programs
(in terms of changing poor behavior), and show that the cost of poor distortions from these
programs alone was of similar magnitude as the aggregate redistribution shown in the Figures, it
would seem that a complete analysis of all programs must conclude that merit motives are important,
and that policy is hardly progressive in the aggregate. Beginning a sequence of such program-by-
program calculations is what we do below.


3.1    Program 1: Compulsory Retirement Accounts
       Retirement accounts, sometimes referred to as Provident Funds, are typically financed with
proportional payroll taxes and pay benefits according to lifetime contributions plus accrued interest.
A few countries around the world have such retirement accounts, and many have proposed that the
U.S. adopt one. In our context, the two groups are rich and poor. The merit and nonmerit goods are
consumption when old and young, respectively. According to our model, the rich would like to see
the poor save more for retirement than the poor would in the absence of government intervention.
By construction, a Retirement Account is neither progressive nor regressive in the accounting sense.
However, as long as the program causes the poor to change their behavior, our model suggests that
the program makes the poor worse off in the Hicksian sense. A number of commentators worry
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 20


that the poor save too little for retirement (Hamermesh 1984, Robb and Burbidge 1989), so that
changing their savings behavior is indeed a primary policy motive as it is in our model.
       Our model also shows that such a proportional program can achieve efficiency if
consumption of the merit good is a larger fraction of income for the rich – in other words, the rich
have higher retirement savings than do the poor – and the merit good cannot be resold.12 One
instance of resale in this application is borrowing during youth against one's retirement benefits, and
is generally believed to be difficult or impossible. The fact that governments make it more difficult,
through e.g. banning lenders from seizing the old-age benefits in case of borrower default, is
indicative of the desire for larger savings rates.
       Such a proportional program can also achieve efficiency even when rich and poor consume
equal fractions of the merit good if the rich have better opportunities for reselling the government
provided merit goods over time. This is likely to be the case with retirement savings because the rich
may have assets they can draw down (e.g., monies intended for bequests) in response to the
requirements of a Retirement Account while the poor do not.
       Hence, our analysis predicts that compulsory Retirement Accounts change behavior mainly
of the poor, are regressive in the Hicksian sense, and tend to be more progressive in the accounting
sense the higher is the fraction of income which must be contributed to the program. This final
prediction is consistent with the apparent finding in the literature that less developed countries
simultaneously have smaller Social Security programs and are more regressive in the accounting
sense as compared to the programs in developed countries.13


3.2    Program 2: Induced Retirement and Social Security
       Here the groups are young and old and the merit good is leisure when old14. Efficiency might


        12
         The studies of Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (1996), and others suggest that savings rates
 are higher for the rich, even accounting for Social Security wealth.
        13
          See Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999) on the size of programs and e.g. Midgley (1984)
 for analysis of the progressivity of Third World programs and Burkhauser and Warlick (1981)
 or Garrett (1995) for analysis of the progressivity of American programs.
        14
          As an example, this is consistent with Sala-i-Martin (1996) who has argued that the
 elderly impose negative external effects on the young in the labor market.
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 21


be achieved in this case with a regulation requiring the old to retire from their jobs. Mandatory
retirement hurts the old and, if workers of different ages are substitutes, helps the young. Fiscal
transfers from young to old may also be part of the policy package so that both groups might gain
from the policy. This prediction is consistent with the vast majority of Social Security Programs
around world which combine fiscal transfers from young to old with strong inducements to retire
(Sala-i-Martin 1996, Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin 1999a,b). From an accounting perspective – a so
called “generational accounting” perspective in this case – it would appear that the old gain at the
expense of the young. Indeed, generational accounts have been used for a number of countries to
show how “policy helps the current elderly and harms current younger and future generations”
(Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Leibfritz 1999, p. 3). However, as generational accounting only focuses
on the resource flows to and from the public sector, including the distortions into the analysis
changes incidence evaluations.15


3.3    Program 3: Medicare and Medicaid
       Here the groups are rich and poor and the merit good is healthcare, especially during old age.
Efficiency, in the sense of encouraging the poor to consume more healthcare than they would on
their own, can be achieved by public provision or financing. Since services are difficult to resell,
separate prices for rich and poor are feasible. For Medicare in the US, taxes are roughly
proportional to lifetime income and, due to the greater longevity and greater utilization by higher
income beneficiaries, benefits are roughly proportional to taxes paid (McClellan and Skinner 1997).
Hence, Medicare appears to be neither progressive nor regressive in the accounting sense.
Nevertheless, in the case that the competitive equilibrium demand for healthcare is a greater
proportion of income for the rich, Medicare is regressive in the Hicksian sense. Medicare looks like
the movement from allocation A to allocation B in Figure 2.
       Medicaid also provides public healthcare, but beneficiaries are relatively poor while taxes
are levied on all income groups. Hence Medicaid is progressive in the accounting sense and may be



        15
         Also see Mulligan (1999) who argues that generational accounting ignores the
 retirement inducing provisions of Social Security programs, overstates the gains by the elderly,
 and may overstate costs to the young.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 22


progressive in Hicksian sense even if beneficiaries would prefer to spend on other goods the dollar
equivalent of their publically provided healthcare. Medicaid looks like the movement from allocation
A to allocation C or D in Figure 2. As a package, Medicare and Medicaid are progressive in the
accounting sense and may be either regressive or progressive in the Hicksian sense.
       The case of Medicaid is particularly interesting when considering long-term care for the
elderly. In the US, the share of nursing home days publicly financed is about 60%, and is almost
exclusively through the means-tested Medicaid program. It is often argued that there is a lack of
demand for long-term care insurance in the US (see e.g. Pauly (1990)). However, since most of
long-term care is covered by public financing, completely so for the poor, what is lacking is a private
demand by the poor. Private long-term care insurance, supplementing the public part, declines with
income just as for other the other merit goods we have discussed. This is again naturally interpreted
through merit motives; the poor over-consume long-term care insurance through the public
distortions, they even demand more of it than the rich (!), and are thus at a corner solution in which
their lack of private demand is more pronounced than that of the rich.
       Regardless of the type of health care, according to the merit good model, the poor do not have
a strong enough preference for health care in a social sense so that offering them a price below cost
enhances efficiency. Such pricing induced by insurance is usually interpreted as creating a so called
moral hazard problem in the sense that beneficiaries are induced to consume more health care than
they would if they made their healthcare consumption decisions based on the resource cost at the
time of purchase. But under merit motives such pricing below cost does not create moral hazard and,
indeed, enhances efficiency.


3.4    Program 4: Compulsory Schooling, and Labor Market Regulations
       Again the groups are rich and poor but now the merit good is schooling. American local
governments mandate and provide elementary and high school training. There are two
interpretations of this, both consistent with our merit good model. In the first interpretation, taxes
roughly proportional to income finance a universally provided education such as a high school
degree. Such a program would appear progressive in the accounting sense, but may be regressive
in the Hicksian sense because the poor often value schooling less than it costs. An extreme case here
is if the poor do not value schooling enough to participate in the program – as is the case for high
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 23


school dropouts.
       In the second interpretation, schooling is compulsory but not financed by the government.
This is basically the American educational program design from the point of view of the federal
government and from the point of view of many state governments. Financing by a local government
is only nominally different than no government finance at all in this interpretation because families
sort geographically according to their income. In this interpretation, compulsory schooling is
trivially neither regressive nor progressive in the accounting sense. At the same time, compulsory
schooling is regressive in the Hicksian sense as long as the poor demand less schooling than is
compelled by the government and less schooling than is demanded by the rich. The results of
Landes and Solmon (1972) and others suggest that compulsory schooling laws do not affect the
educational attainment of most Americans. Presumably the poor are those who are affected, if any.
       One of the most important and prevalent labor regulations is the prohibition of indentured
servitude – young people are not allowed to obtain financing for their schooling and other training
in exchange for a binding promise to work for the creditor after the schooling is completed. Such
regulations, together with government finance of schooling, have a natural interpretation in the merit
good model. “Freedom” is a merit good and, as such, is under-demanded by students in the laissez-
fair case. To stimulate freedom, students are prohibited by the government from selling their
freedom in exchange for publicly subsidized schooling. Our analysis implies that students are not
as much better off – and perhaps worse off – from government policy as the accounting for
government educational subsidies might suggest, not only because they might prefer cash to the
educational subsidy, but also because they are prohibited from borrowing. For example, while
Friedman and Friedman (1980) and others have suggested that public university spending is
regressive because all income groups pay taxes but mainly the higher income families have children
enrolled in universities, our analysis emphasizes that it is for college students that the prohibition
of indentured servitude is most binding.


3.5    Program 5: Public Housing
       Governments often provide or subsidize housing for the poor, although such programs are
typically smaller in magnitude than the old age, medical, and schooling programs mentioned above.
Olsen and York (1984) point out that, according to the Hicksian definition of incidence, the poor
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 24


value the subsidies less than they cost because “[The accounting approach-our addition] ignores the
fact that people are not indifferent between all bundles with the same market value...” (Olsen and
York 1984, p. 177). However, they estimate that the average valuation of the housing by program
beneficiaries is only 9% less than the market value. They also find program benefits to be correlated
with beneficiary attributes in similar ways whether measured by beneficiary valuation or market
valuation.
       We see Olsen and York's analysis as one application of our model – one in which the
government induced change in behavior small relative to those induced by old age, medical, schooling
and other programs. Consistent with our prediction that the accounting approach is most accurate
for small programs, Olsen and York find relatively small gaps between the accounting and Hicksian
incidence for public housing programs.


4      The Quantitative Importance of Merit Good Distortions for Old-Age
       Programs


       The previous sections discuss the qualitative implications of merit good motives as they
deliver implications different from classic public finance. This section attempts the more challenging
exercise of investigating quantitatively whether the distortions are large relative to the progressive
nature of fiscal policy. Our main finding is that for conventional parameter values in common
models of life-cycle consumption, the distortions imposed are of first-order importance and very
large relative to the fiscal transfers that offset them. Indeed, we find that for common models and
empirically relevant parameter values many times an infinite amount of retirement income would
be needed to compensate the poor for raising their yearly savings rate by as little as 3%.16 When the
amount of forced savings is low enough for there to be a feasible amount of government provided
retirement benefits to offset the distortion, the classic tradeoff between efficiency and redistribution

        16
           A sufficient, but not necessary, condition for the inapplicability of the classic
 justification is that distorted savings of the poor are not compensated for fully in terms of above
 market returns through the program. To assess this condition, we do not measure the benefits
 of these distortions for the rich, in terms of their positive external effects, but if the
 compensation required would be finite such estimates would be necessary in order to infer the
 social benefit from offsetting regulatory and fiscal policy.
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 25


cannot justify the program in itself. In addition, as these distortions are so large as to cover the total
amount of redistribution, as discussed in the previous section, the aggregate government budget, and
not only the program itself, is difficult to interpret to be generated by the classic redistribution-
efficiency tradeoff.
        The fact that no amount of progressivity in Social security benefits may make up for the
over-savings of the program is quite striking and can be most easily illustrated through Figure 5. As
before for Social security, we interpret the merit good m as the amount of retirement consumption
when old and the non-merit good c as the amount of pre-retirement consumption when young.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 26




                    Figure 5:
                           5 Merit Good Distortions and Mandatory Savings


The accounting approach labels a transfer neutral if it moves the allocation down or up the budget
line whether or not trading back to the optimal level of consumption is feasible. However, without
resale, the utility of the poor is affected by how much the consumer would have to be compensated
to remain indifferent to his optimal level of consumption, and thus traces out the indifference curve
instead of the budget set. Consider mandating savings beyond the most preferred level of inter-
temporal consumption, indicated by (c*, m*). If the individual is paid back the present value of the
extra savings mandated, he will simply be moving up the budget line and will in an accounting sense
have been subjected to a neutral transfer. This is neutral only if the transfers can be undone in which
case the government program has no effect so that accounting measures of incidence are accurate
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 27


only when in-kind programs are irrelevant. However, when the transfer cannot be undone, the
individual is presumably made worse off. The striking fact that there may be no amount of
compensation when old that will compensate him for the forced savings when young occurs when,
as with the constant elasticity of substitution case shown in the figure, there is enough
complementarity so that indifference curves asymptote away from the axis, towards the
consumption level cA for the indifference curve of the optimal consumption pattern. The more
complementarity is consumption, the more the two goods want to be consumed together, and the
more is the individual is hurt by being forced to favor one good over the other. If the savings
mandated lowers current consumption below cA in the figure then there is no amount of government
provided benefits when old that can compensate the individual for the foregone consumption when
young. Whatever profile chosen in Area A in the figure, even if it involves more old consumption than
the market allows one to trade over time, it is dominated by the optimal consumption profile. Put
differently, if taxes are high enough to push consumption when young below cA, then regardless how
much the government pays out in retirement benefits, even if it involves massive redistribution from
other cohorts, the individual is worse off. Consequently, generous programs in an accounting sense,
in which some cohorts are paid by the government much more than the market would yield, may
nevertheless hurt those cohorts.
       Our quantitative assessment of the magnitude distortions imposed by excessive savings of
the poor proceeds in four steps. First, we show how the standard life cycle model can be viewed as
a special case of our merit good analysis with simply two goods. Second, we calibrate the model and
compute the amount of retirement income an individual would require to raise his savings rate.
Third, we explain why government retirement programs can be expected to have a greater effect
on the retirement income of the poor than that of the rich.   Lastly, we compute how much more
regressive is a retirement program when taking into           account the excessive savings of the
poor rather than simply accounting for research flows to and from the public sector.


4.1    Modigliani's Life Cycle Model as Special Case of the Two Good Merit Model


We consider a continuous-time version of the standard life cycle savings model where the interest
rate equals the rate of time preference. Working life begins at time t=0, retirement begins at time
                                                                                            Policy Design and Incidence - 28


R, and death occurs at time T. Labor income during working life is y(t) and 0 during retirement. Age
t consumers enjoy government benefits (negative taxes) in the amount g(t). We assume that the
interest rate and the rate of time preference are equal, and denote them *. In general, it is possible
that consumers begin or end life with positive financial assets. However, this situation is more likely
for richer persons and we suppose for simplicity that a poor person has no financial assets at the
beginning and at the end of his life. In this latter case, the lifetime budget constraint for poor
consumers is:

                           T                          R                          T


                           m                          m                          m
                                   & *t                       & *t
                               e          c(t) dt #       e          y(t) dt %       e & * t g(t) dt
                           0                          0                          0




where c(t) denotes consumption at a given age. The poor also face a borrowing constraint, which
we discuss in more detail below.
       We assume consumers evaluate a feasible consumption profile C / {c(t) : 0 # t # T}
according to the constant elasticity of intertemporal substitution (CIES) utility function

                               R                                                        T
                     F                                   F
                    F&1 m                                        m
             U(C) /       e & * t [c(t)](F & 1) /F dt %     (1 /F e & * t [c(t)](F & 1)/ F dt
                                                        F&1
                               0                                                        R




Here, the parameter F is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. In the special case we consider
below, the parameter ( is the share of pre-retirement consumption undertaken in retirement in the
absence of government policy. Such a taste may arise, for example, from substitutability between
leisure and consumption 17or the lesser needs associated with the maturation of one's children.
       Following Modigliani and Brumberg (1954), we assume working income is constant over time,
y(t) = y. We also assume government benefits are paid only to retirees and in a constant amount


        17
       This effect is emphasized by Ghez and Becker (1975), Owen (1969), Robb and
Burbudge (1989), and others.
                                                                                Policy Design and Incidence - 29


over time, and denote that amount g(t) = gy if t $R. It is well known that in this case, the most
preferred consumption profile involves consuming the same amount, which we denote c, during each
period of working life and the same amount, which we denote m, during each period of retirement.
Hence the life cycle savings problem in continuous time is a special case of our two good model,
where the utility function is:

                                               F/ *
                   U(C) / u(c,m) /                  (1&e &*R)[c (F & 1)/ F % q(1/ Fm (F & 1) /F]
                                               F&1




                            e & * R & e &* T
where the parameter q '                          represents the trade-off between a yearly reduction in
                                 1 & e &*R


consumption when working and yearly retirement benefits when retired. This utility function is a
special case of our functions up(c, m) and ur(c, m) – the weighted constant elasticity of substitution
case. It naturally depends on the interest rate but also, because the trade-offs are between flows, on
the share of life retired. The corresponding budget constraint is given by


                                                  c + qm # y(1+gq)


Because the two goods are pre-retirement and post retirement consumption, the relative price of the
merit good may be interpreted to be q.
       A government old-age retirement program will force consumers to save a constant fraction
of labor income during each period of working life. This is a regulation which is unlikely to affect
the behavior of the rich because they hold financial assets for other reasons, e.g., they were endowed
with them or can afford to make bequests at end of life, and can thus reduce these non-retirement
assets stocks in order to abide by the regulation. We consider, on the other hand, when the poor
did not have enough non-retirement assets to fully abide by the regulation – and cannot borrow
against their government benefits – and thereby must decrease their working life consumption and
increase their retirement consumption. In other words, we suppose that a mandatory retirement
savings program does change the life cycle consumption profile for the poor, even if it does crowd
out some of the savings that would have occurred in the absence of the program.
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 30


       In order to more readily compare the model with well-known parameters of government
retirement programs, it is useful to rewrite lifetime consumption in terms of the yearly savings rate
when working, denoted s. s is inclusive of mandatory savings and, as we explained above, is affected
by policy for the poor. The consumption when working is then simply what is left over from
income after savings is taken out and the consumption when retired is the accumulated savings
together with government retirement benefits

                                         c(s, g) ' y(1& s)


                                                    s
                                        m(s, g) ' y[ % g]
                                                    q


Substituting in how savings determines consumption, we denote by w(s, g) / u(c(s, g), m(s, g)) the
induced utility over savings rates and government retirement benefits and by s* the most preferred
savings rate in the absence of government benefits; s* = arg maxs w(s, 0). This function defines the
retirement income E(s) necessary to compensate the individual for undertaking a non-optimal
savings rate relative to choosing the privately optimal savings

                                      w(s,E(s)) / w(s(, 0)

The compensating variation represented by the benefit amount E(s) is the primary focus of our
analysis of the distortions imposed by excessive savings by the poor. It represents the extra yearly
retirement income, expressed as a fraction of working life income, required to compensate a
consumer for saving at the rate s. Since s is a fraction of yearly labor income saved for retirement,
it corresponds to the payroll tax “contributions” that are characteristic of so many government
retirement programs systems around the world. Similarly, E(s) corresponds to the “benefits” of such
programs which involves the full replacement rate s/q + E(s) of which part is paid by the
government. In other words, if a worker saves a fraction s of his labor income every year, E(s) is the
minimal addition replacement rate the individual must receive, in addition to the amount he earns on
his own retirement savings, in order to be no worse off under the government induced savings
program.
                                                                  Policy Design and Incidence - 31


4.2    Distortions Induced by Mandatory Savings
We assess the distortions imposed on the poor by excessive savings through the compensating
variation calculated for common parameter values that are empirically relevant in matching observed
consumption behavior to that of the model. Table 1 reports our numerical results for four
parameterizations of the model that fall within the empirically feasible range. The main result
displayed is that even very small increases in the savings rate brought about by merit motives lead
to very large distortions on the poor.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 32


                         Table 1: How Much Is Retirement Income Valued?


                                                           Parameter Values
 Parameters                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
 Years Working, R                          42              42               45              45
 Years Retired, T-R                         15              15               7               7
 Elasticity of Substitution, F              0.5              1               0.5              1
 Optimal Savings Rate, s*                   0.049           0.049            0.024           0.024
 Merit Good Price, q                        0.10            0.10             0.05            0.05
 Excessive Savings, s - s*                          Compensating Variation E(s)
 0                                          0               0                0               0
 0.005                                      0.01            0.00             0.03            0.01
 0.010                                      0.03            0.01             0.16            0.05
 0.015                                      0.07            0.03             0.58            0.13
 0.020                                      0.14            0.05             2.71            0.25
 0.025                                      0.28            0.08            4                0.42
 0.030                                      0.52            0.12            4                0.67
                                        Computations for 2% Excessive Savings s = s* + 0.02
 m/c with g = 0                             0.72            0.72             0.94            0.94
 m/c with g = E(s)                          0.87            0.77             3.78             1.20
 {1+s/[qE(s)]}-1                            0.18            0.07             0.75            0.22
 Notes:
 (1) * = 0.04, ( = 0.5
 (2) m/c is the ratio of retirement consumption to working life consumption



The top part of the table reports the values of the structural parameters and induced values of those
parameters, such as the privately desired savings rate s* and the merit good price q. The middle part
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 33


of the table reports the cost of the minimum savings requirement, expressed as the extra retirement
income per dollar of working life income required for indifference as a function of the amount by
which the minimum savings requirement exceeds the optimal savings rate. Reading across the third
to last row of the middle panel, for example, shows that consumers require an additional replacement
rate ranging from 5 to 271 percent in order to endure the savings rate which is two percentage points
higher than their optimum.
        The effects of three parameters are important for the calibrated finding that small increases
in savings rates hurts the poor a lot in quantitative terms. The first is the length of the retirement
period relative to the length of working life. The shorter is working life, the less painful it is to save
a given extra percentage of income during working life and a more valuable is a given amount of
extra income during retirement. We report computations for two values of the pair of age of
retirement and age of death (R, T). The first is a working life of 42 years and a retirement period of
fifteen years which, for someone beginning his working life at age 20, corresponds to retirement at
age 62 and a life expectancy of 77. We believe this parameterization closely approximates the
expected life-cycle of American retirees late in the 20th-century. The second parameterization of
R = 45 and T-R = 7 corresponds to retirement at age 65 and a life expectancy of 72 years, which we
view as an approximation to the expected life-cycle of American retirees in the mid 20th-century.
        The second crucial parameter is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution F. A large value
of F implies that people are not particularly willing to smooth consumption over their life-cycle. F
is thought to be relatively low and a parameterization of F = 0.5 is commonly found in numerical
public finance analyses of Social Security and other dynamic fiscal policies.18 The less consumption
is substitutable over time, the more the individual is hurt by being forced to favor one time over the
other. For the range of parameter values that have been argued empirically relevant, F < 1, it should
be noted that the CIES utility function implies there are some savings rates for which no amount
of extra retirement income can compensate a consumer for the excessive savings induced by merit
motives (!). This is seen graphically as indifference curves in Figure 3 whose asymptotes are a



         18
          See e.g. Hall (1988) or Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, p. 50). Hubbard and Judd (1987)
 use the CES function form with values of F = 0.2, 0.25, 0.5,and 1.1 for very similar purpose – to
 show that consumers can be worse off under a payroll-taxed financed retirement savings
 system than under no system at all.
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 34


strictly positive distance from the parallel axis19. Although the CIES functional form is very
common in the public finance literature on life-time consumption, apparently it has dramatic
implications for evaluating the welfare implications of large intertemporal government policies.
       An important source generating the large distortions on the poor displayed by the table is
that savings accumulate and more periods are used to save than consume. This implies that small
amounts of excessive savings may hurt the poor a lot, especially if those savings are repaid in-kind
in terms of health care. For example, although a two percentage point increase in the retirement
savings rate may not seem like a lot, the logic of compound interest implies that two more
percentage points as an important effect on the ratio of retirement to working life consumption.
This can be seen the table by comparing the optimally desired ratio of retirement to pre-retirement
consumption, which in the table corresponds to ( = 0.5, to the ratio that results from a forced savings
rate of s* + 0.02. These calculations are shown in the bottom of the table. The minimum savings
requirement increases the ratio of retirement income to pre-retirement income by as much as 50
percent , the forced ratio is 0.72 compared to the optimal ratio of 0.5, when retirement lasts fifteen
years. It raises it by close to 100 percent when retirement lasts seven years; compare 0.94 to 0.5. If
those subject to the minimum savings regulation are compensated in the form of additional
retirement income, then the regulation has an even larger effect on the ratio as shown in the 2nd row
of the table's bottom panel for the case when consumers are fully compensated; the ratio more than
doubles in the case of a seven-year retirement period.
       Another way to evaluate the magnitude of the utility cost of increasing the retirement
savings rate by two percentage points is to express the extra retirement benefits as a fraction of total



        19
         To prove this, express the marginal rate of substitution µ as a function of consumption
 of the merit good c and of the utility level u. Then invert to compute c (remember that u < 0
 when F < 1):
                                                       F&1
                                                           u
                                                        F
                                         c(µ,u) '
                                                    1 %q((µq)F&1




                            F&1
 For F < 1, lim c(µ, u) '       u > 0    .
             µ 6 4           F
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 35


retirement income, where total retirement income is the sum of a fair annuity paid from accumulated
retirement savings (sy/q) plus the government subsidy g:

                            subsidy                g(s)y                   s      &1
                                            '                  ' 1%
                     subsidy % fair annuity   g(s) y % s y / q           q g(s)




For the cases shown in the Table, we see in the last row that the ratio ranges from 0.07 to 0.75 when
the government pays the subsidy making the poor indifferent to the program (g(s) = E(s)). In other
words, consumers as parameterized in the first column need retirement benefits that exceeded those
afforded by their own retirement savings to the extent that 18% of their retirement income is a
subsidy and 82% of it is a fair return on savings.


4.3    Accounting versus Hicksian Incidence of Old-Age Retirement Programs


       We presume that mandatory retirement savings programs have, proportionally, a lesser
effect on the retirement consumption of the rich than that of the poor. Reasons for this
presumption include: (a) the rich have proportionally more other financial assets which can be used
to neutralize much or all of the effect of a retirement savings program on their life cycle
consumption profile and (b) the rich may, in the absence of a government program, save a greater
fraction of their income for retirement so that a mandatory minimum savings rate is more likely to
bind for the poor.
       For simplicity, we assume that the savings rate of the rich is not affected at all by
government retirement savings programs. Hence the only effects on the rich are through net taxes
they pay (if any) to finance retirement income for the poor and their enjoyment of additional
retirement income for the poor. Two calculations are in order. The first applies to future generations
of retirees for whom the calibrations in columns (1) and (2) are most applicable. The second is for
previous generations of retirees for whom the calibrations in columns (3) and (4) are most applicable.
       If the government programs serve to increase the savings rate of the poor by two percentage
points, then we see from, say, the first column of Table 1 that (future generations of) the poor must
receive 18% of their retirement income (= 1.4% of the present value of their lifetime earnings)
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 36


through transfers from the rich.20 This is substantially larger than the degree of regressivity of Social
Security estimated for future generations of retirees (under current law) by Coronado et al (1999)
using the accounting approach. They estimate that the bottom quintile will have paid 3.3% of their
lifetime income more in Social Security taxes than they receive in benefits which, when annuitized
(ie, divide by q), means that the replacement rate of their retirement benefits is 32% lower than it
would be if their Social Security “contributions” had been invested at a 4% rate of return. If their
retirement savings were 6.9% of earnings during working life (as it is in the Modigliani model as
calibrated in columns (1) and (2)), the fair 4% rate of return would have earned them an annuity with
a 67% replacement rate (0.67 = s/q). Hence, they would be in the same situation if their
contributions had been invested at the 4% return and they paid a tax which amounts to 91% of their
actual retirement benefits (0.91 = 0.32/(0.67-0.32)). Since it is a percentage of actual retirement
benefits, this 86% is comparable with the numbers reported for {1+s/[qE(s)]}-1 in the bottom row
of Table 1. However, Coronado et al suggest that the rich are also expected to pay more in Social
Security taxes than they pay in benefits, an amount equal to 2.6% of their lifetime income. This is
as if they were to pay a annual tax during retirement equal to 60% of their retirement benefits.
Although all members of future cohorts are expected to get a “bad deal” (ie, pay more in taxes than
receiving in benefits) from Social Security, Coronado et al suggest that the poor members get a
worse deal than the rich members – it might be said that the program is expected to be regressive
for future retirees in the accounting sense. Our model suggests that the program is even more
regressive than that, because the program changes the behavior of the poor most. At the bottom of
Table 1's column (2), we have computed that, through their changed behavior, the poor effectively
pay another tax amounting to 7% of their retirement income. When the 7% is added to the 86%
derived for the poor in Coronado et al’s study and compared with the 60% for the rich, we only
reinforce the regressive conclusion from the accounting studies.
       If the government programs served to increase the savings rate of the previous generations
of poor by two percentage points, then we see from, say, the third and fourth columns of Table 1



         20
          Both rich and poor have historically received more in benefits than they paid in taxes
 during their lifetime thanks to transfers from younger generations. Under currently law, both
 rich and poor will presumably receive less in benefits than they paid in taxes. Our concern here
 is with whether the poor get a good deal as compared with the rich member of their cohort.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 37


that (previous generations of) the poor must receive at least 22% of their retirement income (= 1.3%
of the present value of their lifetime earnings) through transfers from the rich. 22% extra retirement
income for the poor is similar to Burkauser and Warlick's (1981) estimate for cohorts aged 65 as of
1972. They find that all income classes enjoy extra OASI benefits (i.e., beyond an actuarially fair
return on their “contributions”) that are at least 64% of their total OASI benefit (this 64% is
comparable to the numbers reported in the last row of Table 1). This percentage ranges from 65%
or so for high income classes to 90% or so for low income classes – a difference of about 25
percentage points. Hence, while the poor have enjoyed a “good deal” from Social Security, only part
of that – 25 percentage points – is at the expense of the richer members of their cohort. Since our
Table 1 suggests that the poor need an additional 22 percentage points to compensate them for their
changed behavior under the program, the 25 extra percentage points is barely compensation enough.
In other words, when Burkauser and Warlick's (1981) accounting estimate is added with our estimate
of the implicit cost of behavior change, Social Security appears to have been a lot less progressive
program for previous generations, if progressive at all. Also notice from the bottom row of Table
1 that our conclusions for previous and future generations of retirees are even stronger when a
smaller elasticity of substitution is used to make the calculations.
       In summary, a comparison of our Table 1 with accounting studies of the income incidence
of US Social Security shows how the regressivity of the “regulatory” portion of the program is a
first order consideration. Our estimates of the regressivity of the regulatory portion are as large (in
absolute value) as the most progressive estimates of the fiscal portion and even of the same order
of magnitude as the cross-cohort redistribution.


5      Concluding Remarks
       A common view in public finance is that there is an efficiency-redistribution tradeoff in
which distortions are tolerated in order to redistribute income. This tradeoff has guided much of
incidence analysis to establish how separate policies help the poor at the expense of the rich, even
though it understood that many policies may distort behavior. Merit motives imply that efficiency-
enhancing public policy has the primary purpose of creating distortions and may use progressive
fiscal policy in order to create those distortions – the reverse of the conventional efficiency-
redistribution tradeoff. We discuss why the largest programs on the federal and local level in the
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 38


US – including Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, and Public Schooling – seem consistent with
the reverse tradeoff between redistribution and efficiency. Cross-hauling can be explained by merit
motives, and the progressivity of fiscal incidence is overstated when interpreted in the classical way.
       Our analysis was incomplete and limited in several respects, and therefore left many
questions for future research. We conclude by discussing a few of these in detail here.


5.1    Should Preferences be Respected ?
       We follow the typical economic approach, and in particular the approach taken throughout
public finance, and measure a person’s welfare according to the preferences dictating his behavior.
Two questions arise. First, should the preferences of the poor be respected ? Second, regardless of
the poor preferences, should welfare economics respect any consumption externality? These
questions may be interesting but may not affect our main implications. As long as the poor use the
preference (2) and the rich use the preference (1) when they participate in public decision-making,
the poor will receive greater fiscal transfers the more their behavior is distorted to please the rich21.
Nor do these questions need answers if we are to show how regulation, taxes, and transfers are
related according to the usual theory of policy incidence.
       More generally, our analysis may cover other motives behind the preference of the rich to
see the poor consume more than they want. In particular, there seems to be a variety of other
altruistically induced commodity-specific externalities generating the same predictions for policy
design and incidence to which our analysis is equivalent. First, it may be argued to be the case that
the rich are purely altruistic but wish to change the poor's behavior because the rich believe the poor
are making mistakes with respect to some other more informed preferences. We refer to this as
Information Induced Paternalism and in the Appendix we show that, with respect to the main results
for optimal policy design and incidence, it is observationally equivalent to our merit good economy.
Second, the rich utility function could depend negatively on the poor’s consumption of the demerit
good, rather than positively on the poor consumption of the merit good. Third, the “consumption



         21
          Some sophisticated theories of poor judgement suggest that the poor might exercise
 poor judgement in private affairs, but are willing in public affairs to pay others to help them
 exercise better judgement. Brennan and Lomansky (1983) propose one such theory for
 democracies.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 39


externality” can be modeled as an externality in the budget constraint of the rich as, for example,
when redistribution prevents crime. Fourth, the motives may capture the inter-temporal strategic
issues present in the Samaritan’s dilemma, where the rich want to change the behavior of the poor
in order to prevent the poor from exploiting rich’s altruism. In the Appendix, we again show that
a Samaritan economy is equivalent, with respect to the main results for optimal policy design and
incidence, to our merit good economy. Fifth, the non-excludible public goods may generate similar
motives when valued more by the rich than by the poor.
       The important point is that all these other ways of generating similar types of motives as
those discussed here share a gap between poor’s private marginal rate of substitution between merit
and non-merit goods and the social marginal rate of substitution. We have used the phrase “merit
motive” throughout the paper to characterize motives for changing the behavior of the poor, and
perhaps the phrase is poorly chosen if it gives the reader the impression that it rules out some of the
cases discussed above. Regardless of what generates the gap, we have stressed the novel differences
vis-a-vis standard public finance.
       In defining the merit motive, two questions arise which we are unable to answer using our
approach. The first is “Which group is altruistic and which is the recipient of altruism ?” Our model
does not provide much guidance in this regard, and we rely instead on “common sense'” and on
indicators of private sector behavior. Second, “What is the merit good?” Again, common sense is
our main guide. Perhaps future research will show how economic and other theories might be used
to predict which groups are altruistic and which goods are the merit goods.22


5.2    Merit Motives versus Other Market Failures
       There are of course other motivations and explanations for government involvement in the
largest form of in-kind programs such as healthcare, savings, and education. In particular,
information asymmetries or spillovers in the private market for health care, annuities, life insurance,
and education are often stated as a role for under-provision of these goods. One way to interpret
our argument is that merit motives are not different in general from these arguments, as commonly
believed, but rather is only a different source of market failure due to the positive external effects



        22
          See Mulligan (1997) who discusses endogenous altruism.
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 40


of poor consumption. However, we are not aware of any explicit analysis showing information
failures in insurance or spillovers in education to be more pronounced for the poor than for the rich.
This would have to be the case in order for the central implication discussed here to hold; that the
poor are more distorted and subsidized than the rich.
       Indeed, we may make an even stronger claim that some of the evidence argued to support
information failures we believe better support our implications than such information failures. For
example, one set of evidence brought forward to justify Social Security programs is that information
problems are important in annuity markets because those insured by private annuities live longer
than those who do not (see e.g. Friedman and Warshawsky (1988)). There are several difficulties
with using this as support for information problems in mortality based insurance markets. One
major issue, mentioned in Cawley and Philipson (1999), is that the same pattern holds in the life
insurance market, those holding life-insurance live longer than those who do not. Interestingly, the
fact that both those who hold private annuities and life insurance live longer than those who do not
is consistent with our claim that the publicly induced distortion is larger for the poor than for the
rich. As the poor hold less private life-products when distorted to over-consume them through Social
Security and its survivor benefits, longevity in the private market is larger than overall longevity as
the private market is dominated by the rich. The superior longevity of both annuity and
life-insurance holders may have little to do with information asymmetries but the greater longevity
and greater likelihood of the rich to participate in a financial market.
       We also believe that differential effect of public health programs on rich and poor are
inconsistent with the government-correcting-insurance-market-failure justification for these
programs. Is the “moral hazard”, “adverse selection”, and reasons for insurance market failure more
prevalent among the poor who, one would suspect, know less about their risks than the rich?23,24


        23
         Unless the insurance market fails because of interdependent preferences. See Coate’s
(1995) and our Appendix’s analysis of Good Samaritan economies.
        24
           It is sometimes argued that, because of administrative costs and other factors, “one size
fits all” policies (ie, public benefits that do not vary with the characteristics of the beneficiary)
are efficient solutions to market failure (Diamond 1993 makes such an argument for Social
Security). If so, might this explain why the government response to market failure involves
proportionally larger benefits for the poor such as those shown in our Figure 1? More research
on this question is needed, but we conjecture the opposite, that, except when the market failure
                                                                    Policy Design and Incidence - 41


Note that the superior knowledge of the poor about their risks is in direct contrast to the lack of
knowledge often argued to motivate information induced paternalism.


5.3 Distortions as an Unintended Byproduct of Redistribution
       Some well known studies have emphasized imperfections in the transfer process and that,
as a result, in-kind programs may be the most efficient means for enhancing the utility of the poor.
For example, if there is asymmetric information between government and the private sector, in-kind
transfers can enhance the utility of the poor more than means-tested cash transfers, even when the
poor value the in-kind transfers at less than their cost, because cash transfers are necessarily low
in order to prevent excessive participation in the program by the rich (Nichols and Zeckhauser 1982,
Besley and Coate 1991). Distortionary taxation methods have also been justified as an optimal
response to asymmetric information in the transfer process.
       It may thus appear that some of the differences stressed here would not be robust to such
well-known departures from lump sum transfers under only altruistic motives. However, in a related
analysis, see Mulligan and Philipson (2000), we suggest that introducing imperfections in the
transfer process does not modify three important conclusions. First, the poor value the in-kind
transfers at less than their cost, and a complete analysis of the income incidence of policy would not
value the transfers to the poor at their cost. Second, implicit marginal tax rates (ie, the amount of
distortion) will not increase, or at least not too rapidly, with the amount of social spending when
policy is motivated by redistribution because, holding constant the amount of redistribution, the
utility of the poor falls with the implicit marginal tax rate. Third, income effects must be more
important than substitution effects under redistributive motives, and less important than under merit
motives.
       Moreover, there are important, and testable, differences between the merit good and
asymmetric information explanations of in-kind transfers. First, most quantitatively large in-kind
programs have close universal participation so screening out non-participants does not seem to be
their primary purpose. Medicare and Social Security are universal and Public Schooling is attended




is between rich and poor as it is in our merit good economy, governments facing large
administrative costs should solve market failures only for the rich.
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 42


by about 90 % of students.25 Second, the redistributive interpretation suggests that in-kind transfer
programs should also be subject to income and asset tests, otherwise very little redistribution is
possible unless the income elasticity of the commodity being subsidized (or taxed) is far different
from one (Sah 1983, Nichols and Zeckhauser 1982, p. 375). Third, because beneficiaries value in-kind
transfers at less than their cost, only a merit interpretation can explain why beneficiaries might be
forced to pay at least the full cost of their transfer, as they are in the Medicare, Social Security, and
public schooling programs. Indeed, it is hard to justify on redistributive grounds why the poor
might pay any taxes toward an in-kind program whose purpose is to help the poor, let alone pay
more than they receive. Fourth, an in-kind transfer program goes too far according to the
redistributive interpretation if the commodity is provided up to the point where the beneficiary's
marginal valuation is close to zero. And, assuming that marginal valuations decline with the amount
of the commodity provided, an in-kind transfer program goes too far according to the redistributive
interpretation if, on average, beneficiaries value the commodity at a lot less than its cost. In contrast,
the optimal in-kind transfer program in a merit good economy may well provide a commodity to the
poor to the point where their average and marginal valuations are zero or even negative. While
redistributive motives under asymmetric information might explain food stamps, public housing
projects, and a few other in-kind programs, these first four differences make it clear why a very
large share of government activity – such as public schooling, Medicare, Social Security, and
unfunded mandates – makes too little use of means tested cash transfers to be understood as
redistribution from rich to poor under asymmetric information. Fifth, the screening interpretation
does not subsidize a commodity differentially preferred by the rich (Nichols and Zeckhauser 1982,
p. 376).


5.4        Merit Motives versus Producer Interests
           Might powerful producers interests explain in-kind subsidies of their output ? A model of
producer interests is complementary to the merit good model, because the merit model does not say



           25
          Schooling is perhaps closer to an unfunded mandate when substantial sorting across
 school-districts take place due to the bundling of housing and education through property tax
 financing of public education. In particular, the 10% of students who attend private school may
 sort into low taxed districts.
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 43


much about which goods are merit goods and which goods are not. Perhaps a good theory of which
producers are powerful would help explain which goods are merit goods. However, the causation
may also be in reverse – merit goods may help producers obtain redistribution.
       There are at least four differences between a merit-good and producer interest model of in-
kind subsidies. First, as is well known an interest group model with producer motives does not easily
explain in-kind subsidies (although see Stigler 1975, pp. 115f), because the producers could gain more
by getting paid in cash rather than in demand for their output. Second, the producer model relates
the importance of subsidies to determinants of political power, such as numbers, the natural of the
political process, etc. while the merit good model relates subsidies to basic values of citizens. A
careful empirical analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, but we suggest that the reason why
schooling, medical care, and other goods are subsidized by so many different governments is that
basic values are common in many countries while political representation of teachers, doctors, and
other producers differ.26 For example, we would explain the prevalence of sin taxes not with the
political weakness of tobacco farmers, vineyard owners, and brewers, but on the preferences of
citizens. Indeed, the merit good approach suggests that subsidies to tobacco farmers and other sin-
good producers might, as compensation, go along with policies that discourage the consumption of
the demerit goods they produce. Third, producers presumably care about stimulating aggregate
demand for their product but presumably do not care whose behavior is distorted to raise demand.
This is another departure from the merit good model – optimal policy in a merit good economy
mainly distorts the behavior of the poor who may have little effect on the aggregate demand for the
merit good. Lastly, the two might be separated according the effect of policy on profits and industry
output. Producer interests may be best promoted by policies that raise profits by reducing output,
where merit good motives are satisfying by expanding consumption and, presumably, output.




        26
         Becker (1983) and others have suggested that the importance of food subsidies varies
across countries in relation to determinants of the political influence of farmers. However,
Becker stresses deadweights costs of redistribution as a determinant of political influence and
these are also a determinant of socially optimal policy in a merit good economy. What is
tougher for the merit good approach to explain is why food is taxed (relative to other goods) in
some countries while subsidized in others.
                                                                              Policy Design and Incidence - 44


Appendix: The Samaritan’s Dilemma and Information-induced Paternalism as Special Cases
of a Merit Good Economy


In this Appendix, we argue that the model of a merit good economy considered in the main text is
equivalent, in terms of policy design and incidence, to an economies in which there is a Samaritan’s
Dilemma between the rich and poor or in which the rich and poor are have different beliefs about
the efficacy of merit good consumption.


A.1: Samaritan’s Dillemma
       There are two types of agents in the Samaritan economy: the rich r (aka, “Samaritans”) and
the poor p. There is a “demerit good” c1 and another good c2, which yield utility for the poor
according to:

                                                              p       p
                                           V p ' U p(c1 , c2 )




The rich care about the resources they keep for themselves, c1r and c2r, and the utility of the poor:

                                                  r   r                   p   p
                                 V r ' U r(c1 ,c2 ) % a r U p(c1 ,c2 )




where ar is a constant, and each of the U functions are strictly increasing and concave. Notice how
the rich care only about the poor’s consumption as it affects poor utility Vp, and in this sense have no
merit motive. Nevertheless, this appendix shows how, depending on the sequencing of decisions,
the rich care about the poor’s behavior independent of how it affects poor utility, and in this sense
have a merit motive.
       The aggregate resource constraint is:

                                 r     r      p           p       p       r
                               c1 % c2 % c1 % c2 ' y1 % y1                                              (A-1)
                                                                                                            Policy Design and Incidence - 45




so efficient allocations maximize (A-2) subject to (A-1) for a 0 [ar,4).

                                                    r       r                       p       p
                                      U r(c1 ,c2 ) % a U p(c1 , c2 )                                                                  (A-2)




where, as in the main text, a is a constant reflecting the altruism of the rich and the “planner’s”
relative weight on rich utility. The first order conditions describing an efficient allocation are:

                         p   p   p              p           p   p               r       r       r               r   r   r
                     a U1 (c1 , c2 ) ' aU2 (c1 ,c2 ) ' U1 (c1 , c2 ) ' U2 (c1 , c2 )                                                  (A-3)




where U subscripts denote first derivatives with respect to first and second arguments.
          The laissez-faire allocation, and the so-called Good Samaritan problem, result from the
sequencing of decisions. In the first stage, the poor decide how much, c1p, to consume of the demerit
good and how much, mp, of the remainder of their income yp to set aside for consumption of good
2. In the second stage, a “planner” makes a transfer from rich to poor, and an allocation of rich
consumption, to maximize (A-2) taking c1p = yp - mp as given. Formally, behavior in the second stage
solves:


                                                                    Stage 2

                                                                    r       r                       p   p
                                       max U r(c1 , c2 ) % a U p(c1 , c2 )
                                       r    r   p
                                     c1 , c2 , c2

                                                        r               r       p                           r
                                     s.t.           c1 % c2 % c2 ' m p % y1




The first order conditions for this problem are as in the efficient solution, with the critical exception
of the first equality in (A-3).
          One feature of the Stage 2 solution is particularly relevant for Stage 1 – the optimal c2p as a
                                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 46


function of the resources mp set aside by the poor in Stage 1. It is assumed that all goods are normal
to the planner, from which we can derive the familiar and important result that the derivative of
c2p(mp) is less than one:

                                 p                           r           r       r    &1
                             d c2                    p    U11 & 2U12 % U22
                                        ' 1 % aU22                                         < 1
                                    p                        r   r          r
                            dm                             U11 U22   &   (U12)2




An increase in mp does not increase c2p as much because it crowds out some of the transfer from rich
to poor. Equivalently, more mp benefits the rich not only because it raises c2p, but also because it
raises the resources keep by the rich, c1r and c2r.
        The Stage 2 “planner” could well be the rich, in which case the transfers from rich to poor
are voluntary. Otherwise, Stage 2 involves transfers which may be interpreted as “involuntary,” so
perhaps “laissez-faire” is not the best term to describe such allocations. Nevertheless, the
terminology here is not relevant for understand the design and incidence of regulations that could
enhance efficiency in this economy, as we show below.
        In the first stage, the poor allocate their income between c1p and mp in order to maximize their
utility, taking into account the effect of mp on c2p in the second stage:


                                                         Stage 1

                                             p                       p
                               max u p(c1 , m p )           s.t. c1 % m p ' y p
                                p
                               c1 , m p

                                                 p                       p   p
                                    with u p(c1 , m p ) / U p(c1 ,c2 (m p ))




where up is the function maximized by the poor in their rational decision-making. Embodied in this
function is the poor’s accurately anticipated reaction of transfers to their setting aside resources.
        The first order condition (A-4) for the first stage is easily derived
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 47


                                                    p
                                       p     d c2        p    p
                                    U1 '                U2 < U2                                    (A-4)
                                                    p
                                            dm



and, by comparison with (A-3), proves that the laissez-faire allocation of consumption is inefficient
because the poor do not set aside enough resources. The inefficiency of laissez-faire is the first
important analogue between the merit good economy described in the text and the Good Samaritan
economy.
       It is feasible in Stage 1 for the poor to choose any mp in the interval [0,yp], including the mp
that would lead to the highest value of the planner’s objective in Stage 2. The poor do not do so
because, unlike the planner, they are not concerned with the effect of their mp on consumption by
the rich. If, without compensation in the Stage 2, the poor were forced to set aside the mp preferred
by the planner, or even forced to set aside just a little bit more mp than maximizing up, they would
be worse off than under laissez-faire even though efficiency would be enhanced. This is the second
important analogue between the merit good economy and the Good Samaritan economy.
       For the case a = ar, efficient allocations, laissez-faire allocations, and other allocations can be
displayed in the utility possibility frontier exactly as they are in Figure 2 for the merit good
economy. The laissez-faire or “unregulated” allocation is shown as allocation A in the Figure.
Policy that only requires the poor to set more aside (ie, increase mp) than they would in the
unregulated economy makes the rich better off and the poor worse off, and is a movement along the
locus of “unfunded mandates” shown in the Figure. If such mandate were combined with a larger
Stage 2 transfer than would occur with the mandate alone, then we may have an allocation like C or
D. If the extra transfer is not too large, then the poor may still be worse off under the policy than
in the unregulated economy, as in allocation C. An allocation like D could also be attained by a
policy subsidizing mp.
       To demonstrate the mathematical connection between the merit good and Good Samaritan
economies, we first introduce two definitions:


Definition 1   A parameterization 1 = {a,yp,yr,Up,Ur} of the Samaritan economy is three constants
and two functions describing rich, poor, and planner tastes and endowments.
                                                                      Policy Design and Incidence - 48


Definition 2   A parameterization 1N = {a,b,q,yp,yr,Up,Ur,v} of the Merit Good economy is five
constants and three functions describing rich, poor, and planner tastes and endowments.


Notice that a parameterization of either economy does not imply an allocation unless we also specify
a mechanism (eg., laissez-faire, efficiency).


Proposition    Take a parameterization 1 = {a,yp,yr,Up,Ur} of the Samaritan economy. If Up is
additively separable, there exists a parameterization 1N of the merit good economy such that:
        (i)    The c1p and mp from the laissez-faire allocation of the Samaritan economy 1 is the
               same as cp and mp from the laissez-faire allocation of the merit good economy 1N.
        (ii)   The c1p and mp from the efficient allocation of the Samaritan economy 1 is the same
               as cp and mp from the efficient allocation of the merit good economy 1N.


Proof          To form the parameterization 1N, set q = 1, ur = Ur, b equal to any positive number,
and v as:

                                        a       p                   p
                            v(m p ) '     U p(c1 , T % m p) & u p(c1 , m p )
                                        b




with the constant T is the difference between consumption and income of the poor in the efficient
Samaritan economy. It follows that up is additively separable because Up is, so v does not depend
on c1p. To complete the parameterization 1N, take a, up, yp, and yr directly from 1.
        Using this function v in the merit good economy in the text, we find the first order conditions
for the laissez-faire merit good allocations (see equation (5)) to be the same as for the laissez-faire
Good Samaritan economy. The first order conditions for the efficient merit good allocations (see
equation (4)) are the same first order conditions (A-3) for efficient Good Samaritan allocations.


        Notice that the Proposition’s relationship between merit good and Samaritan economies is
for fixed a, so that the comparative statics with respect to a derived in the text for the merit good
economy are not identical to those statics for the Samaritan economy, although we believe the
                                                                       Policy Design and Incidence - 49


results are qualitatively similar.
        Another difference between Samaritan and merit good economies is that using force against
the rich can enhance efficiency in the former economy, but not in the latter. In particular, efficiency
would be enhanced if the rich were forced to make a transfer to the poor that was independent of
poor’s behavior. If the mandated transfer were of the same magnitude as occurs in the laissez-faire
economy, then the poor would be better off while the rich would be no better off. In other words,
the Good Samaritan approach to policy leaves unexplained why the poor are forced to change their
behavior but, other than paying taxes, the rich are not.


A.2: Information Induced Paternalism
        We consider the equivalence for information induced paternalism when the rich are
differentially informed relative to the poor about the benefits and costs of poor consumption of the
good m. In particular we assume that the rich have some beliefs ds over a set of states of nature
s=1,2,..,S for which the poor have beliefs bs. The states of nature are assumed to determines the
utility of consumption of the poor for the good m. In state s it is assumed that the poor get the
separable utility

                                      us(c p, m p)'uc(c p)%u sm(m p)   s'1,..,S




Consequently, the expected utility of the poor is

                                 V p ' U p(c p, m p) ' uc(c p) % j b susm(m p)



The rich care about their own consumption and the utility of the poor in an altruistic manner given
their own beliefs ds over the states s=1,2,..,S. If we, without loss of generality assume the true state
of nature is s=1 the rich utility function is

                          V r ' U r(c r, m r) % a r[u c(c p) % j ds u sm(m p)]
                                                                     Policy Design and Incidence - 50




where ar is a constant, and each of the utility functions are strictly increasing and concave. The
aggregate resource constraint is as in the main text. Note that whenever the rich and the poor have
the same beliefs about the benefits and costs of the behavior of the poor, d=b, the Paternalistic
economy simply reduces to a Merit Good economy with altruistic motives only. More generally,
for a given Paternalistic economy the social welfare function might be written as (here we have the
planner respecting the beliefs of both rich and poor, but that is not of particular importance):



                  "U r(c r,m r) % "a r[u c % j d s usm] % (1 & ") [uc % j bs usm]




where " is the planner’s relative weight on rich utility (excluding the indirect weight via rich
altruism). Equivalently, the planner maximizes

                                   U r(c r, m r) % a U p % bv(m p)

                       b v(m p) / a r j (ds&b s)usm(m p) ,    a / ar %     1&"
                                                                            "




Hence, we have a merit good economy where the strength of the merit motives depends on the gap
in beliefs and the strength of the rich’s altruism.


References
Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press, 1987.
Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds. Generational Accounting Around
       the World . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Ballard, Charles L., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley. “General Equilibrium Computations of the
       Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the United States.” American Economics Review. 75(1),
       March 1985: 128-38.
                                                                 Policy Design and Incidence - 51


Becker, Gary S. "A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 98(3), August 1983: 371-400.
Besley, T., “A Simple Model For Merit Goods Arguments”, Journal of Public Economics, v 35, 1988:
       371-383.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. “Public Provision of Private Goods and the Redistribution of
       Income.” American Economic Review. 81(4), September 1991: 979-84.
Brennan, Geoffrey and Loren Lomansky. “Institutional aspects of merit good analysis.”
       Finanzarchiv. 41(2), 1983: 183-206.
Brennan, Geoffrey and Cliff Walsh. “Pareto-Desirable Redistribution in Kind: An Impossibility
       Theorem.” American Economic Review. 67(5), Dec. 1977: 987-90.
Burkhauser, Richard B. and Jennifer L. Warlick. “Disentangling the Annuity from the
       Redistributive Aspects of Social Security in United States.” Review of Income and Wealth .
       27, 1981: 401-22.
Cawley, John., and Tomas J. Philipson., “An Empirical Examination of Information Barriers to
       Trade in Insurance.”, American Economic Review, v 89(4), Sept 1999: 827-48.
Chami, Ralph. “Private Income Transfers and Market Incentives.” Economica. 65, 1998: 557-80.
Coate, Stephen. “Altruism, the Samaritan’s Dilemma, and Government Transfer Policy.” American
       Economic Review. 85(1), March 1995: 46-57.
Coughlin, Peter J. Probabilistic Voting Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Deravajan, Shantayanan; Fullerton, Don; Musgrave, Richard A.'Estimating the Distribution of Tax
       Burdens: A Comparison of Different Approaches' in Collected Papers of Richard A.
       Musgrave. New York: New York University Press, 1986, pp. 274-300.
Diamond, Peter. “A Framework for Social Security Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics. 8(3),
       December 1977: 275-98.
Diamond, Peter. “Privatization of Social Security: Lessons from Chile.” National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper #4510, October 1993.
Diamond, Peter. “Generational Accounts and Generational Balance: An Assessment.” National Tax
       Journal . 49(4), December 1996: 597-607.
Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. “Do the Rich Save More?” Manuscript,
       Federal Reserve Board, 1996.
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 52


Fehr, Hans and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. “Generational Accounting in General Equilibrium.” in Alan
       J. Auerbach, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, eds. Generational Accounting Around
       the World . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Feldstein, Martin. “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax.” NBER working
       paper #5055, March 1995.
Friedman, Milton, and Rose D. Friedman. Free to Choose: a Personal Statement. New York:
       Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1980.
Friedman, Benjamin, and Mark Warshawsky (1990), The Cost of Annuities: Implications for
       Savings behavior and Bequests, QJE, 105(1) 135-54.
Fullerton, Don and Diane Lim Rogers. “Lifetime versus Annual Perspectives on Tax Incidence.”
       National Tax Journal. 44(3), September 1991: 277-87.
Fullerton, Don and Diane Lim Rogers. Who bears the lifetime tax burden ? Washington, D.C.:
       Brookings Institution, 1993.
Garrett, Daniel M. “The Effects of Differential Mortality Rates on the Progressivity of Social
       Security.” Economic Inquiry. 33(3), July 1995: 457-75.
Gerdtham, U., and B., Jonson, (2000), “ International Comparisons of Health Care Expenditures”,
       forthcoming, Handbook of Health Economics, North-Holland.
Geoffard, Pierre-Yves, and Tomas Philipson, “Disease Eradication: Private versus Public
       Vaccination”, American Economic Review, v 87 (2), March 1997.
Ghez, Gilbert R. and Gary S. Becker. The Allocation of Time and Goods over the Life Cycle. New
       York: Columbia University Press (for the NBER), 1975.
Hall, Robert E. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political Economy . 96(2),
       April 1988: 339-57.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. “Consumption During Retirement: The Missing Link in the Life Cycle.”
       Review of Economics and Statistics . 66(1), February 1984: 1-7.
Harberger, Arnold C. “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax.” Journal of Political Economy.
       70, 1962: 215-40.
Harberger, Arnold C. “Basic Needs versus Distributional Weights in Social Cost-Benefit
       Analysis.” Economic Development and Cultural Change. 32(3), April 1984: 455-74.
Head, J., (1966), 'On Merit Goods', Finanzarchiv, 25 (1), 1-29.
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 53


Hochman, Harold M., and James D. Rogers. “'Pareto Optimal Redistribution.'” American Economic
       Review . 59(4), Part 1, September 1969: 542-57.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. and Kenneth L. Judd. “Social Security and Individual Welfare: Precautionary
       Saving, Borrowing Constraints, and the Payroll Tax.” American Economic Review . 77(4),
       September 1987: 630-46.
Laitner, John. “Bequests, Gifts, and Social Security.” Review of Economic Studies. 55(2), April 1988:
       275-99.
Landes, William M. and Lewis C. Solmon. “Compulsory Schooling Legislation: An Economic
       Analysis of Law and Social Change in the Nineteenth Century.” Journal of Economic
       History . 32(1), March 1972: 54-91.
Kotlikoff and Summers ,(1985), 'Tax Incidence', in Handbook of Public Economics, edited by
       Auerbach, A., and M., Feldstein, North-Holland.
McClellan, Mark and Jonathan Skinner. “The Incidence of Medicare.” NBER Working paper April
       1997.
Midgley, James. Social Security, Inequality, and the Third World. New York: John Wiley, 1984.
Mirrlees, James A. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.” Review of
       Economic Studies. 38(114), April 1971: 175-208.
Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg. “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
       Interpretation of Cross-Section Data.” in Kenneth K. Kurihara, ed. Post-Keynesian
       Economics. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1954: 388-436.
Moffitt, Robert. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.” Journal of Economic
       Literature. 30(1), March 1992: 1ff.
Mulligan, Casey B. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1997.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Induced Retirement, Social Security, and the Pyramid Mirage.” Working
       paper, University of Chicago, May 1999.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Tomas Philipson. “Distortion and Redistribution in the Public Sector –
       What is the Causation?” Working paper, University of Chicago, March 2000.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Social Security in Theory and Practice (I): Facts and
       Political Theories.” NBER Working Paper, May 1999a.
                                                                  Policy Design and Incidence - 54


Mulligan, Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Retirement-Inducing Policy Wears Many
       Disguises.” Working Paper, University of Chicago, May 1999b.
Musgrave, R., (1957), The Theory of Public Finance, New York: McGraw Hill.
Musgrave, R., (1998), 'Merit Goods', The New Palgrave :A Dictionary of Economics, Stocktone
       Press.
Musgrave, R., Case, K., and H., Leonard, (1974), 'The Distribution of Fiscal Burdens and Benefits',
       Public Finance Quarterly, v 2, No 3, pp 259-310.
National Research Council, (1995), Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, National Academy Press,
       Washington DC.
Nelson, Gary. “Tax Expenditures for the Elderly.” Gerontologist. 23, 1983: 471-8.
Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser. “Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on
       Recipients.” American Economic Review. 72(2), May 1982: 372-77.
Olsen, Edgar O. “A Normative Theory of Transfers.” Public Choice. 6, Spring 1969: 39-57.
Olsen, Edgar O. “Pareto-Desirable Redistribution in Kind: Comment.” American Economic Review.
       70(5), Dec. 1980: 1028-31.
Olsen, Edgar O. and Kathy A. York. “The Effect of Different Measures of Benefit on Estimates
       of the Distributive Consequences of Government Programs.” in Marilyn Moon, ed.
       Economics Transfers in the United States. Studies in Income and Wealth , vol. 49. Chicago and
       London: University of Chicago Press 1984: 177-95.
Owen, John D. The Price of Leisure. Rotterdam: Rotterdam Univ. Press, 1969
Pampel, Fred C. and John B. Williamson. Age, Class, Politics and the Welfare State. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Pauly, Mark,’ The Rational Non-Purchase of Long-Term Care Insurance’ , Journal of Political
       Economy, v 98 (1), (1990), 153-68.
Pechman, J., (1985), Who Paid The Taxes 1966-85? , Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Philipson, T., and G. Becker. ``Old-Age Longevity and Mortality Contingent Claims”, Journal of
       Political Economy 106.3 (1998); 550-574.
Robb, A.L. and J.B. Burbidge. “Consumption, Income, and Retirement.” Canadian Journal of
       Economics . 22(3), August 1989: 522-42.
Rodgers, James D. “Distributional Externalities and the Optimal Form of Income Transfers.” Public
                                                                   Policy Design and Incidence - 55


       Finance Quarterly. 1, July 1973: 266-99.
Sah, Raaj Kumar. “How Much Redistribution Is Possible through Commodity Taxes?” Journal of
       Public Economics. 20(1), February 1983: 89-101.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. “A Positive Theory of Social Security.” Journal of Economic Growth. (1)2, June
       1996: 277-304.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. “Transfers, Social Safety Nets, and Economic Growth.” International
       Monetary Fund Staff Papers. 44(1), March 1997: 81-102.
Sandmo, Agnar, “Ex-post Welfare Economics and The Theory of Merit Goods”, Economica, v 50,
       19-33.
Stigler, George J. The Citizen and the State. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
Tullock, Gordon. “Subsidized Housing in a Competitive Market: Comment.” American Economic
       Review. 61(1), March 1971: 218-9.
United States Congress, House Committee on Ways and Means. Overview of Entitlement Programs,
       1996 Green Book. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1996.
United States Social Security Administration. Social Security Programs Throughout the World.
       Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1995.
Van Doorslaer, E., (1999), The Redistributive Effect of Health Care Finance in Twelve OECD
       Countries’ , Journal of Health Economics, v 18, 291-313.
Wagstaff, A., (1999), Equity in The Finance of Health Care: Some Further International
       Comparisons’ , Journal of Health Economics, v 18, 263-90.
Wittman, Donald A. The Myth of Democratic Failure: Why Political Institutions are Efficient.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Zeckhauser, Richard J. “Optimal Mechanisms for Income Transfer.” American Economic Review.
       61(3), June 1971: 324-34.
