NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARIJUANA AND YOUTH

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
Michael Grossman
Frank J. Chaloupka
Patrick M. O’Malley
Lloyd D. Johnston
Matthew C. Farrelly

Working Paper 7703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7703
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2000

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Rosalie L. Pacula, Michael Grossman, Frank J. Chaloupka, Patrick M. O’Malley, Lloyd D.
Johnston, and Matthew C. Farrelly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Marijuana and Youth
Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Michael Grossman, Frank J. Chaloupka,
Patrick M. O’Malley, Lloyd D. Johnston, and Matthew C. Farrelly
NBER Working Paper No. 7703
May 2000
JEL No. I10
ABSTRACT
This paper contains the first estimates of the price sensitivity of the prevalence of youth
marijuana use. Survey data on marijuana use by high school seniors from the Monitoring the Future
Project are combined with data on marijuana prices and potency from the Drug Enforcement
Administration Office of Intelligence or Intelligence Division. Our estimates of the price elasticity
of annual marijuana participation range from –0.06 to –0.47, while those for thirty day participation
range from –0.002 to –0.69. These estimates clearly imply that changes in the real, quality adjusted
price of marijuana contributed significantly to the trends in youth marijuana use between 1982 and
1998, particularly during the contraction in use from 1982 to 1992. Similarly, changes in youth
perceptions of the harms associated with regular marijuana use had a substantial impact on both the
contraction in use during the 1982 though 1992 period and the subsequent expansion in use after
1992. These findings underscore the usefulness of considering price in addition to more traditional
determinants in any analysis of marijuana consumption decisions made by youths.

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
RAND
1700 Main Street
PO Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
pacula@rand.org

Michael Grossman
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu

Frank J. Chaloupka
Department of Economics
College of Business Administration
University of Illinois
601 S. Morgan Street, Room 2103
Chicago, IL 60607-7121
and NBER
fjc@uic.edu

Patrick M. O’Malley
Institute for Social Research
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Lloyd D. Johnston
Institute for Social Research
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Matthew C. Farrelly
Research Triangle Institute
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709

A recent report sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse and the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism suggests that illicit drug use in America costs society
approximately $110 billion each year (NIDA 1998). Adults alone do not generate these costs.
Statistics from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse show that current use of illicit
drugs among youths (12-17 years of age) doubled from a historic low in 1992 of 5.3% to 11.4%
in 1997 before falling to 9.9% in 1998 (SAMHSA 1999). Data from the Monitoring the Future
study yielded even higher estimates of use, and a similar sharp increase in that period (Johnston
et al. 1999). Even more disturbing, however is the finding that of an estimated 4.1 million
people who met diagnostic criteria (DSM-IV) for dependence on illicit drugs in 1998, 1.1 million
(26.8%) are youths between the ages of 12-17 (SAMHSA 1999).
Marijuana is by far the most commonly used illicit substance among adolescents and has
been so for the past twenty-five years.1 Figure 1 shows historical data on annual alcohol,
marijuana, and other illicit drug use from the Monitoring the Future Survey of High School
Seniors, one of the main national studies used to track youth substance use and abuse. The
prevalence of marijuana has consistently been about half that of alcohol, far greater than the
overall proportion using any of the other illicit drugs (Johnston et al. 1999). When the other
illicit drugs are broken up by type of substance (Figure 2), it is easy to see that no other single
substance has even been half as prevalent as marijuana during the 1975-1998 period.
The sheer popularity of marijuana among youths makes it an interesting illicit substance
to examine. However, there are other factors that motivate a closer examination of the demand
for marijuana by youths. First, early marijuana use has been associated with a wide range of
anti-social and dangerous behaviors, including driving under the influence, dropping out of
school, engaging in crime, and destruction of property (Brook et al. 1999; SAMHSA 1998a

1

1998b; Yamada, Kendix, and Yamada 1996; Spunt et al. 1994; Osgood et al. 1988). Second,
there is increasing evidence that marijuana is an addictive substance and that regular use can
result in dependency (DeFonseca et al. 1997; SAMHSA 1998b). Third, regular marijuana use has
been associated with a number of health problems, particularly among youth, including upper
respiratory problems (Polen et al. 1993; Tashkin et al. 1990) and reproductive system problems
(Nahas and Latour, 1992; Tommasello, 1982). Finally, it is widely believed that marijuana is a
gateway substance, or that early involvement with marijuana can increase the likelihood of later
use of “harder drugs”. Although there is no clear evidence of a causal link between early
marijuana use and subsequent illicit drug use, there is significant evidence of a strong correlation
and that early marijuana use is an antecedent (Kandel 1975; Kandel, Kessler, and Margulies
1978; Ellickson, Hays and Bell 1992; Brook et al. 1999; Ellickson and Morton in press).
In this chapter we explore the demand for marijuana among a nationally representative
sample of American High School Seniors from the Monitoring the Future Survey. Our main
contribution is to present the first set of estimates of the price sensitivity of the prevalence of
youth marijuana use. A related contribution is to assess the extent to which trends in price
predict the reduction in marijuana participation in the 1980s and early 1990s and the increase in
participation since 1992. In Section I we discuss in greater detail the magnitude of the problem,
presenting summary statistics of the prevalence of marijuana use and how it has changed over
time. We also discuss what is currently known about the short and long run implications of
regular and heavy marijuana use. In Section II we provide a brief summary of the literature on
the contemporaneous and intertemporal demand for marijuana. In Section III we present findings
from new time-series analysis of the demand for marijuana by youths using data from the 19821998 Monitoring the Future Survey of High School Seniors. The purpose of this section is to

2

identify factors that are significantly correlated with the trend in marijuana use over time. In
Section IV we re-examine the importance of these factors in repeated cross-sectional analyses of
the 1985-1996 Monitoring the Future Survey.

I. Youth Marijuana Use: The Scope of the Problem
As is indicated in Figure 2, marijuana is the most popular illicit substance among youths
and has been for at least the past 25 years. Its use, however, has fluctuated quite a bit. Figure 3
shows lifetime, annual and thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use among high school seniors in
the Monitoring the Future Study from 1975 to 1998. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
marijuana use was at its peak. In 1978, 37.1% of American High School Seniors reported using
marijuana in the previous thirty days. Annual prevalence of marijuana use was 50.2% and
lifetime prevalence was 59.2%. Annual and lifetime prevalence continued to climb over the
next year, although thirty-day prevalence started to decline. From 1981-1992, marijuana use
among high school seniors was declining across all measures of use. By 1992, youth marijuana
use was at an all-time record low, with 11.9% of high school seniors reporting use of marijuana
in the previous thirty days, 21.9% reporting use in the past year, and 32.6% reporting use in their
lifetime. After 1992 the trend changed and marijuana use again began to rise. By 1997, thirtyday prevalence rates were back up to 23.7% and annual and lifetime prevalence rates were
38.5% and 49.6%, respectively. The 1998 data from the MTF survey suggest that the upward
trend may be leveling off. In that year, 22.8% of high school seniors reported use of marijuana
in the past thirty days, while 37.5% reported using in the past year and 49.1% reported using in
their lifetime.
Although current prevalence estimates are still well below their peak in the late 1970s,

3

the recent upward trend in marijuana use among youths is disturbing for a number of reasons.
First, the increase can be seen across both genders and all ethnic groups, suggesting that this is
not a trend being driven by a small subgroup of the youth population (Johnston et al. 1999;
SAMHSA 1996). Second, the average age of first marijuana use has been declining during this
period, with an average age of initiation of 17.7 in 1992 and an average age of 16.4 in 1996
(ONDCP 1999).
Finally, we may not yet really understand all of the factors that led to the recent increase
in marijuana use or, for that matter, the decline that occurred during the 1980s. Some factors,
such as perceived harm, disapproval and availability of marijuana, have been shown to be
significantly correlated with marijuana use over time (Bachman, Johnston and O’Malley 1998;
Caulkins 1999; Johnston et al. 1999) Johnston and his colleagues (Johnston et al. 1999; Johnston
1991) have offered several explanations for why perceived harm, in particular, may have
changed in the ways that it did. These include: increased media attention to the consequences of
marijuana use beginning in the late 1970s; the large number of heavy users found in most
schools by the late 1970s, affording peers the opportunity to directly observe the consequences
of their drug use; and the active containment efforts by many sectors of society during the 1980s
that included the anti-drug advertising campaigns of the mid-to-late 1980s. Similarly, for the
upturn in the 1990s, Johnston and his colleagues hypothesize that several of the factors that may
have contributed to the decline in the 1980s were reversed, including: reduced attention from the
national media beginning with the buildup to the Gulf War in 1991 and continuing afterwards;
reduced rates of use among peers providing fewer opportunities for vicarious learning in the
immediate social environment; sizable cuts in federal funding for drug prevention programs in
schools in the early 1990s; and the substantial decline in the media placement of the national

4

anti-drug advertising campaign of the Partnership for a Drug Free America. In addition, they
point to the increased glamorization of drug use in the lyrics, performances, and off-stage
behavior of many rock, grunge, and rap groups as a factor likely to have contributed to the rise in
youth drug use in the 1990s.
To the extent that there is some degree of covariation among the various substances in
their intertemporal trends (see Figure 4), there may be some common determinants of their use.
This covariation was perhaps most apparent during the 1990s, when nearly all forms of licit and
illicit drug use rose to some degree among high school seniors. However, there are enough
differences among their cross-time usage profiles to conclude that there are also unique factors
influencing their use (Johnston et al. 1999). Price, for example, is a logical candidate.
Unlike alcohol, cigarettes or cocaine, where the harmful consequences of youth use have
been clearly established, there is tremendous uncertainty regarding the short- and long-term
consequences of youth marijuana use. This uncertainty has led some to question why we should
even be concerned that marijuana use is on the rise. Most regular or heavy marijuana users also
use alcohol or other substances regularly, so that it is difficult to identify a causal link between
particular negative consequences and regular marijuana use. Nonetheless, two reports
commissioned by the National Institute on Drug Abuse in the United States and the National
Task Force on Cannabis in Australia review the existing scientific literature and identify several
psychological and health effects that can be generally attributed to regular and/or chronic
marijuana use and that can lead to negative outcomes, particularly among youth (NIDA 1995;
Hall et al. 1994). These areas include (1) diminished cognitive functioning, (2) diminished
psychomotor performance, (3) increased health services utilization, and (4) the development of
dependence. In addition, both reviews cite the significant correlation between early marijuana

5

use and subsequent harder drug use as a further reason to be concerned about use of marijuana
among youths.

I.A. Diminished Cognitive Functioning
One of the major reasons for widespread recreational use of marijuana is that it produces
a high associated with mild euphoria, relaxation and perceptual alterations. Cognitive changes
also occur during the high, including impaired short-term memory and a loosening of
associations, which makes it possible for the user to become lost in pleasant reverie and fantasy.
Recent studies have identified that this diminished cognitive functioning can be attributed to the
presence of cannabinoid receptor sites in the areas of the brain that control memory (Matsuda,
Bonner and Lolait 1993; Heyser, Hampson, and Deadwyler 1993). Activation of these receptors
interrupts normal brain motor and cognitive function, thus affecting attention, concentration and
short-term memory during the period of intoxication.
It is this negative impact on concentration, attention and short-term memory that have led
many to conclude that marijuana use diminishes human capital formation for youths. Indeed,
research shows that there is a significant contemporaneous correlation between marijuana use
and poor grades and dropping out of school (Bachman et al. 1998; Mensch and Kandel 1988;
Yamada, Kendix, and Yamada 1996). However, findings from longitudinal studies suggest that
these negative associations disappear when other factors, such as lower educational aspirations,
academic performance, and problem behavior, are controlled for (Ellickson et al. 1998;
Newcombe and Bentler 1988; Kandel et al. 1986). One longitudinal study found the negative
association to persist after controls were included for motivational factors, but it persisted for
only one population subgroup: Latinos (Ellickson et al. 1998). Marijuana use remained

6

insignificant for the general sample of young adults and for the other ethnic subgroups.
There are several shortcomings in these studies that make the interpretation of their
findings suspect. In particular, early use of alcohol, cigarettes and marijuana are consistently
treated as exogenous variables. Only one study to date explicitly tests this assumption, but it
does so using a different measure of marijuana use than that typically examined by other studies.
In a longitudinal analysis of the relationship between marijuana initiation and dropping out of
high school, Bray et al. (2000) examine the impact of initiating marijuana use by age 16, 17 and
18 on the likelihood of dropping out of school. They find that marijuana initiation is positively
related to dropping out of high school, although the magnitude and significance of the
relationship varies with the age of dropout and with the other substances used. They test the
possible endogeneity of marijuana initiation and find that they cannot reject exogeneity.
However, because their measures does not distinguish new experimenters from regular or longtime users, their finding of exogeneity should not be generalized.

I.B. Diminished Psychomotor Performance
It is clear that marijuana use impairs judgment and motor skills by distorting perceptions
of space and time. The extent of the impairment, of course, is largely determined by the inhaled
or ingested dose, as in the case of alcohol. The question then becomes to what extent the
impaired performance translates into accidental injury to the user or those around him/her.
Much of the research in this area has focused on automobile accidents and fatalities.
Epidemiological studies that try to identify an association between THC level and crashes and/or
fatalities are problematic for two reasons. First, the vast majority of accident-involved
individuals test positive for alcohol use as well. One recent review of the epidemiology literature

7

showed that although 4% to 12% of drivers who sustained injury or death in crashes tested
positive for THC, at least 50%, and in some cases 90%, of the drivers also tested positive for
alcohol impairment (Robbe and O’Hanlon 1999).2 There have been relatively few studies that
contain large enough samples of non-alcohol impaired drivers to examine this issue. One study
of drivers arrested for reckless driving who were not alcohol impaired did find that half of these
individuals tested positive for marijuana (Brookoff et al. 1994). A second problem with these
studies, however, is that a positive test for marijuana does not necessarily mean that the
individual was under the influence at the time of the accident. THC stays in the blood stream
much longer than other intoxicants, so a positive test may simply indicate recent use.
Experimental studies that use driving simulators and closed-course driving environments
try to overcome these problems. In a review of this literature, Smiley (1986) concludes that
although drivers under the influence of marijuana are more likely to make errors, such as
departing from their lane, they also drive slower than sober drivers and keep a greater distance
from the car in front of them. Intoxicated alcohol drivers, on the other hand, are more likely to
increase their speed, which perhaps explains the comparatively smaller number of marijuanarelated accidents on the road.
The preceding conclusion continues to be supported in more recent studies (e.g. Robbe
and O’Hanlon 1993) and is consistent with findings from a recent econometric study using
reduced form equations to examine the relationship between alcohol and marijuana use and the
probability of non-fatal and fatal accidents among youths (Chaloupka and Laixuthai 1997).
Using self-reported information on non-fatal accidents in the Monitoring the Future Survey,
Chaloupka and Laixuthai (1997) find that a reduction in marijuana prices, which they show
reduces youth drinking and presumably increases youth marijuana use, leads to a significant drop

8

in the probability of a non-fatal motor vehicle accident. They interpret this net negative effect as
evidence that the substitution towards marijuana generates an increase in the probability of a
non-fatal accident that is smaller than the decrease associated with the decline in drinking and
driving. They draw a similar conclusion when examining the effects of marijuana
decriminalization on the probability of a fatal motor vehicle accident among youths using data
from the Fatal Accident Reporting System. So although there is significant evidence suggesting
that marijuana intoxication leads to an increased risk of motor vehicle accidents, the risk is not
believed to be anywhere near as large as the risk associated with drinking and driving.

I.C. Increased Health Services Utilization
There is increasing, albeit controversial, evidence that regular marijuana use is associated
with upper respiratory problems, such as chronic bronchitis, inflamed sinuses, and frequent chest
colds (Nahas and Latour 1992; Tashkin et al. 1990), and reproductive system problems, such as
reduced sperm production and delay of puberty (Nahas and Latour 1992; Tommasello 1982). A
significant problem in identifying the health effects associated with marijuana use is that the vast
majority of marijuana users also use other substances, particularly alcohol and cigarettes. It is
difficult, therefore, to identify whether particular substances generate specific health outcomes or
if it is the combination of substances. Two approaches have been generally used to try to tease
out the relationship. The first approach relies on individual level data where there is a high
incidence of marijuana users who do not use other substances. For example, Polen et al. (1993)
were able to identify 452 Kaiser Permanente enrollees that were daily marijuana smokers who
never smoked tobacco. They compared the health service utilization among these daily
marijuana-only smokers to non-smokers with similar demographics screened at Kaiser

9

Permanente Medical centers between July 1979 and December 1985. They examined medical
care utilization for a number of health-specific outcomes over a one to two year follow up and
found that marijuana smokers have a 19% increased risk of outpatient visits for respiratory
illnesses, a 32% increased risk of injury, a 9% increased risk of other illnesses and were 50%
more likely to be admitted to the hospital than nonsmokers. These results were adjusted for sex,
age, race, education, marital status, and alcohol consumption.
The second approach to understanding the relationship between marijuana use and health
has focused on examining the correlation between general consumption rates and health care
utilization. For example, Model (1993) examined the effect of marijuana decriminalization
status on the incidence of marijuana-related hospital emergency room episodes using data from
the 1975-1978 Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN). During the mid-1970s several states
chose to decriminalize possession of small amounts of marijuana, thus reducing the penalties
associated with using it. Model (1993) found that states that had chosen to decriminalize
experienced significantly higher rates of marijuana-related emergency room episodes.
Although both approaches clearly establish a positive association between marijuana use
and health service utilization, they have yet to demonstrate a direct link between marijuana use
and particular health outcomes or illnesses.

I.D. Development of Dependence
Until the late 1970s and early 1980s, the general consensus opinion regarding marijuana
was that it was not a drug of dependence because marijuana users did not exhibit tolerance and
withdrawal symptoms analogous to those seen in alcohol and opiate dependence. In the late
1970’s, however, expert opinion regarding marijuana dependence began to change as a new,

10

more liberal definition of drug dependence, embodied in Edwards and Gross’s (1976) alcohol
dependence syndrome, was extended to all psychoactive drugs (Edwards et al. 1981). This new
definition reduced the emphasis on tolerance and withdrawal and attached greater emphasis on
the continued use of the drug in the face of its adverse effects. It is this new conception of
dependence that is reflected in the Third Revised and Fourth Editions of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-III-R and DSM-IV). A
diagnosis of psychoactive substance dependence is made if any three of nine criteria are present
for a month or longer. It is therefore not necessary that a person exhibit physical dependence on
a drug for them to be diagnosed as dependent (Hall et al. 1994).
Studies employing these new criteria for marijuana dependence have determined that
marijuana dependence syndrome occurs much more frequently than previously believed.
According to data from the 1993 National Comorbidity Study, nine percent of those who
reported trying marijuana reported dependence at some stage (Anthony, Warner, and Kessler
1994). Data from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area study found that half of those classified as
having experienced drug dependence in their lifetime reported only using marijuana, suggesting
that marijuana users constitute a substantial fraction of all those dependent on illicit drugs
(Anthony and Helzer 1991).
Although tolerance and withdrawal symptoms are not required within the DSM-III-R and
DSM-IV, there is evidence that both can occur for chronic heavy cannabis users (Jones and
Benowitz 1976; Georgotas and Zeidenberg 1979; Weller and Halikas 1982). There is also
clinical and epidemiological evidence that some heavy marijuana users experience problems
controlling their use despite the experience of adverse personal consequences (Stephens and
Roffman 1993; Kandel and Davie 1992; Jones 1984). However, many researchers note that the

11

physical withdrawal symptoms for those suffering from a physical dependence on marijuana are
minor and typically pass within a few days if they are experienced at all (Jones 1987; Jones
1992; Compton, Dewey, and Martin 1990).
Given that the predominant social pattern for marijuana use is recreational and/or
intermittent use of relatively low doses of THC, the actual risk of developing a dependence
syndrome is relatively small for most individuals using marijuana. Further, assuming that the
physical withdrawal symptoms are truly minor, marijuana dependence would be fairly easy to
treat. However, the addictive nature of marijuana is clearly underestimated by most individuals
who decide to use the drug.

I.E. Marijuana as a Gateway Drug
The importance of marijuana as a gateway drug remains highly controversial, despite
tremendous evidence of a correlation between early marijuana use and later hard drug use. The
finding that marijuana use precedes harder drug use and that this sequencing persists across
youth of different gender, race or ethnicity is well established (Kandel 1975; Kandel, Kessler,
and Margulies 1978; Ellickson, Hays, and Bel, 1992; Kandel et al. 1992; Ellickson and Morton
in press). However, the proper interpretation of this consistent finding remains debatable.
Temporal precedence and statistical correlation are only necessary conditions for establishing
causality, not sufficient conditions. It might very well be the case that this consistent finding in
the literature is the result of a spurious correlation driven by other individual factors or problem
behaviors, such as truancy, poor grades, delinquency, and others. Debate ensues regarding the
plausibility of alternative proposed causal mechanisms. These mechanisms can be grouped into
two general categories: physiological and sociological factors.

12

The physiological arguments are based on findings from two recent papers in Science
(June 27, 1997) that demonstrate that cannabis activates neurochemical processes in rats that
respond in a qualitatively similar way to cocaine, heroin, tobacco and alcohol (DeFonseca et al.
1997; Tanda, Pontieri, and DiChiara 1997). These findings support the argument that favorable
experimentation with and regular consumption of marijuana will make youths more receptive to
experimenting with other types of intoxicants, particularly those that offer similar psychological
effects. However, neither study actually examined the relationship between rats’ cannabis
consumption and their consumption of harder drugs or their motivation to use these drugs, so
their findings cannot be interpreted as definitive proof of causality.
Sociological arguments generally tend to focus on the information that is learned when
experimenting with marijuana (Kaplan 1970; MacCoun, Reuter, and Schelling 1996). For
example, it may be the case that seemingly safe experiences with marijuana might reduce the
adolescent’s perceptions regarding the perceived harmfulness, both in terms of legal risks and
health risks, of using harder drugs. Alternatively, exposure to the marijuana market place may
bring casual marijuana users into contact with hard drug sellers, again influencing their
perceptions regarding the legal risks of using illicit drugs. It was this latter argument that
persuaded the Dutch to separate the soft and hard drug markets by permitting low-level cannabis
sales in coffee shops and nightclubs (Ministry of Foreign Affairs 1995).
Despite the numerous theories that propose specific causal mechanisms for this observed
sequencing, very little empirical work has been done trying to verify the existence of a causal
mechanism. At least one published study reports a structural relationship between prior
marijuana use and current demand for cocaine, although it does not attempt to identify the causal
mechanism (DeSimone 1998). Using data from the 1988 NLSY, DeSimone (1998) estimates the

13

current demand for cocaine as a function of past marijuana use (use reported in the 1984 survey)
and current values of other correlates of cocaine demand using a sample of individuals who had
not previously used cocaine. A two-stage instrumental variable approach is used to account for
the potential correlation between past marijuana use and the current period error term.
Instruments for the past use of marijuana included two measures of state-level penalties for
marijuana possession, the beer tax, and an indicator of parental alcoholism or problem drinking.
Estimates from this model suggest that prior use of marijuana increases the probability of using
cocaine by more than 29%, even after one controls for unobserved individual characteristics,
providing the strongest evidence that the observed sequencing in use is not being driven by a
spurious correlation between demand equations.
As the above demonstrates, regular and/or heavy marijuana use is associated with a
number of negative short- and long-term consequences, including reduced educational
attainment, increased risk of accidents, increased use of health care services, increased risk of
dependence and a possible increased risk in the use of harder substances. The problem is that the
literature exploring a causal link between marijuana and these potential consequences is still
relatively sparse and much remains to be explored.

II. The Demand for Marijuana by Youths: Key Insights from the Literature
Few economic studies analyzing the determinants of marijuana demand were done prior
to the 1990s because of the limited information available on the price of marijuana. Nonetheless,
a significant literature developed due to the work of epidemiologists and other social scientists
who were interested in exploring other correlates and causes of marijuana use. Most of these
studies examine how individual and environmental characteristics, lifestyle factors (grades,

14

truancy, religious commitment, evenings out for recreation), and proximate factors (perceptions
and attitudes about marijuana) correlate with current use of marijuana among adolescents.
It is not surprising that a key finding from this literature is that the same general
background and lifestyle factors that are significantly correlated with early use of alcohol and
other drugs are also correlated with marijuana use. Although gender and ethnicity are
consistently significantly correlated with marijuana use, with men being significantly more likely
to use marijuana than women ,and blacks being much less likely to use marijuana than whites,
they are not viewed as leading determinants of marijuana use. Instead, truancy, frequent
evenings away from home for recreation, low religiosity, and low perceived harmfulness or
disapproval (Bachman et al. 1988; Bachman, Johnston, and O’Malley 1981; Jessor, Chase and
Donovan 1980) are considered to be the most significant correlates of marijuana use. Part-time
employment and income are considered to be more moderate correlates, with youths reporting
working more hours per week and higher incomes being more likely to use marijuana (Bachman
et al. 1988; Bachman, Johnston, and O’Malley 1981). Social factors, such as use by peers or
family members and reduced familial attachment, are also significantly correlated with marijuana
use (Brook, Cohen, and Jaeger 1998; Kandel 1985; Jessor, Chase, and Donovan 1980).
Nisbet and Vakil (1972) contributed the first economic study to this literature. They used
a self-administered survey of 926 UCLA students in an effort to obtain information on the price
of marijuana in addition to the quantity of marijuana consumed. Students were asked how many
ounces of marijuana they purchased at current prices as well as how much they would buy if
faced with alternative hypothetical price changes. Two alternative functional forms of very basic
demand curves were estimated that included only measures of the quantity of marijuana
consumed in a month, the price per ounce, mean monthly total expenditures and an expenditure

15

dispersion measure. Price was found to be a significant determinant of quantity consumed.
Estimates of the price elasticity of demand ranged from –0.40 to –1.51 when information on
hypothetical prices was included. When the data were restricted to just actual purchase data, the
price elasticity of demand fell into a narrower range of –1.01 and –1.51.
The Nisbet and Vakil (1972) study provides us with the only published price elasticity of
demand for marijuana. However, the findings from this study are not generalizable because they
are based on a very small convenience sample of college students, do not account for other
important demand factors, and employ data that are almost thirty years old. In addition, the
estimated price elasticities are likely to be overstated in absolute value because students who
consume relatively large amounts of marijuana have incentives to search for lower prices.3
More recent studies by economists and other social science researchers that use nationally
representative samples and include other demand factors lack information on the money price of
marijuana. Most try to overcome this data shortcoming by focusing on other aspects of the full
price of this substance. For example, several studies use cross-state variation in marijuana
decriminalization status to examine the impact of lower legal sanctions on the demand for
marijuana. The findings with respect to the impact of decriminalization on the use of marijuana
by youths and young adults are generally mixed. Early studies focusing on youth populations
generally found that decriminalization had no significant impact on demand. For example,
Johnston, O’Malley, and Bachman (1981) compared change in marijuana use in decriminalized
states to that in non-decriminalized states using data from the Monitoring the Future Survey of
High School Seniors and found no significant difference.
DiNardo and Lemieux (1992) came to a similar conclusion using state-level aggregated
data from the 1980-1989 Monitoring the Future Survey. They estimated log-linear and bivariate

16

probit models of the likelihood of using alcohol and marijuana. In addition to including
marijuana decriminalization status, they included a regional price of alcohol and the minimum
legal purchase age for beer in all specifications. They found that the marijuana decriminalization
variable had no significant effect on marijuana use. Thies and Register (1993) similarly found
no significant impact of marijuana decriminalization on the demand for marijuana among a
sample of young adults from the 1984 and 1988 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY).
They estimated logit and tobit specifications of the demand for marijuana, binge drinking, and
cocaine and included cross-price effects in all of the regressions. Pacula (1998a) also found no
significant effect of marijuana decriminalization in her two-part model specification of the
demand for marijuana using data from the 1984 NLSY.
Two recent studies using youth samples from the MTF study and including information
on the median fines imposed for possession of marijuana have found a positive effect of
decriminalization on marijuana use. Chaloupka, Grossman, and Tauras (1999) used data from
the 1982 and 1989 MTF to estimate annual and thirty-day prevalence of marijuana and cocaine
use among high school seniors. Their models included measures of the median fines for
possession of marijuana and showed that individuals living in decriminalized states were
significantly more likely to report use of marijuana in the past year. They found no significant
impact on thirty-day prevalence, however. In a separate study examining the relationship
between the demands for cigarettes and marijuana, Chaloupka et al. (1999) used data from the
1992-1994 8th, 10th, and 12th grade surveys to estimate a two-part model of the current demand
for cigarettes and marijuana. They found that marijuana decriminalization had a positive and
significant effect on both the prevalence and quantity consumed of marijuana when median jail
terms and fines were also included in the model.

17

Studies employing data on the overall population have generated more consistent
findings with respect to the effects of marijuana decriminalization on the consumption of
marijuana. For example, Model (1993) analyzed the effect of marijuana decriminalization on
drug mentions in hospital emergency room episodes using data from the 1975-1978 Drug Abuse
Warning Network (DAWN). Although she did not directly estimate demand functions for
marijuana, results from multiple variants of her model consistently showed that cities in states
that had decriminalized marijuana experienced higher marijuana ER mentions and lower other
drug mentions than non-decriminalized cities. Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) estimated individual
level prevalence equations for past year and past month use of marijuana, alcohol, cocaine, and
heroin using data from the 1988, 1990, and 1991 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
They found that marijuana decriminalization had a positive and significant effect on marijuana
prevalence, supporting the conclusion made by Model that individuals in the general population
are responsive to changes in the legal treatment of illicit drugs.
Studies examining other components of the legal risk of using marijuana, such as fines
for possession and marijuana arrest rates, have generated similarly mixed findings in terms of
youth responsiveness. For example, Chaloupka, Grossman, and Tauras (1999) and Chaloupka et
al. (1999) both found using different samples from the MTF that youths were responsive to
median fines for possession of marijuana. However, using individual level data from the 19901996 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse to estimate state-fixed effects models of the
prevalence of marijuana and cigarette use, Farrelly et al. (1999) found that higher median fines
for possession of marijuana had no significant effect on youths between the ages of 12 and 20.
They did find a statistically significant effect on young adults between the ages of 21 to 30.
They further found that young adults, but not youths, were responsive to marijuana arrest rates.

18

Individuals living in areas where marijuana arrests were a higher fraction of total arrests were
significantly less likely to use marijuana.
Pacula (1998b) provided further evidence that young adults are sensitive to general
enforcement risk using data from the 1983 and 1984 NLSY. In her models of the intertemporal
demand for alcohol and marijuana, she used a measure of common crime to the number of police
officers at the MSA level as an indicator of the enforcement risk of using marijuana. She found
that higher crime per officer ratios were associated with increased use of marijuana for young
adults.
Unlike the economic literature on the demand for other intoxicating substances, where
the focus of the research has been on estimating the own-price elasticity of demand, much of the
economic literature on the demand for marijuana has focused on analyzing cross-price effects
because of the unavailability of marijuana price data. The goal of this research has been to
determine whether marijuana is an economic substitute or complement to other substances that
are believed to have more harmful consequences associated with use. The findings with respect
to the relationship between marijuana and cigarettes have been consistent so far. Higher
cigarette prices lead to lower cigarette and marijuana use among youths and young adults
(Chaloupka et al. 1999; Farrelly et al. 1999).
Findings are mixed, however, when it comes to other substances. Initial research on the
relationship between the demands for alcohol and marijuana suggested that these two goods were
economic substitutes for youths. DiNardo and Lemieux (1992) found that higher minimum legal
purchase ages reduced alcohol consumption and increased marijuana consumption over time
using aggregated data from the MTF. They further found that individuals living in
decriminalized states were significantly less likely to use alcohol, which they interpreted as

19

evidence of a substitution effect even though decriminalization did not statistically influence
marijuana consumption. Chaloupka and Laixuthai (1997) similarly found evidence of a
substitution effect between alcohol and marijuana using individual level data from the 1982 and
1989 MTF. They estimated ordered and dichotomous probits of drinking frequency and found
that marijuana decriminalization had a consistent negative effect. They further found in
restricted models that incorporated information on marijuana prices, that higher marijuana prices
were generally associated with increased likelihood of drinking and drinking heavily.
Subsequent research that analyzes individual-level demand equations for marijuana has
raised some doubt of a substitution effect. Pacula (1998a and 1998b) finds in both her
contemporaneous and intertemporal demand models using the 1984 NLSY that higher beer
prices are associated with reduced levels of drinking and marijuana use. She interprets this as
evidence of a complementary relationship between alcohol and marijuana. Farrelly et al. (1999)
similarly find that higher beer taxes reduce the probability of currently using marijuana among
their sample of 12-20 year olds from the 1990-1996 NHSDA. However, they also find that
higher beer taxes have no significant effect on the demand for marijuana among their young
adult sample (ages 21-30). The finding of no significant effect among older populations is
consistent with what was found by Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) when they estimated annual and
thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use using the 1988, 1990, and 1991 NHSDA.
Although Model’s (1993) research examining ER episodes suggests that marijuana is an
economic substitute for other illicit substances in general, studies that actually estimate
individual level demand equations generate mixed findings with respect to cross-price effects for
specific substances. Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) find that higher cocaine prices are associated
with reduced marijuana participation in the past month and the past year while marijuana

20

decriminalization is generally associated with increased cocaine consumption, suggesting that
these two goods are economic complements. The findings regarding marijuana and heroin,
however, are more mixed. Higher heroin prices are found to generally reduce marijuana
participation, although the findings are sensitive to other prices included in the model.
Marijuana decriminalization, on the other hand, has no significant impact on heroin participation.
Of course a major concern in trying to interpret the findings from all of these studies is
the fact that all but one (Chaloupka and Laixuthai 1997) exclude a measure for the monetary
price of marijuana. Thus it is difficult to know whether the estimates from these models are
biased and, if so, in what direction.
Most of the research just reviewed focuses on determinants of the contemporaneous
demand for marijuana. Research examining changes in the trend of marijuana use over time
suggests that significant predictors of contemporaneous demand cannot account for the change
we have seen in demand over time (Bachman, Johnston, and O’Malley 1998; Bachman et al.
1988). Using data from the 1976-1986 MTF survey of high school seniors, Bachman et al.
examine through multivariate analysis the influence of lifestyle factors (grades, truancy, hours
worked/week, weekly income, religious commitment, political conservatism, and evenings out
per week), attitudes (perceived harmfulness and disapproval of regular marijuana use) and
secular trends (mean marijuana use among seniors for that year) on variation in individual use of
marijuana over time. They find that attitudinal measures are by far the most powerful predictors
of change. When attitudinal measures are included in the regression, the influence of the secular
trend becomes insignificant, suggesting that the secular trend can be entirely explained by
measures of perceived risk or disapproval. Similarly, the influence of lifestyle factors as a group
diminishes with the inclusion of the attitudinal variables, although some factors such as truancy

21

and evenings out continue to have large effects. The fact that lifestyle factors alone could not
diminish the influence of the secular trend on individual marijuana use suggests that attitudes and
not lifestyle factors are more important in determining trends in marijuana use over time.
In a follow up study that expanded the previous research by examining a longer time
period and replicated the analysis on 8th and 10th graders, Bachman, Johnston and O’Malley
(1998) reaffirm their previous findings. Using data from 1976-1996, they again find evidence
that the influence of lifestyle variables on marijuana use occurs primarily through disapproval
and perceived risk. Further, they also find that the secular trends in marijuana use can be
completely explained by changes in attitudes over time.
In light of these findings and the fact that self-reported perceived availability did not
change significantly during the periods being examined, Bachman, Johnston, and O’Malley
(1998) concluded that supply reduction has limited potential to influence use over time and the
focus of government efforts should be on trying to influence perceived harm and disapproval.
Caulkins (1999) challenged this conclusion by arguing that the MTF indicator of availability
may not be properly calibrated to detect significant changes in perceived availability. He
showed that there is indeed a strong negative correlation between median national marijuana
prices and seniors’ self-reported use between 1981 and 1997. Depending on the measure of use,
Caulkins found a correlation coefficient between –0.79 and –0.95, which overlaps with the
simple correlation coefficients obtained between participation and perceived harm. Although
this is not definitive evidence that supply factors substantially influence marijuana use by youths
over time, Caulkins argued that it suggests that further analyses exploring the relative importance
of supply factors over time is needed. We conduct such analyses in the remainder of this paper.

22

III. Time-Series Analysis
In this section we focus on national trends in marijuana participation in the past year
(annual participation) and in the past thirty days (thirty-day participation) by MTF high school
seniors for the period from 1982 through 1998. We relate these trends to trends in the real price
of marijuana, the purity of marijuana as measured by its delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
potency, and the perceived risk of great harm from regular marijuana use as reported by the MTF
seniors.4 Included are multiple regressions of past year or past month participation on the three
variables just mentioned and a time trend. We begin with data for 1982 because that is the first
year in which potency and prices are available.
Compared to the repeated cross-sectional analysis that follows, the national analysis has
certain advantages. First, it covers a longer period of time. Second, it puts purity on equal
footing with other determinants since this variable only is available at the national level. Third,
we can examine whether changes in price and the perceived harm from regular marijuana use
have the potential to account for a significant share of the observed changes in youth marijuana
use over time.
The disadvantages of the time series are that there are a small number of observations and
a considerable amount of intercorrelation among the variables. In addition, this analysis is
limited by the lack of data on marijuana prices prior to 1982, particularly when comparing the
contributions of price and perceived harm in predicting the downward trend in marijuana use in
the 1980s. Starting in 1982 misses the early part of the downturn in use that began in 1979 and
the 25-percentage point increase in the proportion of youth seeing great risk from regular
marijuana use that occurred between 1978 and 1982. Any conclusions reached from these
analyses must be interpreted with caution.

23

III.A. Monitoring the Future Prevalence Data
The Monitoring the Future (MTF) Survey is a nationally representative, annual schoolbased survey of approximately 16,000 high school seniors in approximately 130 public and
private high schools each year. One of the main purposes of the study is to explore changes in
youths’ perceptions, attitudes, and use of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. As such, great care
is taken to ensure that responses pertaining to use of each of these substances are valid and
reliable. Students complete self-administered, machine-readable questionnaires in their normal
classroom, so parents are not present when the students are filling out the questionnaires nor are
they informed of the students’ responses. The survey was developed and is conducted by the
Institute for Social Research (ISR) at the University of Michigan. Detailed information
pertaining to survey design and sampling methods is available in Johnston et al. (1999). Further
information regarding the validity of these data is available in Johnston and O’Malley (1985).
The University of Michigan team reports aggregate measures of use from the survey annually
(Johnston et al., 1999, is the most recent in their annual monograph series).

III.B. Data on Marijuana Prices and Potency
There are two sources of data on marijuana prices: the System to Retrieve Information
from Drug Evidence (STRIDE) and the Illegal Drug Price/Purity Report (IDPPR). The Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) of the U.S. Department of Justice maintains both. DEA and
FBI agents and state and local police narcotics officers purchase illicit drugs on a regular basis in
order to apprehend dealers. Taubman (1991) argues that DEA agents must make transactions at
close to the street prices of the drugs in order to make an arrest because an atypical price can

24

cause suspicion on the part of dealers.
Information on the date and city of the purchase, its total cost, total weight in grams, and
purity (as a percentage) for certain drugs is recorded in STRIDE for each of approximately 140
cities. Most of the data pertain to cocaine or heroin since DEA agents have focused their efforts
on apprehending cocaine and heroin dealers since STRIDE was created in 1977. Cocaine
purchases are the most numerous: approximately 30,000 in the period from 1981 through 1998,
compared to only 3,000 for marijuana. No information on the purity of marijuana is recorded.
In addition no distinction is made between wholesale and retail purchases, although the latter
involve smaller quantities than the former.
Given the small number of marijuana purchases and given that almost 30 percent are
made in the District of Columbia, STRIDE cannot be used to develop marijuana prices at the
state or local level. Moreover, this database cannot be used to adjust price for purity and to
distinguish between retail and wholesale purchases. Therefore, in the repeated cross-sectional
analysis in the next section and in the trend analysis in this section, prices are taken from the
following publications of the DEA Office of Intelligence or Intelligence Division: The Domestic
Cities Report (1982 through third quarter of 1985); the Illicit Drug Wholesale/Retail Price
Report (fourth quarter of 1985 through fourth quarter of 1990); and the Illegal Drug Price/Purity
Report (first quarter of 1991 through last quarter of 1998). The publications just mentioned
contain data for nineteen cities in sixteen states. In general the prices are reported quarterly. In
1982, 1983, and 1984, a single city-specific figure is given for each of the four marijuana price
series (see below for more details), and the quarter for which the figure pertains is not given.5
Data for the first and third quarters of 1985, the second quarter of 1988, and the second quarter
of 1996 are missing. The cities are as follows: Atlanta, Georgia; Boston, Massachusetts;

25

Chicago, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; Denver, Colorado; Detroit, Michigan; Houston, Texas; Los
Angeles, California; Miami, Florida; Newark, New Jersey; New Orleans, Louisiana; New York,
New York; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Phoenix, Arizona; San Diego, California; San Francisco,
California; Seattle, Washington; St. Louis, Missouri; and the District of Columbia.
Four marijuana price series are contained in these publications: the wholesale price (price
per pound) of commercial grade marijuana, the wholesale price of a more potent grade called
sinsemilla, and the retail price (price per ounce) of each of these two grades. In most cases the
price range (minimum and maximum price) is reported. In some cases a single price is quoted.
The number of observations on which the price range or price is based is not reported.
For convenience, we refer to prices from the sources just described as IDPPR or
nineteen-cities prices from now on. The purchases on which these prices are based are sent to a
laboratory at the University of Mississippi, which distinguishes between commercial marijuana
and sinsimella and ascertains the THC content of each purchase as a percentage. Annual average
percentages for commercial marijuana and sinsemilla potency are published, but figures for the
individual cities are not given.6 No distinction is made between potency at the wholesale and
retail levels. In our sample period the mean potency of commercial marijuana was 4.09 percent
and the mean potency of sinsemilla was 8.39 percent, with the simple pairwise correlation
coefficient between the two equal to 0.43.
We obtain four annual price series from IDPPR by taking the midpoint of each price
range (defined as the simple average of the maximum and minimum price), converting all prices
into prices per gram, and converting to real prices by dividing by the annual Consumer Price
Index for the U.S. as a whole (1982-84 = 1). The four prices are highly correlated. The pairwise
simple correlation coefficients between them range from 0.73 in the case of the retail commercial

26

price and the retail sinsemilla price to 0.92 in the case of the wholesale and retail sinsemilla
prices. In the trend and regression analyses in this section we employ the retail commercial price
and the potency of commercial marijuana. The retail price is clearly the most relevant one for
youth consumption decisions. There are no data, however, to indicate whether commercial
marijuana or sinsemilla is more commonly consumed by young marijuana users. Given the
evidence that commercial marijuana dominates the US marijuana market for the period covered
by these analyses (Kleiman 1992; National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee 1998),
we suspect that commercial marijuana is likely to be the type most used by high school seniors.7
For the period as a whole, the average nominal price of retail commercial marijuana was
$5.97 per gram, and the average nominal price of wholesale commercial marijuana was $3.15
per gram. The corresponding prices for sinsemilla were $10.41 per gram at the retail level and
$6.71 per gram at the wholesale level. Since a marijuana cigarette (a “joint”) typically contains
0.5 grams (Rhodes, Hyatt, and Scheiman 1994), one retail commercial joint costs approximately
$3.00 in nominal terms in our sample period. For comparative purposes, a six-pack (six 12
ounce cans) of beer costs approximately $3.50. If one assumes that a joint produces the same
“high” as two or three cans of beer, the purchase of marijuana puts at least as great a dent in a
youth’s budget as the purchase of beer.

III.C. Trends
Trends in annual marijuana participation as a percentage, thirty-day marijuana
participation as a percentage, and the percentage reporting great risk of harm from regular
marijuana use (termed harm from now on) are shown in Figure 5. These data reveal a cycle in
use in the period at issue: a contraction from 1982 through 1992 followed by an expansion from

27

1992 through 1998. Annual prevalence fell from 44.3 percent in 1982 to 21.9 percent in 1992
and then rose to 37.5 percent in 1998. Thirty-day prevalence followed a similar pattern. It
declined from 28.5 percent in 1982 to 11.9 percent in 1992 and then grew to 22.8 percent in
1998.
The trend in the harm measure leads the trends in the two participation series. It grew
from 60.4 percent in 1982 to 76.5 percent in 1992 and then shrank to 58.5 percent in 1998. This
suggests the trend in harm has the potential to help explain the differential trend in the number of
users in the two subperiods of 1982-1992 and 1992-1998. This is particularly true because the
peak in harm (78.6 percent in 1991) leads the trough in annual or thirty-day participation by one
year.
The real price of commercial retail marijuana and the potency of commercial marijuana
are plotted in Figure 6. These two series are more erratic than the three in Figure 5. Their
behavior during the two subperiods, however, has the potential to help explain the cycle in
participation. From 1982 to 1992, price more than tripled while potency fell by 22 percent.
Since 1992, real price fell by 16 percent, and potency increased by 53 percent. Moreover, the
peak in the real price of one gram of marijuana ($7.64 in 1991) leads the trough in participation
by one year.
Between 1982 and 1998, the number of high school seniors using marijuana in the past
year declined by 15 percent and the number using marijuana in the past thirty-days declined by
20 percent. At the same time, price almost tripled, potency increased by approximately 20
percent, and the number reporting harm from regular marijuana use fell by 3 percent. If we
compare only the two end points (1982 and 1998), the price rise is consistent with the decline in
the prevalence of marijuana use, but the increase in potency and the decline in perceived risk are

28

not. In our view, however, it is misleading to focus on the end points given the considerable
change within the interval. Given this change, it is much more meaningful to separately examine
the 1982-1992 contraction and the 1992-1998 expansion.
In theory, price and potency should be positively correlated. The simple correlation
between these two variables is 0.35 for the entire period, but they are negatively correlated in
each of the two subperiods. This is likely to reflect the considerable measurement error in these
data, particularly in the potency data (Kleiman 1992).
Limited information is available to explain trends in price and potency. Presumably,
price varies over time due, in part, to variations in resources allocated to apprehension and
conviction of dealers and to crop reduction. Pacula (1998a) documents that the first factor
explains differences in the price of marijuana among cities in 1987, and Grossman and
Chaloupka (1998) report a similar finding in the case of cocaine prices in 1991. Crane, Rivoli,
and Comfort (1997) show that increases in interdiction lead to increases in the real price of
cocaine in a time series for the years 1985 through 1996. Kleiman (1989) presents evidence
suggesting a positive correlation between resources allocated to enforcing marijuana laws and
the real price of marijuana in the 1980s.
The Drug Enforcement Administration (1999) hypothesizes that the increase in potency
over this time period can at least be partially attributed to the implementation of its Domestic
Cannabis Eradication and Suppression Program in 1979. It began as an aggressive eradication
effort in just two states, Hawaii and California. By 1982, the program had grown to include
eradication efforts in 25 states. By 1985, all 50 states were receiving funding for similar
eradication programs. Although the program targets both outdoor and indoor cultivation, indoor
cultivation is more difficult to detect. One of the main outcomes of this program, therefore, has

29

been the abandonment of large outdoor plots for indoor cultivating areas that are safer and easier
to conceal. This movement indoors has led to the more widespread use of hydroponic
cultivation, a cultivation method employing a nutrient solution instead of soil that enables
growers to produce a more potent form of marijuana.

III.D. Conceptual Issues
Three conceptual issues need to be addressed in specifying time-series demand functions
for marijuana participation. The first pertains to the appropriateness of including the harm
measure in these demand functions. High school seniors’ perceptions about the perceived risk of
great harm from regular marijuana use are not formed in a vacuum.8 Instead, these perceptions
are likely to depend on attitudes and behaviors of parents, older siblings, and peers. If this is the
case, then harm is an endogenous variable that may be correlated with the disturbance term in the
structural demand function for marijuana participation that includes it. One factor is that harm
may be correlated with an unmeasured characteristic, such as “a thrill-seeking personality,” that
causes both marijuana participation and perceptions of risk. A second factor is that there may be
true reverse causality from participation to risk. A youth who smokes marijuana may be less
likely to report that it is a harmful behavior than a youth who does not smoke marijuana.
We term the first factor “statistical endogeneity” arising from a recursive model with
correlated errors and the second factor “structural endogeneity.” Both factors cause the
coefficient of harm in the demand function to be biased and inconsistent. In addition the price
coefficient is biased if it is correlated with harm. A relationship between price and harm in
which a reduction in the real price leads to a reduction in perceived harm is quite plausible. For
example, suppose that a reduction in price encourages participation or consumption given

30

participation by older peers. This should lower high school seniors’ perception of harm and
increase their participation.9
In principle, one could employ simultaneous equations methods, such as two-stage least
squares, to obtain consistent estimates of the structural demand function. However, we lack an
instrument for harm. Since harm is endogenous, one wants to allow for both a direct effect of
price on participation with harm held constant and for an indirect effect that operates through
harm. In this section we estimate demand functions with and without the harm variable by
ordinary least squares. We also estimate equations that include harm but exclude price and
potency. This allows us to examine the importance of price as a determinant of youth marijuana
participation and to determine how the price coefficients change when harm is included or
excluded from the models.
A second conceptual issue pertains to biases in the price coefficient due to measurement
error and the endogeneity of this variable. It is plausible that price is subject to measurement
error because only its midpoint is available. Moreover, we do not know the quantity employed
to calculate the retail price of a one-gram purchase of marijuana. A distinguishing characteristic
of the market for illegal drugs is that the average cost of a purchase falls as the size of the
purchase increases (DiNardo 1993; Caulkins 1994; Rhodes, Hyatt, and Scheiman 1994;
Grossman and Chaloupka 1998). If youths typically purchase 1 or 2 grams (2 or 4 joints) at a
time and the retail price is estimated from a larger purchase, we underestimate the price actually
paid by youths. Trends in the purchase size on which the IDPPR price is calculated or trends in
the purchase size made by youths create biases due to measurement error. If the error due to
these factors or to the absence of mean or median prices is random, the price coefficient is biased
towards zero.

31

We assume that the supply function of marijuana is infinitely elastic and that price varies
over time due to variations in resources allocated to apprehension and conviction of dealers and
to crop reduction. Even if the supply function is not infinitely elastic, high school seniors can be
viewed as price takers if they represent a small fraction of marijuana users. If this is not the case
and the supply function slopes upward, we understate the price coefficient or elasticity in the
demand function in absolute value. If the supply function slopes downward due to externalities
(the greater is market consumption, the smaller is the probability of catching a given dealer), the
price coefficient or elasticity in the demand function is overstated. On balance, we believe that
biases due to measurement error are the most important and that the price coefficients or
elasticities that we report are conservative lower-bound estimates.
The final conceptual issue deals with the incorporation of purity or potency into the
demand function. Here it is natural to view purity as an index of quality and to appeal to the
literature on the demand for the quantity and quality of a good (Houthakker 1952-53; Theil
1952-53; Rosen 1974). The simplest model in this literature is one in which consumers demand
quality-adjusted quantity and base consumption decisions on quality-adjusted price. In our
context quality-adjusted quantity is given by Q = mq, where m is the number of marijuana
cigarettes smoked and q is quality or potency as measured by THC content. Quality-adjusted
price is given by p* = p/q, where p is the price of a joint. This model suggests a conditional
demand function for m by marijuana users whose arguments are p and q. With p held constant,
an increase in q lowers, raises, or has no impact on m as the price elasticity of demand for m is
less than, greater than, or equal to 1 in absolute value.10 The model also suggests a demand
function for participation in which this decision is a negative function of p*. Hence,
participation is more likely the smaller is p and the larger is q.11

32

III.E. Results
Definitions, means and standard deviations of the variables in the time-series regressions
are shown in Table 1. Tables 2 and 3 contain demand functions for annual and thirty-day
marijuana participation, respectively. The t-ratios of all regression coefficients in these tables
are based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors that allow for heteroscedasticity and for
autocorrelation up to and including a lag of three. Standard errors based on longer lags were
very similar to those contained in the tables. The first regression in Panel A of either table
includes the real retail price of commercial marijuana and the potency of commercial marijuana.
The second regression adds a linear time trend, and the third adds the square of time.
Regressions (4)-(6) delete price and potency from regressions (1)-(3) and add the percentage of
high school seniors reporting great risk of harm from regular marijuana use. Panel B of either
table employs price, potency and harm in the same models.
According to the first three models in Panel A of Table 2, price always has a negative
effect on annual participation that is significant at conventional levels. As expected the
regression coefficient of potency is positive and significant except in the model that includes a
quadratic time trend. Evaluated at the sample means, the price elasticity of annual marijuana
participation ranges between -0.27 and -0.41. In the two models in which the potency coefficient
is positive, its elasticity equals 0.49. This is somewhat larger than the absolute value of the price
elasticity of 0.41 in model 1 or 0.40 in model 2, but the price and potency elasticities do not
differ dramatically. This gives some support for the notion that participation depends on qualityadjusted price.
The regression coefficient of harm is negative and significant in the last three models in

33

Panel A of Table 2. A 10-percentage point increase in the harm measure lowers annual
participation by between 6 and 7 percentage points.
When harm is entered together with price and potency in the models in Panel B of Table
2, the price coefficient retains its negative sign and is significant at the 5 percent level on a onetailed test. The price elasticities are reduced by between 23 and 50 percent and now range from
-0.20 to -0.31. The potency effects are positive but not significant when harm is held constant.
The two positive potency coefficients in Panel A are much larger than the corresponding
coefficients in Panel B. Harm retains its significance when price and potency are held constant,
but the magnitude of the effect is reduced by between 12 and 24 percent.
The results in Table 3 tell a similar story to those in Table 2. The price elasticity of
thirty-day participation is somewhat larger than the price elasticity of annual participation except
in models that include a quadratic time trend or harm and time. But the observed differences are
not substantial. The largest occurs when the only other regressor is potency: -0.48 for the price
elasticity of thirty-day participation compared to -0.41 for the elasticity of annual participation.
One way to evaluate the nine models in each table is to see how well they predict the
reduction in marijuana participation between 1982 and 1992 and the increase between 1992 and
1998. Table 4 contains estimates of the predicted changes in annual and thirty-day marijuana
prevalence based on the estimates contained in Tables 2 and 3. The component labeled price is
obtained by multiplying the change in price between the initial and terminal years by the
regression coefficient of price. The potency and harm components have similar interpretations.
In general, the predicted changes in participation associated with the changes in perceived risk
are relatively stable across specifications, while those associated with price and potency are more
sensitive to the choice of specification.

34

Between 1982 and 1992, annual participation declined by 22.4 percentage points. Based
on the estimates from the specifications that include price, potency and harm, the changes in
price during this period suggest a 6.9 to 10.4 percentage point reduction in annual participation,
while those in potency imply a reduction of 0.3 to 0.9 percentage points. Similarly, the changes
in harm during this period suggest a 7.8 to 9.1 percentage point reduction in annual prevalence.
Because an increase in price unadjusted for potency or a reduction in potency raises qualityadjusted price, the price and potency components can be summed to form a single, qualityadjusted price component. In the most complete specifications that control for time trends
(linearly or quadratically), the quality-adjusted price changes predict a 7.5 to 7.8 percentage
point reduction in prevalence, while the changes in harm predict a 7.8 to 9.1 percentage point
reduction.
Similarly, in the 1982 through 1992 period, monthly participation declined by 16.6
percentage points. Based on the estimates from specifications that include price, potency, and
harm, with or without controlling for time trends, the changes in price during this period predict
a 2.8 to 6.8 percentage point reduction in monthly participation, while the changes in potency
suggest relatively little change. The changes in harm predict a 7.3 to 8.2 percentage point
reduction in monthly prevalence. In the specifications that include a linear or quadratic time
trend, the changes in quality-adjusted price predict a 3.1 to 3.2 percentage point reduction in
participation, while those in harm predict a 7.6 to 8.2 percent reduction.
Between 1992 and 1998, annual participation rose by 15.6 percentage points, while
monthly participation rose by 10.9 percentage points. Focusing on comparable models to those
discussed for the earlier period, the changes in the quality-adjusted price during this period
predict an increase of between 2.4 and 3.1 percentage points in annual participation and an

35

increase of between 0.9 and 1.3 percentage points in monthly participation. Similarly, the
changes in harm predict increases of 8.7 to 10.2 percentage points in annual participation and 8.2
to 9.2 percentage points in monthly participation.
To summarize, the changes in quality-adjusted price and perceived risk predict much of
the contraction in youth marijuana use in the 1982 to 1992 period and the expansion in use after
1992. Both factors appear roughly equally important in accounting for the reduction in annual
participation in the earlier period, with perceived risk somewhat more important in accounting
for the reduction in monthly participation during this period. Changes in harm, however, appear
to play a much stronger role than changes in quality-adjusted price during the more recent
expansion in youth marijuana use.

IV. Repeated Cross-Section Analysis of Marijuana Demand
To investigate individual demand for marijuana among youth, we use micro-level data
from the 1985-1996 MTF. These data allow us to incorporate more determinants than those
employed in the time-series analysis. At the same time, we base estimates of the price elasticity
of demand for marijuana on prices that vary among cities as well as over time in the context of a
fixed-effects estimation strategy. By employing a set of dichotomous indicators for states of the
United States in all models, we hold constant unmeasured variables that may be correlated with
consumption and price. Finally, we include measures of cigarette and beer prices to investigate
whether marijuana, cigarettes, and beer are substitutes or complements for youths. We examine
two outcomes: past year participation and past month participation, as in the time-series analyses
presented above.12

36

IV.A. Measurement of Variables and Empirical Implementation
Table 5 contains definitions, means, and standard deviations of all variables. MTF
survey respondents report the number of occasions in the past year and in the past thirty days on
which they used marijuana (grass, pot) or hashish (hash, hash oil). These are ordered categorical
variables with seven outcomes: 0 occasions, 1-2 occasions, 3-5 occasions, 6-9 occasions, 10-19
occasions, 20-39 occasions, and 40 or more occasions. Participants are youths who reported a
positive number of occasions. 13
Demographic characteristics included in this analysis are: gender (male or female), race
(white non-Hispanic, black non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other), age, parental education (less than
a high school education, at least a high school education), total number of siblings, family
structure (live alone, live with mother, live with father, both parents present, or other living
arrangement), mother’s work status while growing up (full-time, part-time, or stay at home), and
place of residence (rural, suburb, city). Lifestyle factors include marital status (married or
engaged versus being single), attendance at religious services (no attendance, infrequent
attendance, and frequent attendance), hours worked per week, real weekly earned income, and
real weekly other income (primarily income from allowances).14 The labels given to certain
variables are somewhat arbitrary. For example, weekly earnings and other income reflect
command over real resources. We use each income measure and hours of work as regressors
because exposure to the work environment may affect marijuana consumption by channels other
than pure income effects.
To capture youths’ perceptions and attitudes toward marijuana, we include an index of
the youth’s perceived risk of harm from regular use of marijuana. This item was not included on
all survey forms in all survey years, so the sample size is reduced when it is included in the

37

analysis.15 The indicator of perceived risk is set equal to zero for youths that report no risk,
equal to 1 for youths that report a slight risk, equal to 2 for those that report moderate risk and
equal to 3 for those who report great risk associated with regular marijuana use.
It is clear from the existing literature that peer use of substances has an important impact
on the susceptibility of youths to use different substances. Although we do not have any direct
measure of friends’ use of particular substances, it is possible to construct school-level measures
by aggregating responses to each of these questions for all youths in the same school that
participated in the survey.16 An indicator of the fraction of individuals reporting marijuana use
in the past 30 days is used as a proxy for peer use of marijuana. This variable is almost certainly
endogenous. Unfortunately, appropriate instruments are not available. Given this, some of the
models presented below do not include the peer marijuana use measure.
There were originally 193,796 observations in the 1985-1996 pooled sample.
Approximately 28 percent of this sample is lost due to missing observations on gender, race, age,
marital status, number of siblings, parental education, mother work status, living arrangements,
place of residence, religious participation, employment status, and income. Means of all
variables except for marijuana participation and harm are based on 138,933 observations.
Marijuana participation is known for 136,595 of these cases. The harm measure is available for
73,068 cases.
The commercial marijuana prices described in the last section are matched to MTF
counties in which the high schools are located based on an algorithm that matches each county in
the United States to the three nearest cities in the 19 cities database. Three matches are made
rather than one due to missing data for certain cities in some years.17 The price of marijuana in a
given year is taken from the best or closest match. Since the wholesale commercial price has

38

fewer missing values than the retail commercial price, the former price is used in the demand
functions estimated in this section. All price coefficients in the tables have, however, been
multiplied by 0.5--the coefficient of the retail price in a regression in which the wholesale price
is the dependent variable.18 The potency of commercial marijuana is the same variable
employed in Section III and varies by time but not by city.
To capture potential cross-price effects associated with the consumption of cigarettes and
alcohol, we include the real state tax on a pack of twenty cigarettes, the real state tax on a case of
24 12-ounce cans of beer, and the state minimum legal age for the purchase and consumption of
beer with alcohol content of 3.2 percent or less. The beer tax and legal drinking age are
employed as measures of the cost of alcohol because beer is the beverage of choice among
youths who consume alcohol. Nominal state-level cigarette taxes were obtained from the
Tobacco Institute’s annual Tax Burden on Tobacco and deflated by the national CPI
(1982-1984 = 1). Since taxes are reported as of Nov. 1 and the MTF interviews take place in the
spring of each year, we use the average of the current year’s tax and last year’s tax to obtain a
better estimate of the tax at the time of the MTF interview. We similarly construct a measure of
the average real state tax on a case of 24 12-ounce cans of beer using quarterly tax information
from Beer Institute’s Brewers’ Almanac. The real state tax in a given year is calculated as the
average of the current year’s first and second quarter and the previous year’s third and fourth
quarter.19
The minimum legal drinking age for beer was taken from Chaloupka, Saffer, and
Grossman (1993). By July 1988, all states had minimum drinking ages of twenty-one. Many
enacted “grandfather clauses,” however, exempting state residents of legal age prior to the
increase. The drinking age measure accounts for these clauses and does not become twenty-one

39

in all states until 1991.20
The full price of consuming marijuana consists of the money price and the monetary
value of the expected penalties for possession or use (the probability of apprehension and
conviction multiplied by the fine or the monetary value of the prison sentence). For a variety of
reasons, we have excluded measures of expected penalties for possession of marijuana from the
demand functions. The marijuana decriminalization indicator discussed in Section II is a timeinvariant variable during our sample period. Thus, it is perfectly collinear with the set of state
dummies that are included in all models.21
In the case of monetary fines for possession of marijuana, Chaloupka, Grossman, and
Tauras (1999) find that youths who reside in states with higher fines are less likely to consume
marijuana. Their estimated effects are, however, very small and do not control for unmeasured
state characteristics. Farrelly et al. (1999) find no effects when these controls are included. The
fine measure assembled by Farrelly and his colleagues is missing for all states for the years 1986,
1987, and 1989. There is no trend in the real fine during the sample period. Therefore, it cannot
explain the trend in marijuana use. Moreover, preliminary results for the period 1990 through
1996 revealed that the real fine for the possession of one ounce of marijuana did not have a
significant effect on participation or frequency when state fixed effects were included.
The probability of arrest for marijuana possession in an area is not observed since the
number of users is not known. The arrest rate for possession (arrests divided by population) is
available at the county level and could be employed as a regressor. A natural objection to this
measure is that it reflects reverse causality: an increase in the number of users causes the number
of arrests to rise. A somewhat more subtle analysis recognizes that, if the arrest rate replaces the
probability of arrest in the demand function, the coefficient of the former variable is positive if

40

the elasticity of the probability of use with respect to the probability of arrest is greater than one
in absolute value. On the other hand, the arrest coefficient is negative if the elasticity just
defined is less than one in absolute value. Nevertheless, the estimated arrest coefficient is
inconsistent unless an instrumental variables procedure is employed. This is because the arrest
rate is correlated with unmeasured determinants of marijuana participation and because of
reverse causality from participation to arrests.
The above points are spelled out in more detail in the Appendix. Here we note that we
lack a suitable instrument for the arrest rate. We also note that there is no trend in this measure
during the sample period. Finally, in preliminary estimates we included the state-specific per
capita number of juveniles in custody for the years 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991, and 1993 obtained
from Levitt (1998). This variable has a negative and significant effect on marijuana
participation, but it results in the loss of seven of the twelve cross sections and has no trend.
Moreover, it reflects the combined impact of the removal of potential users from the noninstitutional population and deterrence. Therefore, we do not employ it in the final models
presented in Section IV.B.
To parallel the models obtained in Section III and to include marijuana potency as a
determinant, we obtain three basic equations. The first omits a time trend, the second includes a
linear trend in which 1985 = 0 and 1996 = 11, and the third includes time and time squared. All
equations contain dichotomous variables for 45 of the 46 states in the repeat cross sections.
Robust or Huber (1967) standard errors of logit and regression coefficients are obtained. They
allow for state/year clustering.
The conceptual issues raised with regard to the appropriateness of including the harm
measure in the time-series demand functions in Section III.D also apply to the micro-level

41

demand functions. This same concern applies to including the measure of peer marijuana use.
The many pitfalls involved in obtaining peer effects have been discussed in detail by Manski
(1993), and our estimated effects should be interpreted with caution.

IV.B. Results
Table 6 contains maximum likelihood logit equations for annual marijuana participation,
and Table 7 contains comparable estimates for thirty-day marijuana participation. Three models
are shown in each table. The first omits a time trend; the second includes a linear trend; and the
third includes the trend and its square. The harm and peer marijuana use variables are excluded
from the models in these tables.
Given the pronounced trends in the real price of marijuana, the potency of marijuana, and
the minimum legal drinking age during the relatively short period at issue, the coefficients of
these variables are sensitive to the exclusion or inclusion of a trend term and to the exact
specification of the trend. A case can be made that the specifications with the quadratic trend
represent an “overparamaterization” of the data since the computations in Section III and those at
the end of this section suggest that trends in the variables just mentioned provide plausible
explanations of trends in participation. Moreover, we have reasonably good proxies for such
hard-to-measure variables as attitudes (as indicated by perceived risk of harm) and peer behavior.
Nevertheless, we present all three models to indicate the degree to which the estimates vary and
to allow the reader to make up his or her own mind on this issue.
The marijuana price coefficient is negative and significant in the three models in Table 6
and in the first two models in Table 7. Evaluated at sample means, the price elasticity of annual
marijuana participation ranges from -0.33 in the equation with no trend to -0.06 in the equation

42

with a quadratic trend. The elasticity estimates for thirty-day participation are quite similar and
follow the same pattern, ranging from –0.34 in the equation with no trend to –0.002 in the
equation with a quadratic trend. The estimates in Tables 6 and 7 are much more sensitive to the
inclusion of trend terms than those in Tables 2 and 3 most likely because the data in the latter
span a longer period of time.
As in the time-series regressions, an increase in the potency of commercial marijuana
increases participation, except when a quadratic trend is entered. The potency elasticity of 0.48
in model 1 for annual participation is fairly similar to the absolute value of the price elasticity of
0.33 in that specification. These results are consistent with the framework outlined in Section III
in which participation decisions are based on quality-adjusted price. The potency elasticity of
0.88 in the second model in Table 6 is not consistent with this framework. A similar pattern is
observed for thirty-day participation.
There is some evidence from both tables that beer and marijuana are complements. All
six of the beer tax coefficients are negative, albeit generally not significant. In the annual
participation models that control for time, the beer tax participation effects are significant at
approximately the 20 percent level on a two-tailed test but not at the 10 percent level.22 An
increase in the legal drinking age has significant negative effects on annual and thirty-day
participation, except in the models with the quadratic time trend. In those models, the effect is
positive and significant, implying substitution rather than complementarity. This finding again
suggests that it is difficult to sort out unmeasured trend impacts from those of variables with
significant trends.
Five of the six cigarette tax coefficients are positive, but none are close to significant at
conventional levels, suggesting that cigarettes and marijuana are neither substitutes nor

43

complements.
Our finding of negative beer tax effects is similar to that reported by Pacula (1998a,
1998b) and Farrelly et al. (1999). Pacula also reports an inverse relationship between the
drinking age and marijuana participation. DiNardo and Lemieux (1992) report a positive
relationship between these two variables, and we have no explanation of why their results differ
from ours. Chaloupka et al. (1999) and Farrelly et al. (1999) contain evidence of either no
relationship or complementarity between cigarettes and marijuana. The former study does not,
however, control for state fixed effects, and neither study includes a measure of the money price
of marijuana.
The effects of the individual and family characteristics are consistent with those found in
the literature and will not be discussed in any detail. Youths of more educated parents, youths
who do not live with both parents, and youths whose mothers’ worked full- or part-time while
they grew up are more likely to have tried marijuana in the past year; while youths who are
married or engaged are less likely to have done so. Similar differentials are observed for thirtyday participation.
Hours worked per week, weekly earned income, and weekly other income (primarily
income from allowances) have positive coefficients in all demand functions. The earned income
effect would be larger if hours worked were omitted. As already pointed out, the impact of
earnings might reflect forces associated with the workplace environment. This comment does
not apply to other income, so that its coefficients can be attributed to command over real
resources. The other income elasticity of annual participation equals 0.03. While this elasticity
is modest, other income accounts for only 22.5 percent of total weekly income. Hence, the
corresponding elasticity with respect to total income is 0.13.

44

Based on t-ratios, frequent religious service attendance is the most important correlate of
marijuana participation. The ratio of the odds of annual marijuana participation for those who
attend services frequently compared to those who do not of 0.36 is dramatic. Evaluated at
sample means, the probability of annual marijuana participation for a youth who never attends
religious services is 0.41, while the probability for a youth who attends these services frequently
is 0.21. A similar pattern is observed for thirty-day participation.
Since there is no cross-sectional variation in potency, we also explored a specification in
which potency was deleted from the set of independent variables and dichotomous indicators for
each of the twelve years from 1985 through 1996 were included. This logit equation was forced
through the origin. The results (not shown) are very similar to those in the specifications with
the quadratic time trend in Tables 6 and 7 and produce similar elasticity estimates.
Following Moulton (1986), we regressed the coefficients of the time dummies on
potency. These regressions, which contained twelve observations, were weighted by the square
root of the inverse of the standard errors of the coefficients of the time dummies. The potency
coefficient was positive and not significant, suggesting that the time effects cannot be explained
by the trend in potency. A positive and insignificant potency effect also emerges from the model
with the quadratic trend. These findings imply that the most flexible trend specification adds
little to the quadratic specification.
Table 8 contains selected coefficients from annual and thirty-day participation logit
equations that include the index of perceived risk of harm from regular use of marijuana (harm)
and peer marijuana use in specifications that are otherwise the same as those in Tables 6 and 7.
The sample size is reduced by approximately 50 percent when the harm index is included
because it is not included on all MTF forms. When the models excluding harm and peer

45

marijuana use in Tables 6 and 7 were estimated on the smaller sample, the coefficients of the
variables in the price vector were almost identical to those presented in the tables.
The models in Table 8 show that harm and peer marijuana use are highly correlated with
marijuana participation. An increase in the perceived risk of harm significantly lowers the
probability of participation, while an increase in peer marijuana use significantly raises this
probability. Evaluated at sample means, the marginal effect of an increase in peer marijuana use
on the probability of marijuana use in the past year is approximately equal to 0.55 in each of the
three models. In other words, if the fraction of peers who used marijuana rose from 0.31 (the
sample mean) to 0.47 (a one-standard deviation increase), the probability that a youth used
marijuana in the past year would rise from 0.31 to 0.39. Similar effects are observed for thirtyday participation.
Not surprisingly, the significant price effects are reduced in absolute value when harm
and peer marijuana use are added to the set of regressors. In discussing this phenomenon, we
focus on the models without the quadratic trend term. Unlike the pseudo R-squared measures in
Table 6 and 7, those in Table 8 are the same (to three decimal places) in models with and without
the quadratic trend. The coefficients on the time-squared variable in model 3 are almost 90
percent smaller than the corresponding coefficients in Tables 6 and 7. The coefficients of time
itself in model 3 are over more than 70 percent smaller than the same coefficients in the third
model in Tables 6 and 7. While the inclusion of the square of time has a dramatic effect on the
coefficient of time in Table 6, it has less of an impact in the specifications contained in Table 8.
These results imply that the quadratic trend specification adds little in equations that include
harm and peer marijuana use.
The price elasticities of marijuana participation in Table 8 are smaller than those

46

contained in Tables 6 and 7. The estimates in Table 8, however, hold peer participation constant.
When the price of marijuana falls, peer participation increases. Thus, there is both a direct effect
of price on participation with peer participation held constant and an indirect effect that operates
through peer participation. The price elasticity of the market demand function for participation
incorporates both effects.
Let ε be the price elasticity of the demand function that holds peer participation constant,
and let α be the marginal effect of peer participation. Then the market price elasticity is
ε/(1 - α). The market price elasticity in each of the models is contained in the last row of each
panel in Table 8. The annual participation market price elasticities range from –0.466 to –0.260,
while those for thirty-day participation range from –0.694 to –0.093. These estimates are larger
than the corresponding values in Tables 6 and 7, with the exception of the second model for
thirty-day participation. They suggest that the market price elasticity may be underestimated
when it is obtained by simply excluding peer participation from the demand function. This
conclusion is very tentative given the likely endogeneity of the peer marijuana use measure
We conclude this section by evaluating the contribution of key determinants to the
reduction in marijuana participation between 1982 and 1992 and to the expansion in participation
since 1992. National values of marijuana participation and the determinants considered in 1982,
1992, and 1998 are shown in Table 9. Our analysis is based on the three models in Tables 6, 7
and 8.
Before the results are presented, a number of comments on the computations that underlie
them are in order. First, the figures in Table 10 pertain to a period that is longer than the one
spanned by the repeated cross sections. Results for the 1985-1992 contraction and the 19921996 expansion are, however, very similar to those in Table 10. Second, the percentage of

47

youths who used marijuana in the past year or the past thirty days (the probability of
participation multiplied by 100) are nonlinear functions of their determinants in the logit
functions. Given this and our aim to isolate the contribution of specific variables, we base our
computations on linear probability of participation equations estimated by ordinary least squares.
Marginal effects that emerge from the logit equations are very similar to the corresponding
regression coefficients in the linear probability equations. The same comment applies to
elasticities at sample means in the logit and linear probability models.
Third, given our focus on marijuana price, potency, and harm, we exclude the individual
and family characteristics, the cigarette and beer taxes, and the minimum legal drinking age from
the computations, although the regressions that they are derived from include these variables.
Finally, the computations based on regressions that include peer marijuana use employ
coefficients from the market demand function. These are coefficients that hold peer participation
constant divided by one minus the coefficient of peer participation. This is appropriate because
basic determinants may have important indirect effects operating through peer participation.
Moreover, at the national level the mean value of peer participation coincides with the fraction of
high school seniors who used marijuana. Clearly, one does not want to hold this variable
constant when examining national trends in participation.
Models 4, 5, and 6 in Table 10 allow one to compare the predicted effects of changes in
the real quality-adjusted price of marijuana and the perceived risk of harm from regular use on
participation, holding all else constant. An average of the components in these three models
suggests that changes in the quality-adjusted price predict approximately 55 percent of the 50
percent decline in the annual participation rate between 1982 and 1992. The changes in harm
predict more than 40 percent of this decline. The comparable estimates for the nearly 60 percent

48

decline in thirty day participation during this period are 22 percent for quality-adjusted price and
nearly 100 percent for harm.
With regard to the recent expansion in marijuana participation, changes in qualityadjusted price appear to have little predictive power in explaining the increases in use, largely
because of the opposing effects of price and potency on participation during this period. If the
effects of potency are ignored (given the insignificant effects of potency in the models including
time trends), the changes in the real price of marijuana predict about 20 percent of the
approximate doubling in the annual participation rate between 1992 and 1998 and approximately
15 percent of the somewhat larger increase in the thirty-day participation rate. The observed
changes in harm predict over 80 percent of the growth in annual participation, but imply more
than double the observed increases in thirty-day participation.
We interpret these estimates as generally similar to those based on the time-series
regressions in Section III. It should be kept in mind that these estimates are biased and perhaps
overstated if the coefficient of the endogenous peer marijuana participation measure is biased
upwards.
One additional aspect of the results in Table 10 is worth mentioning. The price
components (not adjusted for quality) in models 1, 2, and 3, which exclude harm and peer
participation, are usually smaller than the corresponding components in models 4, 5, and 6. This
is not surprising and is consistent with our finding that the market price elasticity obtained from a
demand function that includes peer participation is larger than the elasticity obtained by omitting
peer participation as a regressor.
V. Discussion
Our most important contribution in this paper is to present the first estimates of the price

49

elasticity of demand for the prevalence of marijuana use by high school seniors. Our estimates
of this parameter span a fairly wide range from -0.06 to -0.47 for annual participation and a
similarly wide range from –0.002 to –0.69 for thirty-day participation. These wide ranges can be
attributed to a variety of factors. The price and potency variables are subject to considerable
measurement error. Pronounced trends in price and several other key determinants make it
difficult to sort out their effects from those due to unmeasured time effects. Indeed, it may be
inappropriate to include trend terms since we have very good proxies for hard-to-measurevariables in a short time series. Peer marijuana participation and perceptions concerning the risk
of harm from regular marijuana use have large effects on the probability of participation. Yet
these two variables potentially are endogenous, and their coefficients, as well as those for price,
may be biased. Given these considerations, a conservative lower-bound estimate of the price
elasticity of demand for marijuana participation is -0.30.
Our estimates imply that cycles in the real (inflation-adjusted) price of marijuana and in
the perceived risk of harm from regular marijuana use contribute to an understanding of cycles in
the number of high school seniors who use marijuana. The estimation of the relative effects of
price and harm is complicated by a variety of factors. Price and potency are measured with
error. Several key determinants are endogenous. Attitudinal variables other than a single
indicator of perceived risk of harm from regular marijuana use, and other potentially important
variables that are correlated with harm and price have been omitted. In addition, analyses of
different time periods could produce somewhat different estimates; the analyses contained in this
paper (given the limited data available on price) begin in 1982, several years after the start of the
downturn in marijuana use and the substantial rise in perceived risk that preceded it. Given these
considerations, we have provided a wide range of estimates. These estimates clearly imply that

50

changes in the real, quality-adjusted price of marijuana contributed significantly to the trends in
youth marijuana use between 1982 and 1998, particularly during the contraction in use from
1982 to 1992. Similarly, changes in youth perceptions of the harms associated with regular
marijuana use had a substantial impact on both the contraction in use during the 1982 through
1992 period and the subsequent expansion in use after 1992.
As clearly described above, our estimates of the magnitudes of the price and attitudinal
effects are subject to significant variation and should not be considered definitive. Research that
focuses on outcomes other than annual and thirty-day participation, and that employs a wider
range of attitudinal measures, better data on price and potency, and additional measures of the
full price of youth marijuana use is required to provide a more complete understanding of the
relative impact of price and attitudes on youth marijuana use. Similarly, studies that construct
and estimate structural models that treat peer behavior, risk perceptions, and marijuana
consumption decisions as endogenous deserve high priority for future investigations. These
studies would be especially valuable if they could identify the basic forces that cause attitudes
and perhaps price and potency to vary. In the absence of this research and as a prelude to it, the
main message of this paper is that is useful to consider price in addition to more traditional
determinants in any analysis of marijuana consumption decisions made by youths.

51

Appendix
In this appendix we examine problems that arise when the marijuana arrest rate
(marijuana possession arrests divided by population) replaces the probability of arrest (arrests
divided by the number of marijuana users) in the demand function for the probability of
marijuana participation. We assume that the probability of use of a representative individual or
the number of users divided by the population (u) at the aggregate level depends on the
probability of arrest (π):
u = u(π), ∂u/∂π < 0.

(1)

Note that we do not distinguish between the probability of arrest and the probability of
conviction given apprehension and ignore components of the full price of marijuana other than π.
If a is the arrest rate (arrests divided by population), then
a = uπ.

(2)

∂ln u/∂ln a = (∂ln u/∂ln π)*(∂ln π/∂ln a).

(3)

From equation (1),

Define the elasticity of u with respect to π as
ε ≡ ∂ln u/∂ln π.

(4)

Note that ε is analogous to the price elasticity of demand. As we have defined this elasticity, it is
negative. From equation (2),
(∂ln a/∂ln π) = 1 + ε.

(5)

An increase in the probability of arrest increases the arrest rate if ε is smaller than 1 in
absolute value but decreases the arrest rate if ε exceeds I in absolute value. This is perfectly
analogous to the effect of an increase in price on total revenue. Revenue rises if the price
elasticity of demand is less than 1 in absolute value and falls if the price elasticity of demand

52

exceeds 1. Of course, this is because the arrest rate corresponds to total revenue and the
probability of arrest corresponds to price. The arrest rate is a positive correlate of the probability
of arrest if -ε < 1, but the arrest rate is a negative correlate of the probability of arrest if -ε > 1.
For -ε = 1, there is no relationship between these two variables; an increase in π lowers u but has
no impact on a.
From equations (4) and (5),
φ ≡ (∂ln u/∂ln a) = ε/(1 + ε).

(6)

In words a regression of ln u on ln a gives an estimate of φ = ε/(1 + ε). The parameter φ is
negative if ε is smaller than 1 in absolute value, while φ is positive and greater than 1 if ε is
greater than 1 in absolute value.
Given φ, one can obtain ε from
ε = φ/(1 - φ).

(7)

This shows why φ must exceed 1 if it is positive. Given φ > 0, ε is negative if and only if φ > 1.
Put differently, the theory places restrictions on the value of φ.
To explore estimation issues in more detail, consider a demand function for u that is
linear in the ln u and ln π:
ln u = εln π + x,

(8)

where x stands for an unobserved factor or the disturbance term in the regression. Other
observed determinants are suppressed. Since ln π = ln a - ln u,
ln u = [ε/(1 + ε)]ln a + [1/(1 + ε)]x.

53

(9)

With π held constant, an increase in x raises u by assumption. But with a held constant, an
increase in x raises u only if ε is smaller than 1 in absolute value. The reason is that the only
way to fix a when u varies is for π to vary. Indeed, since ln a = ln u + ln π,
ln a = (ε + 1) ln π + x.

(10)

With π held constant, x and a are positively related; unmeasured factors that increase use
also will increase arrests. This is the intuition behind the proposition that the coefficient of ln a
is biased upward because arrests are high when use is high. Arrests and x are positively related,
but the coefficient of the omitted variable x is positive only if ε is smaller than 1 in absolute
value. In that case the estimate of φ, which is a negative parameter, is biased upward. When -ε
> 1, the coefficient of the omitted variable x is negative. Hence the estimate of φ, which now is a
positive parameter that exceeds 1, is biased downward. Indeed, since the coefficient of x on ln a
is normalized at 1, the expected value of the coefficient of ln a in the demand function is equal to
1 regardless of the value of ε.
So far we have assumed that π is exogenous. Now we follow Ehrlich (1973) and specify
a production function for the probability of apprehension and conviction
ln π = αln g + βln u + y.

(11)

The new variable, g, stands for resources allocated to police and courts and α is positive. The
variably y stands for an unmeasured determinant. Ehrlich assumes that β is negative. He argues
that the productivity of g is likely to be lower at higher levels of criminal activity because more
offenders must then be apprehended, charged, and tried in court in order to achieve a given level
of π. Thus with g held constant, u and π might be negatively correlated, but the causality runs
from u to π

54

Since ln π = ln a - ln u,
ln a = αln g + (β + 1) ln u + y.

(12)

The coefficient of ln u is positive if -β <1 and negative if -β > 1. For -β = 1, the coefficient is
zero. Consider equations (9) and (12) as a simultaneous system with two endogenous variables:
u and a. From equation (12), the estimate of φ is biased upward if -β <1 both because of reverse
causality from an increase in u to an increase in a and because of the positive correlation between
x and a. When -β > 1, these two biases go in opposite directions.

55

Footnotes
This is a revised version of a paper presented at a National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference entitled “An Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior Among Youths” in Captiva
Island, Florida, December 10-11, 1999. The paper also was presented at the Fourth Biennial
Pacific Rim Allied Economic Organization Conference in Sydney, Australia, January 11-16,
2000 and at seminars at Vanderbilt University and the City University of New York Graduate
School. We are extremely grateful to John DiNardo, Jonathan Gruber, Robert Kaestner, John
F.P. Bridges, and conference and seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions.
We are indebted to John F.P. Bridges, Dhaval Dave, and especially Deborah D. Kloska for
research assistance. We wish to thank to Nick Mastrocinque and Mark Redding of The Drug
Enforcement Administration Intelligence Division for providing us with data from the Illegal
Drug Price/Purity Report and for answering a variety of questions concerning these data. We
also wish to thank Steven D. Levitt for providing us with data on the per capita number of
juveniles in custody. Research for this paper was supported by grants from the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation to the University of Illinois at Chicago and the University of Michigan, as
part of the Foundation’s Bridging the Gap Initiative. Monitoring the Future data were collected
under a research grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (RO1 DA01411). This paper
has not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications; in particular, it has not been
submitted for approval by the Board of Directors. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation or NBER.
1

Although alcohol is an illegal substance for teenagers, we use the term “illicit

substance” to refer to those substances that are illegal for persons of all ages.

56

2

The authors note that higher values have been found among certain high risk

populations, such as young men and people living in large cities.
3

The estimated price elasticities reported in Sections III and IV are not subject to this

bias because they employ prevailing market prices rather than prices paid by individual
consumers.
4

The MTF data contain other measures of youth attitudes towards marijuana, including

the risk of harm from occasional marijuana use, the risk of harm from experimental use, and
disapproval of regular, occasional, or daily use. Given the length of this chapter and the
complexity of analyses it contains, a more complete treatment of the attitudinal variables is not
included. While these measures are highly correlated, the use of different attitudinal measures is
likely to have some impact on the estimates reported below. Further consideration of these
variables deserves high priority in future research.
5

We assume that the data for 1982, 1983, and 1984 pertain to the second quarter of each

6

Information on the nineteen-cities prices and the publications that contain them were

year.

kindly supplied by Nick Mastrocinque and Mark Redding of the DEA Intelligence Division. It is
not clear why the purchases on which these prices are based are not contained in STRIDE.
7

If youth are more likely to use sinsemilla rather than commercial marijuana, then an

additional source of measurement error is introduced into our models. However, given the
relatively high correlations between price and potency, the regression results obtained with
alternative series are very similar to those reported in this chapter, suggesting that this is not a
significant problem.

57

8

Becker and Mulligan (1997) develop an economic framework that highlights the

incentives of parents to make investments that raise the future orientation of their children.
Clearly, these investments can also alter attitudes and perceptions governing potentially risky
behaviors.
9

A positive correlation between price and harm also is possible. Suppose that an

increase in price is due to an expansion in resources allocated to enforcing marijuana laws. If the
expected penalty for possession of marijuana rises and if this penalty is one of the harms
associated with use, price and harm would be positively related.
10

The simplest way to prove this is to write the demand function as
ln Q = α - εln p*,

where α is a constant. Using the definitions of Q and p* in the text, one can rewrite this demand
function as
ln m = α - εln p + (ε - 1)ln q.
11

In terms of the model specified in the preceding note, the elasticity of participation

with respect to q should equal the elasticity of participation with respect to p with the sign
reversed. This constraint could be imposed by employing p/q as the regressor in the demand
function. We do not take this approach because our measure of q does not distinguish between
wholesale and retail potency and because THC content may not be the only determinant of
quality.
12

Additional measures of youth marijuana use, including frequency of use and

participation in daily use, could be constructed from the MTF data. Given the focus of this

58

chapter, these outcomes are not considered. A more complete analysis of these measures should
be a priority for future research.
13

One-sixth of the MTF sample are asked separate questions about marijuana and

hashish. These answers have been aggregated to form indicators of the use of any form of
marijuana.
14

As in Section III, variables are converted from nominal to real dollars by deflating by

the Consumer Price Index for the United States as a whole (1982-84 = 1).
15

From 1985-1989, five different questionnaires were administered in each year,

enabling investigators to increase the range of questions being asked without making any given
questionnaire too long. From 1985-1988, only one form included the question on perceived risk
(Form 5). In 1989, a sixth questionnaire form was added to the survey and the risk item was
included on this sixth form. In 1990, the perceived risk question was added to three of the
existing forms, making it available on five of the forms. As noted above, additional attitudinal
measures are contained in the MTF surveys and the use of alternative measures could have some
impact on the estimates presented in this chapter. However, space constraints prohibit a
complete examination of all of these measures. Further examination of these alternative
attitudinal measures should be a high priority for future research in this area.
16

Classes are chosen within in each school to be representative of the high school

students within that school. This is a standard part of the multi-stage random sampling
procedure.
17

If the price is missing for all three matches, the observation is deleted.

18

Let r be the retail price, w be the wholesale price, and m be a measure of marijuana

59

consumption. Then ∂m/∂r = (∂m/∂w)(∂w/∂r).
19

The benefits of adopting similar algorithms in the case of the marijuana price were

outweighed by the amount of measurement error that they would create in an already “noisy”
variable.
20

The drinking age is a weighted average of the daily effective drinking age in the state

and takes account of the month in which the age was raised.
21

Alaska re-criminalized the possession of a small quantity of marijuana in 1990, but that

state does not appear in MTF during the 1985-1996 period. Arizona decriminalized marijuana
possession in 1994 but is not contained in MTF after that year.
22

A two-tailed test is appropriate because the sign of the coefficient is ambiguous in

theory.

60

References
Anthony, James and John E. Helzer. 1991. Syndromes of drug abuse and dependence. In
Psychiatric disorders in America, ed. Lee N Robins and Darrel A Regier New York:
Free Press, MacMillan.
Anthony, James, Lynn Warner and Ronald Kessler. 1994. Comparative epidemiology of
dependence on tobacco, alcohol, controlled substances and inhalants: Basic findings
from the National Comorbidity Study. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology
2: 244-268.
Bachman, Jerald G., Lloyd D. Johnston, and Patrick M. O’Malley. 1998. Explaining recent
increases in students’ marijuana use: Impacts of perceived risks and disapproval, 1976
through 1996. American Journal of Public Health 88 (6): 887-892.
Bachman, Jerald G., Lloyd D. Johnston, and Patrick M. O’Malley. 1981. Smoking, drinking and
drug use among American high school seniors: correlates and trends, 1975-1979.
American Journal of Public Health 71 (1): 59-69.
Bachman, Jerald G., Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O’Malley, and Ronald H. Humphrey. 1988.
Explaining the recent decline in marijuana use: differentiating the effects of perceived
risks, disapproval, and general lifestyle factors. Journal of Health and Social Behavior
29: 92-112.
Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. The endogenous determination of time
preference. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 729-758.
Bray, Jeremy W., Gary A. Zarkin, Chris Ringwalt, and Junfeng Qi. 2000. The relationship
between marijuana initiation and dropping out of high school. Health Economics 9 (1):
9-18.

61

Brook, Judith S., Elinor B. Balka, and Martin Whiteman. 1999. The risks for late adolescence
of early adolescent marijuana use. American Journal of Public Health 89 (10): 15491554.
Brook, Judith S., Patricia Cohen, and L Jeager. 1998. Developmental variations in factors
related to initial and increased levels of adolescent drug involvement. Journal of Genet
Psychology 159 (2): 179-194.
Brookoff, Daniel, Charles S. Cook, Charles Williams, and Calvin S. Mann. 1994. Testing
reckless drivers for cocaine and marijuana. New England Journal of Medicine 331: 518522.
Caulkins, Jonathan, P. 1999. Can supply factors suppress marijuana use by youth? Federation
of American Scientists Drug Policy Analysis Bulletin 7: 3-5.
Caulkins, Jonathan P. 1994. Developing price series for cocaine. Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand
Corporation.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Michael Grossman, and John A. Tauras. 1999. The demand for cocaine
and marijuana by youth. In The economic analysis of substance use and abuse: An
integration of econometric and behavioral economic research, ed. Frank J. Chaloupka,
Michael Grossman, Warren K. Bickel, and Henry Saffer, 133-155. Chicago, Il:
University of Chicago Press.
Chaloupka, Frank J. and Adit Laixuthai. 1997. Do youths substitute alcohol and marijuana?
Some econometric evidence. Eastern Economic Journal 23 (3): 253-276.
Chaloupka, Frank J., Rosalie L. Pacula, Mathew C. Farrelly, Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M.
O’Malley, and Jeremy W. Bray. 1999. Do higher cigarette prices encourage youth to use
Marijuana? NBER Working Paper no. 6938. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of

62

Economic Research.
Compton, David R., William L. Dewey, and Billy R. Martin. 1990. Cannabis dependence and
tolerance production. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse 9: 128-147.
Crane, Barry D., A. Rex Rivolo, and Gary C. Comfort. 1997. An empirical investigation of
counterdrug interdiction program effectiveness. Alexandria, Virginia: Institute for
Defense Analysis.
DeFonseca, Fernando R., M. Rocio A. Carrera, Miguel Navarro, George F. Koob, and Friedbert
Weiss. 1997. Activation of corticotropin-releasing factor in limbic system during
cannabinoid withdrawal. Science 276: 2050-2054.
DeSimone, Jeffrey. 1998. Is marijuana a gateway drug? Eastern Economics Journal 24 (2):
149-164.
DiNardo, John. 1993. Law enforcement, the price of cocaine, and cocaine use. Mathematical
and Computer Modeling 17 (2): 53-64.
DiNardo, John and Thomas Lemieux. 1992. Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: The
unintended effects of government regulation. NBER Working Paper no. 4212.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Drug Enforcement Administration, U.S. Department of Justice. 1999. DEA briefing book.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Edwards, Griffith, Awing Arif, and R Hadgson. 1981. Nomenclature and classification of drugand alcohol-related problems: A WHO memorandum. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 59 (2): 225-242.
Edwards, Griffith and Milton M. Gross. 1976. Alcohol dependence: provisional description of a
clinical syndrome. British Medical Journal 1: 1058-1061.

63

Ellickson, Phyllis L., Khanh Bui, Robert M. Bell, and Kimberly A. McGuigan. 1998 . Does
early drug use increase the risk of dropping out of high school? Journal of Drug Issues
28 (2): 357-380.
Ellickson, Phyllis L., Ron D. Hays, and Robert M. Bell. 1992. Stepping through the drug use
sequence: Longitudinal scalogram analysis of initiation and regular use. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 101(3): 441-451.
Ellickson, Phyllis L. and Sally Morton. forthcoming. Identifying adolescents at risk for hard
drug use: Racial/ethnic variations. Journal of Adolescent Health.
Farrelly, Mathew C., Jeremy W. Bray, Gary A. Zarkin, Brett W. Wendling, and Rosalie L.
Pacula. 1999. The effects of prices and policies on the demand for marijuana: Evidence
from the National Household Surveys on Drug Abuse. Cambridge, MA: NBER Working
Paper no. 6940. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Georgotas, Anastase and Phillip Zeidenberg. 1979. Observations on the effects of four weeks of
heavy marijuana smoking on group interaction and individual behavior. Comprehensive
Psychiatry 20: 427-432.
Grossman, Michael and Frank J. Chaloupka. 1998. The demand for cocaine by young adults: A
rational addiction approach. Journal of Health Economics 17 (4): 427-474.
Hall, Wayne, Nadia Solowij, and Jim Lemmon. 1994. The health and psychological
consequences of cannabis use. Monograph Series No. 25. Canberra, Australia:
Government Printing Office.
Heyser, Charles J., Robert E. Hampson and Sam A. Deadwyler. 1993. Effects of delta-9tetrahydrocannibinol on delayed match to sample performance in rats – alternations in
short-term memory associated with changes in task specific firing of hippocampal cells.

64

Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 264 (1): 294-307.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. 1952-53. Compensated changes in quantities and qualities consumed.
Review of Economic Studies 19 (3): 155-164.
Jessor Richard, James A. Chase, and John E. Donovan. 1980. Psychosocial correlates of
marijuana use and problem drinking in a national sample of adolescents. American
Journal of Public Health 70(6): 604-613.
Johnston, Lloyd D. 1991. Toward a theory of drug epidemics. In Persuasive communication and
drug abuse prevention, ed. R. Lewis Donohew, Howard E. Sypher and William J.
Bukoski . Hillsdale (NJ): Lawrence Erlbaum.
Johnston, Lloyd D. and Patrick M O’Malley. 1985. Issues of validity and population coverage
in student surveys of drug use. In Self-report methods of estimating drug use: Meeting
current challenges to validity, ed. Beatrice A. Rouse, Nicholas J. Kozel, and Louise G.
Richards. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Johnston Lloyd D., Patrick M. O’Malley and Jerald G. Bachman. 1999. National survey results
on drug use from the Monitoring the Future study, 1975-1998 Volume I: Secondary
school students (NIH Publication No. 99-4660). Rockville (MD)National Institute on
Drug Abuse.
Johnston Lloyd D., Patrick M. O’Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman. 1981. Marijuana
decriminalization: The impact on youth 1975-1980. Monitoring the Future Occasional
Paper no. 13. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan.
Jones, Reese T. 1984. Marijuana: health and treatment issues. Psychiatric Clinics of North
America 7: 703-712.

65

Jones, Reese T. 1987. Drug of abuse profile: Cannabis. Clinical Chemistry 33: 72B-81B.
Jones, Reese T. 1992. What have we learned from nicotine, cocaine and marijuana about
addiction? In Addictive states, ed. Charles P. O’Brien and Jerome H. Jaffe . New York:
Raven Press.
Jones, Reese T. and Neal Benowitz. 1976. The 30-day trip – clinical studies of cannabis
tolerance and dependence. In Pharmacology of marijuana, ed. Monique Braude and
Stephen Szara . Volume 2 New York: Academic Press.
Jones, Reese T., Neal Benowitz, and Ronald I. Herning. 1981. The clinical relevance of
cannabis tolerance and dependence. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 21: 143s-152s.
Kandel, Denise B. 1985. On processes of peer influences in adolescent drug use: A
development perspective. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse 4 (3): 139-163.
Kandel, Denise B. 1975. Stages in adolescent involvement in drug use. Science 190: 912-924.
Kandel, Denise B. and Mark Davies. 1992. Progression to regular marijuana involvement:
Phenomenology and risk factors for near daily use. In Vulnerability to drug abuse, ed.
Meyer Glantz and Roy Pickens. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological
Association).
Kandel, Denise B., Mark Davies, Daniel Karus, and Kazuo Yamaguchi. 1986. The
consequences in young adulthood of adolescent drug involvement. Archives of General
Psychiatry 43: 746-754.
Kandel, Denise B., Kazuo Yamaguchi, and Kevin Chen. 1992. Stages of progression in drug
involvement from adolescence to adulthood: Further evidence for the gateway theory.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 53 (5): 447-457.
Kandel Denise B., Ronald C. Kessler, and Rebecca Z. Margulies. 1978 Antecedents of

66

adolescent initiation into stages of drug use: A developmental analysis. Journal of Youth
and Adolescence 7 (1): 13-40.
Kaplan, John. 1970. Marijuana: The new prohibition New York: World Publishers.
Kleiman, Mark A. R. 1992. Against excess: Drug policy for results. New York: Basic Books.
Kleiman, Mark A. R. 1989. Marijuana: Costs of abuse, costs of control. New York:
Greenwood Press.
Levitt, Steven D. 1998. Juvenile crime and punishment. Journal of Political Economy 106 (6):
1156-1185.
MacCoun, Robert J., Peter Reuter, and Thomas Schelling. 1996. Assessing alternative drug
control regimes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 15: 330-352.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem.
Review of Economic Studies 60:531-542.
Matsuda, Lisa A., Tom I. Bonner, and Stephen J. Lolait. 1993. Localization of cannabinoid
receptor messenger RNA in rat brain. Journal of Comparative Neurology 327 (4): 535550.
Mensch, Barbara S., and Denise B. Kandel. 1988. Dropping out of high school and drug
involvement. Sociology of Education 61: 95-113.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs; Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport; Ministry of Justice; Ministry
of the Interior., the Netherlands. 1995. Drug policy in the Netherlands: Continuity and
change. Rijswijk, Netherlands See also Ministry of Justice fact sheet, Dutch Drug
Policy (http://www.minjust.ml:8080/a_beleid/fact/cfact7.htm).
Model, Karyn E. 1993. The effect of marijuana decriminalization on hospital emergency room
drug episodes: 1975-1978. Journal of the American Statistical Association 88 (423):

67

737-747.
Moulton, Brent R. 1986. Random group effects and the precision of regression estimates.
Journal of Econometrics 32 (3): 385-397..
Nahas, Gabriel and Colette Latour. 1992. The human toxicity of marijuana. Medical Journal of
Australia 156 (7): 495-497.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. 1995. National conference on marijuana use: Prevention,
treatment and research: Conference Summary. Rockville MD: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. Available from the World Wide Web at
http://www.NIDA.NID.gov.
National Institute on Drug Abuse and National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.
1998. The economic costs of alcohol and drug abuse in the United States, 1992.
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer Committee. 1998. The NNICC Report 1997: The
Supply of Illicit Drugs to the United States. Washington DC: Drug Enforcement
Administration.
Newcomb, Michael D. and Peter M. Bentler. 1988. Consequences of adolescent drug use:
Impact on young adults. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Newy, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. 1987. A simple positive semi-definite
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55
(3): 703-708.
Nisbet, Charles. T., and Firouz Vakil. 1972. Some estimates of price and expenditure
elasticities of demand for marijuana among U.C.L.A. students. The Review of Economics
and Statistics 54 (4): 473-475.

68

Office of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 1996.
Preliminary estimates from the 1995 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse.
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Office of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 1999.
1998 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, fact sheet. Rockville, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Office of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 1998a.
Driving after drug or alcohol use: Findings from the 1996 National Household Survey on
Drug Abuse. Analytic Series A-8. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Office of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 1998b.
Analyses of substance abuse and treatment need issues. Analytic Series A-7. Rockville,
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Office of National Drug Control Policy. 1999. 1999 national drug control strategy Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Osgood, D. Wayne, Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O’Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman. 1988.
The generality of deviance in late adolescence and early adulthood. American
Sociological Review 53:81-93.
Pacula, Rosalie L. 1998a. Does increasing the beer tax reduce marijuana consumption? Journal
of Health Economics 17 (5): 557-586.
Pacula, Rosalie L. 1998b. Adolescent alcohol and marijuana consumption: Is there really a
gateway effect? Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper no. 6348. Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

69

Polen, Michael R., Stephen Sidney, Irene S. Tekawa, Marianne Sadler, and Gary D. Friedman.
1993. Health care use by frequent marijuana smokers who do not smoke tobacco.
Western Journal of Medicine 158: 596-601.
Rhodes, William, Raymond Hyatt, and Paul Scheiman. 1994. The price of cocaine, heroin and
marijuana, 1981-1993. The Journal of Drug Issues 24 (3): 383-402.
Robbe, Hindrik W.J. and James F. O’Hanlon. 1999. Marijuana, alcohol and actual driving
performance. DOT HS 808 939. Washington, D. C.: National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, US Department of Transportation.
Robbe, Hindrik W.J. and James F. O’Hanlon. 1993. Marijuana and actual driving
performance. Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of Transportation.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure
competition. Journal of Political Economy 82 (1): 34-55.
Saffer, Henry and Frank J. Chaloupka. 1999. The demand for illicit drugs. Economic Inquiry
37 (3): 401-411.
Smiley, Alison. 1986. Marijuana: On-road and driving simulator studies. Alcohol, Drugs &
Driving: Abstracts & Reviews 2: 121-134.
Spunt, Barry, Paul Goldstein, Henry Brownstein, and Michael Fendrich. 1994. The role of
marijuana in homicide. International Journal of the Addictions 29 (2): 195-213.
Stephens, Robert S. and Roger A. Roffman. 1993. Adult marijuana dependence. In Addictive
behaviors across the life span: Prevention, treatment and policy issues, ed. John S. Baer,
G. Alan Marlatt, and Robert J. MacMahon. Newbury Park, California: Sage
Publications.
Tanda, Gianluigi, Francesco E. Pontieri, and Gaetano DiChiara. 1997. Cannabinoid and heroin

70

activation of mesolimbic dopamine transmission by common u1 opioid receptor
mechanism. Science 276: 2048-2050.
Tashkin, Donald P., Suzanne Fligiel, Tzu-Cin Wu, Henry Gong, Richard G. Barbers, Anne H.
Coulson, Michael S. Simmons, and Theodore F. Beals. 1990. Effects of habitual use of
marijuana and/or cocaine on the lung. In Research Findings on Smoking of Abused
Substances, ed. C. Nora Chiang and Richard L. Hawks. National Institute on Drug
Abuse Research Monograph No. 99. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Taubman, Paul. 1991. Externalities and decriminalization of drugs. In Searching for
alternatives: Drug-control policy in the United States, ed. Melvyn B. Krauss and Edward
B. Lazear, 90-111. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press.
Theil, Henri. 1952-53. Qualities, prices and budget enquiries. Review of Economic Studies 19
(3): 129-147.
Thies, Clifford F., and Charles A. Register. 1993. Decriminalization of marijuana and the
demand for alcohol, marijuana and cocaine. Social Science Journal 30 (4): 385-399.
Tommasello, Anthony C. 1982. Marijuana effects on sperm and testosterone. Pharmalert
13(1): 1-4.
Weller, Ronald A. and James Halikas. 1982. Changes in effects of marijuana: a five- to sixyear follow-up. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 43: 362-365.
Yamada, Tetsuji, Michael Kendix, and Tadashi Yamada. 1996. The Impact of alcohol
consumption and marijuana use on high school graduation. Health Economics 5 (1): 7792.

71

TABLE 1
DEFINITIONS, MEANS, AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF VARIABLES IN TIME-SERIES REGRESSIONS

VARIABLE

DEFINITION

MEAN, STANDARD DEVIATION

Annual marijuana
participation

Percentage who used
marijuana in past year

34.176, 6.666

Thirty-day marijuana
participation

Percentage who used
marijuana in past thirty days

20.547, 4.944

Price

Real retail price of one gram
of commercial marijuana in
1982-84 dollars

4.349, 1.840

Potency

Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) potency of commercial
marijuana as a percentage

4.088, 0.828

Harm

Percentage reporting great risk
of harm from regular use of
marijuana

68.676, 7.550

Time

Time in years, 1982 equals
one

Time squared

Square of time

72

9.000, 5.050

105.000, 93.523

TABLE 2
ANNUAL MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION REGRESSIONSa
Panel A: Price and Harm Entered Separately
(1)
(2)
Price
-3.205
-3.167
(-7.83)
(-3.27)
Potency

4.074
(4.04)

Time

(3)
-2.122
(-2.59)

4.120
(2.59)

-0.406
(-0.37)

-0.020
(-0.06)

-3.326
(-3.10)

Time squared

(5)

(6)

-0.861
(-4.50)

-1.400
(-1.08)

0.192
(3.30)

Harm

R-squared

(4)

0.723

0.723

0.851

F-statistic

93.54

60.70

31.96

Price elasticity b

-0.407

-0.402

-0.269

Panel B: Price and Harm Entered Together
(7)
Price
-2.408
(-5.81)
Potency

0.263
(0.26)

Time

R-squared

-0.590
(-2.95)

-0.746
(-5.91)

-0.656
(-3.19)

0.446

0.839

0.841

8.70

20.27

12.03

(8)
-1.595
(-2.08)

(9)
-1.626
(-2.01)

0.776
(0.76)

0.411
(0.32)

-0.385
(-1.28)

-0.949
(-0.79)

Time squared

Harm

0.032
(0.41)

0.036
(0.53)
-0.517
(-4.47)

-0.567
(-4.20)

-0.485
(-3.55)

0.866

0.881

0.882

F-statistic

96.74

45.94

42.38

Price elasticity b

-0.306

-0.203

-0.206

a

Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors on which they are based allow for
heteroscedasticity and for autocorrelation up to and including a lag of 3. Intercepts are not shown.

b

Evaluated at sample means.

73

TABLE 3
THIRTY-DAY MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION REGRESSIONSa
Panel A: Price and Harm Entered Separately
(1)
(2)
Price
-2.280
-2.079
(-6.73)
(-2.80)
Potency

3.100
(4.31)

Time

(3)
-1.156
(-2.16)

3.341
(2.85)

-0.657
(-1.04)

-0.105
(-0.38)

-3.025
(-4.28)

Time squared

(5)

(6)

-0.632
(-5.76)

-0.881
(-1.20)

0.169
(4.49)

Harm

R-squared

(4)

0.679

0.682

-0.471
(-3.32)

-0.586
(-8.79)

-0.545
(-4.79)

0.518

0.904

0.904

0.863

F-statistic

78.02

57.30

26.30

Price elasticity b

-0.483

-0.441

-0.245

Panel B: Price and Harm Entered Together
(7)
Price
-1.577
(-4.47)
Potency

0.015
(0.34)

-0.263
(-0.31)

Time

11.03

R-squared
F-statistic
Price elasticity b

26.55

(8)
-0.658
(-1.33)

(9)
-0.673
(-1.34)

0.318
(0.52)

0.140
(0.21)

-0.435
(-2.15)

-0.710
(-1.07)

Time squared

Harm

40.74

0.017
(0.51)
-0.456
(-5.18)

-0.512
(-6.04)

-0.473
(-5.66)

0.855

0.916

0.917

155.50
-0.331

a

73.65

57.86

-0.139

-0.143

Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors on which they are based allow for
heteroscedasticity and for autocorrelation up to and including a lag of 3. Intercepts are not shown.

b

Evaluated at sample means.

74

TABLE 4
PERCENTAGE-POINT IMPACTS OF PRICE, POTENCY, AND HARM ON MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION

Panel A: Annual Participation
Model

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-6.91
-0.86
-9.12

-7.04
-0.46
-7.81

-16.90

-15.31

1.54
1.58
10.20

1.57
0.84
8.74

1982-1992, Observed Change in Participation = -22.40
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted
change

-13.88
-4.52

-18.41

-13.72
-4.57

-18.29

-9.19
0.45

-8.74

-9.49

-12.02

-10.57

-10.43
-0.29
-8.32

-9.49

-12.02

-10.57

-19.04

1992-1998, Observed Change in Participation = 15.60
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted
change

3.10
8.31

11.41

3.06
8.40

11.46

2.05
-0.83

1.22

10.61

13.44

11.81

2.33
0.54
9.30

10.61

13.44

11.81

12.16

13.33

11.15

(7)

(8)

(9)

-2.85
-0.35
-8.25

-2.91
-0.16
-7.61

-11.45

-10.68

0.64
0.65
9.22

0.65
0.29
8.51

10.51

9.45

Panel B: Thirty-Day Participation
Model

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1982-1992, Observed Change in Participation = -16.60
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted
change

-9.88
-3.44

-13.32

-9.01
-3.71

-12.72

-5.01
0.73

-4.28

-7.59

-9.44

-8.11

-6.83
0.29
-7.34

-7.59

-9.44

-8.11

-13.88

1992-1998, Observed Change in Participation = 10.90
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted
change

2.20
6.32

8.53

2.01
6.82

8.82

1.12
-1.34

-0.22

8.48

10.56

9.80

1.52
-0.54
8.21

8.48

10.56

9.80

9.19

Estimates for annual participation are based on the specifications in Table 2; estimates for thirty-day
participation are based on the specifications in Table 3.

75

TABLE 5
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Pooled Sample
N = 138,933
Mean
Std. Dev.

VARIABLE
INDICATORS OF MARIJUANA USE

Annual prevalence of marijuana use
Thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use

0.311
0.184

0.463
0.388

0.484
0.097
0.063
0.068
17.948
2.490
0.115
0.840

0.500
0.296
0.242
0.251
0.559
1.839
0.319
0.367

0.101
0.867
0.515
0.266
0.006
0.035
0.158
0.044
0.591
0.211

0.302
0.340
0.500
0.442
0.079
0.184
0.364
0.205
0.492
0.408

0.538
0.335
0.075
13.298
37.299
10.842

0.499
0.472
0.263
10.521
34.221
17.882

2.607

0.742

0.180

0.090

3.325
3.856

1.280
0.470

0.180
0.493
20.812

0.085
0.498
0.567

DEMOGRAPHICS

Male
Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic
Other race
Age
Siblings: Total number of siblings
Father had some high school
Father finished high school plus (finished high school or attended or graduated
college)
Mother had some high school
Mother finished high school plus
Mother worked full-time
Mother worked part-time
Live alone
Live with father only
Live with mother only
Other living arrangement
City: Live in a city
Suburb: Live in a suburb
LIFESTYLE FACTORS

Infrequent religious service attendance
Frequent religious service attendance
Married or engaged
Hours worked per week
Earned income: Real weekly earned income
Other income: Real weekly other income
ATTITUDES & PERCEPTIONS

Harm: Perceived risk of harm from regular marijuana use (0 = no risk, 1 =
slight risk, 2 = moderate risk, 3 = great risk)
MEASURES OF PEER USE

Peer marijuana use: Fraction who used marijuana in past month in
respondent’s school
PRICE OF MARIJUANA

Marijuana price: Real retail price of one gram of commercial marijuana
Marijuana potency: Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) potency of
commercial marijuana as a percentage
SUBSTITUTE/COMPLEMENT PRICES

Cigarette tax: Real state tax on a pack of cigarettes
Beer tax: Real state tax on case of 24 12-ounce cans of beer
Drinking age: State minimum legal age for purchase and consumption of beer,
alcoholic content 3.2 percent or less

76

TABLE 6
ANNUAL MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION LOGIT EQUATIONS
(N=135,970)
(1)

0.176
(10.34)
Black
-0.738
(-16.58)
Hispanic
-0.187
(-4.11)
Other race
-0.547
(-11.11)
Age
-0.026
(-2.31)
Siblings
0.046
(11.31)
Father had some high school
0.100
(2.48)
Father finished high school plus
0.114
(3.01)
Mother had some high school
0.304
(6.15)
Mother finished high school plus
0.370
(7.79)
Mother worked part-time
0.101
(5.49)
Mother worked full-time
0.137
(8.92)
Live alone
0.434
(5.75)
Live with father only
0.254
(7.76)
Live with mother only
0.176
(9.87)
Other living arrangement
0.335
(10.93)
City
0.377
(14.04)
Suburb
0.474
(15.08)
Infrequent religious service
-0.190
attendance
(-9.89)
Frequent religious service attendance
-0.991
(-40.08)
Married or engaged
-0.082
(-3.06)
Hours worked per week
0.011
(11.31)
Earned income
0.002
(7.65)

Male

77

(2)

0.177
(10.48)
-0.739
(-16.68)
-0.179
(-3.94)
-0.540
(-11.02)
-0.022
(-1.96)
0.044
(10.93)
0.100
(2.49)
0.118
(3.09)
0.298
(6.06)
0.366
(7.76)
0.101
(5.50)
0.142
(9.23)
0.439
(5.83)
0.256
(7.80)
0.176
(9.89)
0.335
(10.89)
0.374
(14.00)
0.471
(15.23)
-0.194
(-9.99)
-0.995
(-40.35)
-0.082
(-3.05)
0.011
(11.67)
0.002
(7.23)

a

(3)

0.182
(10.83)
-0.739
(-17.16)
-0.161
(-3.61)
-0.540
(-11.43)
-0.021
(-1.85)
0.043
(10.50)
0.103
(2.53)
0.120
(3.10)
0.305
(6.16)
0.370
(7.83)
0.098
(5.27)
0.137
(8.84)
0.441
(5.82)
0.260
(7.98)
0.178
(9.99)
0.340
(11.06)
0.375
(14.33)
0.483
(15.76)
-0.193
(-9.96)
-1.002
(-40.74)
-0.086
(-3.18)
0.011
(11.77)
0.002
(7.26)

TABLE 6 (CONTINUED)

0.009
(23.53)
-0.042
(-0.08)
-0.679
(-2.29)
-0.129
(-3.64)
-0.145
(-7.95)
0.181
(4.80)

0.009
(23.50)
0.337
(0.69)
-0.416
(-1.34)
-0.063
(-1.65)
-0.103
(-5.15)
0.331
(6.21)
-0.043
(-3.78)

0.009
(23.44)
0.068
(0.26)
-0.198
(-1.26)
0.096
(2.74)
-0.027
(-1.77)
0.002
(0.05)
-0.286
(-17.68)
0.023
(16.52)

0.066
8355.91
-0.331

0.067
8425.21
-0.235

0.071
8633.30
-0.063

Other income
Cigarette tax
Beer tax
Drinking age
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Time
Time squared

Pseudo R-squared
Chi-squared
Price elasticityb
a

All equations include state dummies. Asymptotic t-ratios are in parentheses.
Huber (1967) or robust standard errors on which they are based allow for
state/year clustering. Intercepts are not shown.

b

Evaluated at sample means.

78

TABLE 7
THIRTY-DAY MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION LOGIT EQUATIONSa
(N=135,8231)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Male
0.280
0.281
0.286
(14.89)
(15.07)
(15.49)
Black
-0.659
-0.660
-0.658
(-12.35)
(-12.38)
(-12.83)
Hispanic
-0.197
-0.189
-0.169
(-4.04)
(-3.94)
(-3.62)
Other race
-0.471
-0.464
-0.465
(-8.88)
(-8.78)
(-9.13)
Age
-0.025
-0.021
-0.020
(-1.90)
(-1.62)
(-1.51)
Siblings
0.042
0.041
0.039
(9.14)
(8.85)
(8.43)
Father had some high school
0.134
0.134
0.138
(2.64)
(2.65)
(2.71)
Father finished high school plus
0.108
0.111
0.113
(2.37)
(2.43)
(2.47)
Mother had some high school
0.345
0.339
0.346
(5.62)
(5.55)
(5.64)
Mother finished high school plus
0.395
0.392
0.396
(6.44)
(6.42)
(6.50)
Mother worked part-time
0.077
0.078
0.074
(3.37)
(3.39)
(3.17)
Mother worked full-time
0.101
0.106
0.100
(5.14)
(5.33)
(4.99)
Live alone
0.603
0.607
0.611
(6.65)
(6.70)
(6.69)
Live with father only
0.229
0.231
0.236
(5.94)
(5.97)
(6.15)
Live with mother only
0.186
0.186
0.187
(9.56)
(9.58)
(9.73)
Other living arrangement
0.335
0.335
0.339
(9.66)
(9.66)
(9.73)
City
0.373
0.371
0.373
(12.51)
(12.52)
(13.11)
Suburb
0.468
0.466
0.481
(12.54)
(12.67)
(13.52)
Infrequent religious service
-0.293
-0.297
-0.296
attendance
(-13.66)
(-13.82)
(-13.82)
Frequent religious service attendance
-1.114
-1.117
-1.124
(-39.15)
(-39.41)
(-39.77)
Married or engaged
-0.185
-0.185
-0.189
(-5.77)
(-5.76)
(-5.88)

79

TABLE 7 (CONTINUED)

Hours worked per week
Earned income
Other income
Cigarette tax
Beer tax
Drinking age
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency

0.010
(9.49)
0.002
(6.36)
0.010
(24.64)
0.200
(0.38)
-0.523
(-1.72)
-0.137
(-3.71)
-0.123
(-6.15)
0.227
(5.70)

0.010
(9.78)
0.002
(5.99)
0.010
(24.59)
0.532
(1.08)
-0.281
(-0.89)
-0.078
(-1.86)
-0.085
(-4.00)
0.364
(6.22)
-0.039
(-3.08)

0.011
(9.86)
0.002
(5.98)
0.010
(24.40)
0.187
(0.76)
-0.021
(-0.12)
0.095
(2.56)
-0.001
(-0.04)
-0.010
(-0.22)
-0.307
(-17.18)
0.026
(16.74)

0.062
79.21
-0.335

0.063
79.57
-0.228

0.068
85.59
-0.002

Time
Time squared

R-squared
F-statistic
Price elasticityb
a

All equations include state dummies. Asymptotic t-ratios are in parentheses. Huber
(1967) or robust standard errors on which they are based allow for state/year clustering.
Intercepts are not shown.

b

Evaluated at sample means.

80

Table 8
SELECTED LOGIT COEFFICIENTS FROM MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION
EQUATIONS WITH HARM AND PEER MARIJUANA USEa

Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Peer marijuana use
Pseudo R-squared
Price elasticityb
Market price
elastictityb

Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Peer marijuana use
Pseudo R-squared
Price elasticityb
Market price
elastictityb

Panel A: Annual Participation (N=71,452)
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.092
-0.064
-0.053
(-6.80)
(-4.65)
(-3.37)
-0.134
-0.008
-0.035
(-6.26)
(-0.26)
(-1.14)
-1.100
-1.104
-1.103
(-65.64)
(-65.89)
(-65.92)
4.498
4.484
4.383
(30.59)
(30.14)
(27.97)
0.188
0.188
0.188
-0.210
-0.146
-0.121
-0.466
-0.322
-0.260
Panel B: Thirty-Day Participation (N=71,478)
(1)
(2)
(3)
-0.076
-0.011
-0.029
(-2.72)
(-0.38)
(-0.93)
-0.187
-0.042
-0.018
(-8.29)
(-1.20)
(-0.50)
-1.135
-1.139
-1.140
(-71.19)
(-71.20)
(-71.24)
5.665
5.647
5.731
(34.22)
(34.05)
(32.40)
0.221
0.222
0.222
-0.102
-0.014
-0.040
-0.694

-0.093

a

-0.292

All equations include state dummies, real cigarette and beer taxes, minimum legal drinking age,
and the family and individual characteristics contained in the equations in Tables 6 and 7.
Asymptotic t-ratios are in parentheses. Huber (1967) or robust standard errors on which they are
based allow for state/year clustering.
b

Evaluated at sample means

81

TABLE 9
NATIONAL VALUES OF SELECTED VARIABLES, 1982, 1992, AND 1998

1982

1992

1998

44.30
28.50
2.45
1.83
4.95

21.90
11.90
2.70
6.16
3.84

37.50
22.80
2.37
5.19
5.88

VARIABLE
Annual prevalence of marijuana use
Thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use
Harm
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency

82

TABLE 10
PERCENTAGE-POINT IMPACTS OF SELECTED VARIABLES ON MARIJUANA PARTICIPATION

Model Numbera

Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted change
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted change

Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted change
Marijuana price
Marijuana potency
Harm
Total predicted change

(1)

-12.74
-3.92
-16.66
2.84
7.20
10.04

-7.86
-3.44
-11.30
1.75
6.32
8.07

(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Annual Participation
1982-1992, Observed Change in Participation = -22.40
-9.18
-0.22
-18.89
-6.73
-0.06
4.46
-9.85
-15.91
-0.28
-24.28
1992-1998, Observed Change in Participation = 15.60
2.05
0.05
4.21
12.36
0.10
-8.19
13.05
14.41
0.15
9.07
Panel B: Thirty-Day Participation
1982-1992, Observed Change in Participation = -16.60
-5.54
-0.04
-13.56
-5.56
0.23
8.31
-16.22
-11.10
0.19
-21.47
1992-1998, Observed Change in Participation = 10.90
1.24
0.01
3.02
10.22
-0.43
-15.28
21.48
11.46
-0.42
9.22

a

(5)

(6)

-13.04
0.32
-9.87
-22.59

-10.53
0.97
-9.65
-19.21

2.91
-0.59
13.08
15.40

2.35
-1.78
12.78
13.35

-0.99
1.56
-16.23
-15.63

-7.10
0.89
-16.63
-22.84

0.22
-2.86
21.51
18.87

1.58
-1.64
22.03
21.97

Model 1, 2, and 3 are based on the specifications in Tables 6 and 7. These specifications exclude harm and peer marijuana use. Model 1
omits a trend. Model 2 includes a linear trend. Model 3 includes a quadratic trend. Models 4, 5, and 6 are based on the specifications in
Table 8 and on coefficients that take account of the effect of a given variable on peer marijuana use. Model 4 omits a trend. Model 5
includes a linear trend. Model 6 includes a quadratic trend.

83

Figure 1:
Annual Marijuana Use Relative to Other Substance Use, MTF
100

90

80

70

60
Alcohol
50

Marijuana/Hashish
Any Illicit Drug Other Than Marijuana

40

30

20

10

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1998

84

Figure 2:
Annual MJ Use Relative to Other Illicit Drugs, MTF
60

50

40
Marijuana/Hashish
Cocaine, all forms
Stimulants
Inhalants
Tranquilizers
Hallucinogens

30

20

10

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

1998

Figure 3: Lifetime, Annual and Thirty-Day MJ Prevalence
MTF High School Seniors
70

60

50

40
Lifetime
Annual
Thirty-Day
30

20

10

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

0

Figure 4:
Trends in Thirty Day Prevalence, MTF
80

70

50
Alcohol
Cigarettes

40

Marijuana/Hashish

30
Any Illicit Drug Other
Than Marijuana

20

Cocaine

10

Year

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

0
1975

% Reporting Use

60

Figure 5
Annual Prevalence of Marijuana Use, Thirty-Day Prevalence of Marijuana, and the Perceived
Risk of Great Harm from Regular Marijuana Use, 1982-1998
90

80

Percentage of respondents

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
82

84

86

88

90

92

94

96

Year

Annual Preverence

30-Day Prevalence

Perceived Risk of Great Harm

98

Figure 6
Real Retail Price of Commercial Marijuana and Potency of
Commercial Marijuana, 1982-1998
9.00

8.00

7.00

Price or percentage

6.00

5.00

4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00

0.00
82

84

86

88

90

92

94

Year
Real Retail Price

Potency

96

98

