                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      OPTIMAL INCOME TRANSFER PROGRAMS:
              INTENSIVE VERSUS EXTENSIVE LABOR SUPPLY RESPONSES


                                             Emmanuel Saez


                                          Working Paper 7708
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7708

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000




I thank David Cutler, Peter Diamond, Esther Duflo, Jim Heckman, Larry Katz, Michael Kremer, John
McHale, and David Spector for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive
Labor Supply Responses
Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 7708
May 2000
JEL No. H21



                                            ABSTRACT

        This paper investigates the optimal income transfer problem at the low end of the income
distribution. The government maximizes a social welfare function and faces the traditional equity-
efficiency trade-off. The paper models labor supply behavioral responses along the intensive margin
(hours or intensity of work on the job) and along the extensive margin (participation in the labor
force). Optimal tax formulas are derived as a function of the behavioral elasticities, the shape of the
income distribution and the redistribution tastes of the government. When behavioral responses are
concentrated along the intensive margin, the optimal transfer program is a classical Negative Income
Tax program with a substantial guaranteed income support that is taxed away at high rates.
However, when behavioral responses are concentrated along the extensive margin, the optimal
transfer program is an Earned Income Credit program with negative marginal tax rates at low income
levels and a small guaranteed income. Numerical simulations calibrated with the actual empirical
earnings distribution are presented for a range of behavioral elasticities and redistributive tastes of
the government. For realistic elasticities, the optimal program provides a moderate guaranteed
income, imposes low tax rates on very low annual earnings levels, and then starts phasing out
benefits at substantial rates.




Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
saez@fas.harvard.edu
1       Introduction

During the twentieth century, most developed countries have adopted large and govern-
ment managed income support programs. These programs have generated substantial
controversy. Most recognize that they considerably improve the well-being of the disad-
vantaged but some have pointed out that these programs may reduce substantially the
incentives to work and thus have large eÆciency costs that may outweigh the redistribu-
tive gains. Redistributive public policy interventions face an equity-eÆciency trade-o .
Optimal transfer programs must be designed such that, at the margin, eÆciency costs
equate the redistributive gains. The important question is therefore to determine the
optimal size and shape of the transfer program.
     There is disagreement among economists and among policy makers about how income
transfer programs should be structured. For a long time, economists have been inclined
to think that the best transfer program is a            Negative Income Tax    (NIT) program that
would provide a basic income support to all households.1 This basic or guaranteed income
would then be taxed away, but at a rate lower than 100%, as earnings or income increases
until the bene t is fully lost. Many European countries use NIT type programs to re-
distribute toward zero or low income earners. In the U.S., there is no universal income
support program. However, single headed families with dependent children are entitled
to Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.2 The TANF program works as a negative
income tax program with a fairly high implicit tax rate. In many countries, the implicit
tax rate at the low end of the earnings distribution is often very large because of the
phasing out of transfer programs. The implicit tax rate may sometime exceed 100% when
two or more transfer programs are phased-out simultaneouly.3
    1 For   example, universal NIT program has been advocated as early as the 1940s by Milton Friedman
and James Meade.
   2 The TANF program replaced in 1996 the Aid for Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program

which had been in place since 1935.
  3 Blundell and MaCurdy (1999) provide an extensive analysis of marginal tax rates faced by low income

households in the U.S. and in the U.K.


                                                    3
    A high implicit tax rate, even though it is lower than 100%, may have adverse e ects
on labor supply. This has lead economists and politicians to advocate programs that
would make work suÆciently attractive to reduce the need for income support. These
programs are known as earnings subsidies or Earned            Income Credit    (EIC) programs. An
EIC does not provide any income support for individuals with no earnings but all earnings
below a given threshold are partially matched by the government. In economic terms, the
EIC is equivalent to negative marginal tax rates at the bottom of the income distribution.
The U.S. have implemented such a program, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), since
1975. In the early 1990s, because previous welfare programs such as AFDC were thought
to discourage recipients to work, the EITC program was substantially increased and is
now the largest cash transfer program to the poor in the U.S. There is pressure in other
countries as well to move away from NIT programs toward EIC programs.4 Obviously,
relative to a NIT program, incentives to work are enhanced with an EIC program because
low income workers keep a much larger share of each dollar earned than with a NIT
program. However, the EIC provides no support for non-workers and thus does not reach
the most needy people. Moreover, the earned income credit has also to be taxed away at
some point further up the income distribution.
    The main purpose of this paper is to investigate which of the NIT or the EIC pro-
grams (or which combination) is the most desirable assuming that the government values
redistribution but cares about the eÆciency costs of redistribution. As the eÆciency costs
emanate from the behavioral responses to the transfer or tax programs, it is obviously
crucial to examine and model these behavioral responses as accurately as possible. The
empirical literature on labor supply has emphasized two margins of labor supply responses
(see Heckman (1993)). First, individuals can respond along the intensive margin. That
is, they can vary their hours or intensity of work on the job. There is a very large and
   4 For   example, the U.K. adopted in 1988 a Family Credit which is similar to the american EITC and
that has also been expanded. Canada has implemented recently on an experimental basis a Self-SuÆciency
Program that is also akin to the EITC.



                                                   4
controversial empirical literature on this issue (see the surveys of Pencavel (1986) and
Blundell and MaCurdy (1999)). Second, individuals may respond along the extensive
margin. That is, they can decide whether or not to enter the labor force. There is ample
empirical evidence that the response along this margin is a real issue for low and sec-
ondary income earners. The literature consistently suggests that, at the low income end,
the extensive margin of response is probably more important than the intensive margin
of response.
   Though the empirical literature has distinguished these two margins of behavioral
responses, the implications in terms of income transfer policy have not been carefully in-
vestigated. The applied literature discusses extensively the welfare costs of actual transfer
programs using behavioral response estimates from the empirical literature but does not
try to derive results on optimal transfer schemes. The theoretical literature on optimal
income taxation has focused almost exclusively on the intensive responses model. In that
context, optimal income tax theory has been able to show that, under fairly general as-
sumptions, optimal marginal tax rates cannot be negative. This rules out EIC programs
as optimal transfer schemes.
   In contrast, the main contribution of this paper is to show that the margin of the
behavioral response is a key element to take into consideration when designing an optimal
transfer scheme. The paper shows that a NIT program with a substantial guaranteed
income level and high phasing out rates is optimal when behavioral responses are along
the intensive margin. However, when behavioral responses are along the extensive margin,
then the optimal transfer is similar to an EIC with negative marginal tax rates at the
bottom and a smaller guaranteed income for non-workers. In the paper, optimal tax rates
formulas are derived as a function of the behavioral elasticities estimated by the empirical
literature. Therefore, using the estimates of both intensive and extensive behavioral
elasticities from empirical studies, it is possible to assess the optimal shape and the optimal
size of the transfer program. This paper provides a number of numerical simulations to
investigate this point further. It is shown that four key elements a ect the pattern of


                                              5
optimal tax rates and the size of the guaranteed income level.
    First, as explained above, if the behavioral response is mostly extensive, then the
guaranteed income level should be smaller and tax rates negative at the bottom so as
to shift transfers away from non-workers toward low income workers. Second, the size of
the behavioral elasticities at the bottom a ect the optimal pattern of marginal tax rates.
The higher the elasticities, the higher the eÆciency costs induced by distorting prices
and thus the smaller in absolute value should the size of the program be. Third, higher
redistributive tastes unsurprisingly lead to a larger guaranteed income level. Last, as
redistribution is nanced by middle and high income earners, the higher are the behavioral
responses at the middle and high income end, the higher is the cost of redistribution and
thus the smaller is the optimal transfer program.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the main contributions of previous
work on optimal transfer programs. Section 3 presents the models of intensive and exten-
sive responses and derive optimal tax formulas in each of these two polar cases. Section 4
mixes the two polar models and derives results for that general case. Section 5 discusses
the empirical literature on income maintenance programs and presents numerical simu-
lations of optimal transfer schemes. Section 6 concludes and discusses avenues for future
research.


2      Related Literature

Many economic studies have investigated the income support problem from a theoretical
perspective.5 An early literature, closely related to empirical studies, has proposed and
analyzed a number of di erent schemes to provide income support to the disadvantaged
using the classic static labor supply model. As described in the introduction, the Negative
Income Tax program has been extensively discussed. Blank et al. (1999) provide a recent
and detailed analysis of the e ect of NIT programs on work incentives, and describe the
    5 Atkinson   (1987) provides a comprehensive survey.



                                                     6
standard conclusion that lowering the tax rate may not necessarily reduce distortions
because lowering the tax rate while keeping the same guaranteed income increases the
break-even point (the income level at which bene ts are fully taxed away) implying that
people further up the income distribution are a ected by the program.
   The main other type of programs proposed are wage or earnings subsidies. The aim
of these alternative programs is to make work pro table and thus reduce the need for
income transfers. Kesselman (1969) and Zeckhauser (1971), among others, argue that
these schemes can be more e ective than NIT type programs. However, wage subsidies are
diÆcult to implement because they depend on the wage rate, which can be manipulated
more easily than total earnings. Earned income credit programs which subsidize earnings
and which also encourage work e ort are easier to implement and have been applied at a
very large scale in the US through the EITC program. Wage or earning subsidies do not
reach the people who do not work and have to be phased out at some point and, creating
thus distortions further up the income distribution. It is therefore not obvious to assess
which of the NIT or EIC program are the most appropriate to transfer income to the
poor.
   This literature, although it provides interesting insights into the issue of transfer pro-
grams, adopts a piecemeal approach to the income maintenance problem without spec-
ifying and solving any underlying optimization problem and does not precisely de ne
what information the government can use when designing policy. The key issue when
designing income transfer programs is precisely the impossibility to perfectly observe the
individuals' earning abilities.
   The theoretical literature on optimal income taxation, which grew out of the seminal
contribution of Mirrlees (1971), has tried to remedy these two defects of the previous
literature. However, the literature has focused almost exclusively on the intensive margin
of response. Mirrlees (1971) considered such a model and characterized the optimal non-
linear income tax that maximizes a given social welfare function and showed that optimal
marginal tax rates at any income level cannot be negative. Seade (1982) clari ed the


                                             7
conditions under which this result holds. Thus this important theoretical result implies
that an EIC which generates negative marginal rates cannot be optimal in a model with
intensive behavioral responses. Seade (1977) showed that when everybody works and
when the earnings distribution is bounded away from zero then the optimal marginal rate
at the very bottom is equal to zero. These conditions are unlikely to be met empirically
and numerical simulations have shown that optimal rates at the bottom can be substantial
when the Seade conditions do not hold (see e.g., Tuomala (1990) and Saez (2000a)).
Therefore, simulations coming out of the Mirrlees (1971) model suggest that optimal
transfer programs look like NIT type programs with a substantial guaranteed income
taxed away at fairly high rates.
    Optimal taxation models with labor force participation choice have attracted very
little attention.6 Two exceptions are Diamond (1980) and Mirrlees (1982). Diamond
(1980) develops a simple optimal tax model where hours and wages are xed but people
can choose whether or not to participate in the labor force. He shows that optimal
marginal tax rates may be negative for some income ranges. The study is theoretical and
no attempt is made to express optimal tax formulas in terms of elasticities or to assess the
importance of the participation decision margin relative to the standard intensive margin
of response. As a result, that study has not been followed upon to cast light on the EIC
versus NIT debate. Mirrlees (1982) is a model of optimal taxation with migration where
individuals have a xed income but can decide to migrate to other countries if taxes are
too high. The decision to migrate and the decision to participate in the labor force can
be modeled in almost identical terms. As a result, the optimal tax formulas obtained by
Mirrlees (1982) are qualitatively close to the formulas obtained in the purely extensive
case in the present paper, although their interpretation is very di erent because Mirrlees
(1982) focuses his analysis mostly to the high end of the income distribution.
   6 Note   however that retirement decision is akin to a labor force participation decision. As a result,
models on the optimal shape of social security taxes and bene ts, such as Diamond and Mirrlees (1978)
or Diamond et al. (1980), are related to what is done in the present paper.



                                                     8
     Last, two studies by Besley and Coate (1992, 1994) have investigated the design of
income maintenance programs when the objective of the government is not to maximize
social welfare but to alleviate poverty.7 They show that in that context, work requirements
(workfare) might be an e ective screening device to target welfare to the less skilled
individuals. Besley and Coate question the welfare maximization approach on the grounds
that it requires the government to observe individuals' valuation of leisure and to make
interpersonal utility comparisons. The present paper shows that it is possible to adopt a
welfare maximization objective without specifying explicitly the valuation or leisure and
that the redistributive tastes of the government can be summarized using straightforward
marginal welfare weights at each income level.


3       Extensive versus intensive response models

In this section, I introduce the extensive model or participation model and the intensive
model or e ort model. I consider both discrete and continuous versions of the models. The
discrete case allows simpler derivations and will be used for simulations. The continuous
case allows a deeper understanding of the structure of optimal transfers. I consider income
taxation at the individual level only and thus ignore completely the secondary earner labor
choice decision issue that arises in the context of household income taxation.
     In the discrete model, there are I + 1 types of occupations: the unemployed earning
w0   = 0, and      I   types of jobs paying salaries     wi .   The salaries   wi   are increasing in i and
correspond to occupations with increasing skills. The key assumption of the paper is that
the government is only able to observe income levels and thus can condition taxation of
income only. The net taxes paid by each class of individuals are denoted by                       Ti .   This
     7 Kanbur,   Keen and Tuomala (1994) have shown that when the objective of the government is not to
maximize a classic social welfare function, but to ght poverty, negative marginal rates may be desirable
for low incomes in the Mirrlees (1971) model. Their numerical simulations show, however, that this
result is not important in practice and that simulated optimal ghting poverty schedules are very close
to welfare maximizing simulated schedules.


                                                     9
tax scheme embodies both taxes and transfers. The after tax income in occupation i is
denoted by ci = wi        Ti .

   The total population is normalized to one and I note hi the proportion of individuals
in occupation i. Individuals choose their occupation i according to the relative after-tax
rewards in each occupation. As a general formulation, the number of individuals choosing
occupation i depends on after-tax rewards in all occupations:              hi   =   hi (c0 ; c1 ; ::; cI ).   In-
centives to work are embodied in the aggregate labor supply functions hi . High taxation
and redistribution levels for example may shift labor supply away from highly productive
activities toward lower productive jobs or unemployment.
   The government set taxes Ti so as to maximize welfare. Taxes must nance transfers
and government consumption. I assume that government consumption per capita is xed
and equal to H . The government budget constraint is,

                                            X
                                            I
                                                  hi Ti   = H:                                                (1)
                                            i=0
   The welfare function can be simply characterized by marginal social welfare weights
(expressed in terms of the value of public funds) that the government sets for each of the
I +1 of occupations.     These weights are denoted gi , i = 0; 1; ::; I and represent the value (in
terms of public funds) of giving an additional dollar to an individual in occupation i. Put
another way, the government is indi erent between giving one more dollar to an individual
in occupation i and      gi   more dollars of public funds. As we will see, these weights are a
suÆcient statistic for the redistributive tastes of the government in the optimal transfer
formulas that we derive. If the government values redistribution then the weights                        gi   are
decreasing in i. In the extreme Rawlsian case where the government cares only about the
worse-o individuals, all weights, except g0 , are zero.
   The social weights should depend on disposable income              ci   rather than          wi   because
the government should take into account the redistributive e ects of the tax schedule
when setting the marginal social weights. Therefore, it is constructive to express the
social weights   gi   as a function of disposable income gi = g (ci)=p where          p   is the marginal

                                                    10
value of public funds. In that case, the function g () can be taken as exogenous and it
re ects the absolute redistributive tastes of the government. This formulation is useful
for the numerical simulations. The function g () summarizes in a transparent way the
redistributive tastes of the government and is decreasing when the government values
redistribution. In that sense, welfare maximization does not require explicit interpersonal
utility comparisons or to measure the value of leisure for each individual.
    I assume that there are no income e ects and therefore that increasing all after-tax
levels   ci   by a constant amount       R   does not change the supply levels                hi   for each occupa-
tion.8 Formally,     hi (c0   + R; c1 + R; ::; cI + R) =        hi (c0 ; c1 ; ::; cI )   for all i and R. With no
income e ects, a marginal dollar of public funds is valued as much as an additional dollar
redistributed to all classes and therefore,

                                                X
                                                I
                                                      hi gi   = 1:                                              (2)
                                                i=0

Equation (2) pins down the value of             p   and thus provides a normalization of the welfare
weights gi .
    The model where each          hi   depends on all after-tax rewards (c0 ; ::; cI ) is of course too
general to provide interesting results. Therefore, we specialize this model to two polar
cases of interest: the extensive response model and the intensive response model. As is
standard in the optimal income tax literature, we assume that there is perfect substitution
of labor types in the production function and thus that wages wi are xed.9


3.1       Extensive Responses


 The discrete model
    In this rst model, individuals respond only through the extensive margin. Each
   8I   describe brie y below how the model can be extended to the case with income e ects.
   9 Saez   (2000b) has shown that the production side of the economy can be ignored when deriving
optimal income tax formulas when individuals can only choose their occupation as in the model I have
described.


                                                        11
individual is characterized by a skill level               i   2 f0; 1; ::; I g and may only choose either to
work in occupation i corresponding to his skill or be unemployed. Therefore, the only
decision is a participation decision. The decision to participate depends on the relative
after-tax incomes when working          ci   and when unemployed                     c0 .   This model is obviously a
crude simpli cation of reality but captures the extensive margin labor supply decision.
As I rst assume away income e ects, the decision to participate depends only on the
di erence    ci     c0 .    Presumably, if disposable income is higher when unemployed than
when working, nobody would choose to work. Therefore, I assume that                                      hi (ci    c0 )   =0
when   ci   c.
              0    As a result, it is never optimal for the government to set ci < c0 and thus
I assume that ci  c0 for all i.
     The size of the behavioral responses is captured by the elasticity of participation with
respect to the di erence in after-tax incomes. Formally, I de ne for i = 1; ::; I ,

                                                 ci        c0       @hi
                                        i   =                                   :                                        (3)
                                                      hi        @ (ci     c0 )
This elasticity measures the percentage number of employed workers in occupation                                            i

who decide to leave the labor force when the di erence between disposable incomes in
employment and unemployment decreases by one percent. The framework underlying this
elasticity is an heterogeneous population of workers (at each skill level) that are attached
to the labor force in varying degrees according to their tastes for work. These tastes
cannot be observed by the government and therefore taxation is based on income only.

     In order to derive the optimal set of taxes                 Ti ,   I consider a small change           dTi   of tax Ti
on occupation i. This tax change has two e ects on tax revenue and welfare.
     First, there is a mechanical increase in tax revenue equal to                             hi dTi   because workers
with skill i pay dTi additional taxes. This increase in tax revenue, however, is valued only
(1   gi )hi dTi   by the government because each dollar raised decreases the after tax incomes
of individuals in class i and this income loss is valued gi by the government.
     Second, there is a loss in tax revenue due to the behavioral response. The small tax
changes induces       dhi   workers to leave the labor force. By de nition of                       i   in (3), we have

                                                           12
dhi   =     hi i dTi =(ci   c0 ).   Each worker leaving the labor force induces a loss in tax revenue
equal to Ti       T0 ,   therefore the total behavioral cost is equal to (Ti                T0 )hi i dTi =(ci     c0 ).

There is no change in welfare due to the behavioral response because workers leaving the
labor force on the margin are indi erent between becoming unemployed and remaining
employed.10
      At the optimum, the sum of the mechanical and behavioral e ects must be zero,
implying,

                                             Ti    T0          1
                                                        =          (1   gi ):                                      (4)
                                              ci   c0       i
Equations (4) for i = 1; 2; ::; I and (1) de ne the optimal set of taxes Ti for i = 0; 1; ::; I .

      With redistributive tastes, we have           g0 > g1 > :: > gI .
                                                             From (2), we know that the
average (using population weights) value of the gi 's is one. Therefore, there is some i
such that gi  1 for i  i and gi < 1 for i > i . The government wants to redistribute
from high skilled occupations i > i toward low skilled occupations i  i .
   Equation (4) implies then that Ti T0 > 0 for i > i and that Ti T0  0 for i  i .
When i > 0, the government provides a higher transfer to low skilled workers (for whom
1  i  i ) than to the unemployed even though social marginal utility of consumption is
highest for the unemployed. Therefore, when the government wants to redistribute toward
the low income workers (gi > 1 for low i), it provides them with a tax transfer                           Ti     larger
than the tax transfer to the unemployed                 T0 .   In other words, the government implements
in that case a combined lumpsum guarantee income                          T0    and a negative marginal tax rate
at the bottom (similar to the Earned Income Tax Credit) in order to increase the size
of transfers as income increases. The cost of these two welfare programs are then fully
 nanced by higher income earners.
  10 This   can also be seen as a consequence of the envelope theorem: adjustments in behavior due to
small price changes do not produce rst order e ects on utility. This property cannot be used when the
objective of the government is non-welfarist. This is why welfare maximization objectives are in general
easier to handle than non-welfarist objectives.


                                                         13
      The intuition for having higher transfer levels to low skilled workers than to the un-
employed is clear. Starting from a situation with equal transfers to low income workers
and the unemployed, increasing the transfers to the low income workers is bene cial from
a pure redistributive point of view because                gi >   1 for   i   small and positive. This also
encourages some of the unemployed to join the labor force at zero scal cost as transfers
are initially equal for the two groups. As a result, it is unambiguously welfare enhancing
to provide a larger transfer to low income workers than to the unemployed.11
      Finally, in two important cases, the EIC bubble disappears. First, when the govern-
ment cares mostly about the welfare on the worse-o individuals (the extreme case being
the Rawlsian objective), it might be the case that all weights (except g0 ) are below one.
In that case, i = 0 and Ti  T0 for all i, implying that the negative marginal tax rate
component of the welfare program disappears and the transfer program is a classic nega-
tive income tax. Second, when the government has no redistributive tastes, then there is
no guaranteed income and the weights gi are constant (below one) and set so as to raise H
dollars per capita. In that case as well, tax liability is necessarily increasing with income.

       The continuous model
      The discrete model described above can be adapted in a straightforward way to the
case of a continuum of jobs. This extension is useful to investigate in more detail the
optimal transfer schedule. In the continuum case, jobs are indexed by w 2 [0; +1). Job
w    pays a wage equal to           w   and job 0 corresponds to unemployment. The government
implements a (non-linear) income tax schedule T (w) and I note c(w) = w                         T (w )   after-
tax income. Whether an individual chooses to work or not depends on disposable income
when working, c(w) =            w       T (w ),   relative to welfare bene ts when unemployed which I
    11 Alternatively,   using the concepts of contract theory, the intuition can be formulated as follows. In
the extensive model, increasing low income salaries does not tempt higher income earners to reduce their
e ort to imitate low income workers but does tempt the unemployed to start working. Therefore, it is
unambiguously bene cial to increase the wedge between the after-tax levels of the unemployed and of the
low income workers.



                                                         14
note   E     = c(0) =        I note T^(w) =
                           T (0).                            T (w )          T (0),   the tax liability excluding the
transfer E . By de nition, T^(0) = 0.
    As in the discrete model, with no income e ects, the actual density of occupied jobs
at income level w can be written as h(w; c^(w)). I also de ne the elasticity of participation
at income level w as,

                                                            c^(w )      @h
                                                 (w)   =                       :                                 (5)
                                                              h      @ c^(w )
    The optimal tax schedule is derived as above by considering a small change of tax
liability T (w) at income level w. The continuous version of equation (4) is,

                                          T^(w )             1
                                                        =          [1     g (c(w ))] :                            (6)
                                      w     T^(w )          (w)
This formula is a simple inverse elasticity tax rule. Each labor type can be considered as
a good that is taxed according to the inverse of its aggregate elasticity (w) .12 Diamond
(1982) developed a fully speci ed particular case of the continuous model of participation
just presented. He did not, however, relate his formula to participation elasticities as in
equation (6).
    As discussed above,        w       T^ (w )
                                   cannot be negative because nobody would choose to
work at income level w. Therefore, as w T^(w)  T^(w), we have that T^(w)=(w T^(w))
is larger or equal to -1. However, the right-hand side of equation (6) computed at w = 0
is equal to [1       g (c(0))]=(0)   and is smaller than -1 when g (c(0)) > 1 + (0) . This happens
when redistributive tastes are strong enough. In that case, there is a jump in the tax
schedule at 0. The unemployed receive c(0) = E and I note c(0+ ) = E + R the amount
received by very low incomes in the limit when w tends to 0. I note c^(0+) = R the size of
  12 This    formula is also closely related to the model of optimal taxation in the presence of migration
developed by Mirrlees (1982). In that model, individuals can choose to work either in their country or to
leave the country and work and be taxed abroad. In the present paper, the possibility of working abroad
is replaced by unemployment but the structure of the model and the optimal tax formulas are almost
identical.



                                                             15
the jump which is the extra-amount received when one starts working. For very small w,
the left hand side of (6) tends to -1 and the right hand side tends to [1               g (R + E )]=(0) .

Thus,   R   is de ned such that, g (E + R) = 1 + (0) .
     Therefore, we can characterize the optimal tax schedule as follows,
     1) When redistributive tastes are mild, g (c(0)) < 1 + (0) , the schedule is continuous
at 0 and marginal tax rates are negative at the bottom.
     2) When redistributive tastes are stronger, g (c(0)) > 1 + (0) , the schedule is discon-
tinuous at 0. Employed individuals are paid an extra-premium R.
     These two situations are illustrated on Figure 1. This graph displays two optimal
tax schedules cH (w) and cL (w) corresponding respectively to High and Low redistributive
tastes. The unemployed receive a positive transfer           cH (0)   and   cL (0).   In the Low redis-
tributive tastes case, the schedule is continuous at 0 and marginal tax rates are negative
at the bottom. In the High redistributive tastes case, the schedule is discontinuous at 0
(cL (0+) > cL (0)) and low income earners receive a larger transfer than the unemployed.
     In a real situation, the discontinuity is the schedule at 0 may not be desirable because
of the arbitrage opportunity it can provide. Firms could agree to hire idle workers who
would be paid a very small wage in order to share with the worker the government subsidy
R.   This arbitrage possibility issue could be alleviated by replacing the discontinuity by
a large but nite earnings subsidy for very low incomes.13 In practice, this is not an
important issue as few individuals (excluding teenager dependents) report positive annual
earnings below a few thousand dollars.

      Income E ects
     In the case with income e ects, the labor supply functions hi depend not only on ci               c0

but also on c0 . Presumably, keeping ci        c0   constant, hi is decreasing in c0 because higher
  13 Note   that any earnings subsidy provides an arbitrage opportunity for workers and rms. In prac-
tice, transaction costs and tax regulations would probably make it impossible to exploit this arbitrage
opportunity.


                                                    16
welfare bene ts make the extra-earnings derived from work less desirable. In the case
with income e ects, equation (2) needs to be modi ed. Decreasing by dT the tax liability
of all individuals (including the unemployed) has a mechanical scal cost of dT but also
induces a behavioral response through income e ects. More precisely,                               dhi   =   dT @hi =@c0

workers in occupation i shift to unemployment. The total scal cost due to the behavioral
                             P                                   P
response is thus equal to       i   (Ti      T0 )dhi    =   dT      i   (Ti     T0 )@hi =@c0 .   The welfare gain of
                         P
the tax change is   dT    i gi hi   . The sum of the mechanical, behavioral and welfare e ects
is zero at the optimum and thus we have,

                                     X
                                     I                  X
                                                        I
                                                                                @hi
                                           hi gi   =1         (Ti        T0 )         :                              (7)
                                     i=0                i=0                     @c0

With income e ects, the average welfare weights may no longer be equal to one (and is
presumably larger than 1). However, the previous derivations carry over and equations
(4) and (6) remain valid.


3.2    Intensive Responses


The theory of optimal income taxation has mostly focused, following Mirrlees (1971)
seminal contribution, on the intensive response to taxes. The model of Mirrlees (1971)
is the classical static labor supply model where individuals choose their labor supply
until marginal desutility of work equals marginal utility of money derived from the extra
amount of work. Key to the analysis are the elasticities of labor supply with respect to
tax rates. Piketty (1997) has developed the discrete version of the Mirrlees (1971) model.
He considered only the Rawlsian case but it is straightforward to adapt the model to any
welfare weights. We follow here his approach.

    The Model
   In the discrete type model, intensive responses can be modeled as follows. If the
rewards of occupation i are reduced relative to the lower income occupation                                  i   1, then
some individuals in occupation i reduce their e ort and switch to occupation i 1. I also

                                                        17
assume here that there are no income e ects implying that giving a uniform lumpsum to
all individuals does not a ect supply for each job.14 In that case, the supply functions hi
can be written as hi (ci+1               ci ; ci    ci     1   ). When ci+1                    ci   increases by dc and when all the
other di erences cj +1             cj   for j 6= i are kept constant, there is a displacement of workers
from job i to job i + 1. The increase in                             hi+1     is exactly equal to the decrease in                      hi   and
therefore, we have, @hi+1 =@ (ci+1                  ci )   =         @hi =@ (ci+1              ci ).     The behavioral elasticities can
be de ned as follows,

                                                         ci         ci               @hi
                                               i   =                    1
                                                                                                    :                                       (8)
                                                     )          hi           @ (ci        ci   1

This elasticity measures the percentage increase in supply of job                                                      i   when   ci   ci   1   is
increased by one percent. The link between this mobility elasticity and the elasticity of
earnings with respect to tax rates of the usual labor supply model is investigated later
on.

        Optimal Tax Formula
       To derive optimal tax rules in this model, we consider as above a small perturbation
of the optimal tax schedule. To derive a condition on the relative tax rates between jobs
i    and i 1, I consider a small increase dT in tax rates for jobs i; i + 1; ::; I :                                         dTi   = dTi+1 =
::   = dTI =      dT .   This tax change decreases                       ci      ci       1   by    dT    but leaves unchanged all the
other di erences cj           cj    1   for j 6= i.
       This tax change raises [hi + hi+1 + :: + hI ]dT additional taxes through the mechanical
e ect which are valued [(1                gi )hi + (1              gi+1 )hi+1 + :: + (1                   gI )hI ]dT   by the government.
This change also induces                dhi   =     hi i dT =(ci              ci     1   ) individuals in job i to switch to job
i      1 reducing tax revenue by (Ti                    Ti     1   )dhi . At the optimum, the sum of the two e ects
is zero implying,
     14 Income   e ects can be included in the analysis as in Saez (2000a). However, income e ects complicate
substantially the analysis. Moreover, as income e ects along the intensive margin of response have, in
general, been found to be small in the empirical literature, we consider only the simpler case with no
income e ects.


                                                                         18
                                             "                                                          #
                     Ti    Ti           1 (1         gi )hi   + (1    gi+1 )hi+1   + :: + (1   gI )hI
                                1
                                    =                                                                       :        (9)
                      ci   ci   1       i                               hi
      Equations (1) and (9) for i = 1; 2; ::; I characterize the optimal tax levels Ti .
      When the social weights                gi   are non-increasing, equation (2) implies that (1              gi )hi   +
::   + (1     gI )hI    0 for any i > 0.             Therefore, formula (9) implies that tax liability Ti is
increasing with i.15        In the intensive model, it is therefore never optimal to impose negative
marginal tax rates.16 The reason for this result is the following. If there is a negative
marginal rate in some range, then, by increasing slightly this rate, the government reduces
work incentives in that range but this increases tax revenue raised from people in that
range (precisely because the tax rate is negative in that range). Moreover, this small
marginal tax rate increase allows the government to raise money from all taxpayers above
that range (tax liability at any income being the sum of marginal rates up to that income).
This is bene cial for redistributive reasons.17
      The key di erence between the intensive and the extensive model lies precisely in the
relevant sources of incentives. In the extensive model, the behavioral response is only
on the participation margin and thus what matters is only the level of taxation at each
income level (relative to transfers at 0 income level). In the intensive model, the behavioral
response is on the earnings level margin which implies that the relevant parameter for
incentives is primarily the marginal tax rate. Note that the intensive response model
generates more complicated optimal tax formulas which also depend on the shape of the
income distribution. The shape of the income distribution is not directly relevant in the
simple inverse elasticity rule (4).
     15 Obviously,   ci is increasing in i because nobody would choose an occupation requiring more e ort and
providing less after-tax income.
  16 As mentioned in Section 2, this result was noticed by Mirrlees (1971) and clari ed by Seade (1982)

who provides an intuition di erent from the one I give here.
 17 Note that when the social welfare weights are non-decreasing, negative rates might be optimal. For

example, if the government cares more about low income workers (the \deserving poor") rather than
the unemployed (the \undeserving poor"), then it might be optimal to provide a larger transfer to the
workers than to the unemployed.

                                                                 19
     Relating transition elasticities to labor supply elasticities
    The discrete model of mobility that I have used does not t directly into the Mirrlees
(1971) model where individuals vary their hours of work in a continuous way. However, it
can be easily shown that the two models have the same structure and that the elasticity
of mobility      i   can be related the the usual labor supply elasticity. In order to calibrate
the discrete model using the empirical elasticities from the labor supply literature, it is
important to analyze the relation between the elasticities of mobility and the labor supply
elasticity.
    In the classical model of labor supply with no income e ects, labor supply responses
are measured by the elasticity of earnings with respect to one minus the marginal tax
rate. This intensive elasticity of earnings is de ned by,


                                                   "   = [(1       )=w ]@w=@ (1                ):                                     (10)

In the discrete model, I can de ne an implicit marginal tax rate i between occupations i
and i        1 as, i = (Ti             Ti   1   )=(wi     wi     1   ) or equivalently 1             i   = (ci   ci      1   )=(wi   wi   1   ).
    In appendix, I show that the elasticities "i at each income level that generate behavioral
responses of the same magnitude as the elasticities i are such that,


                                                         i (wi        wi   1   ) = " i wi :                                            (11)

    The weight hi is the fraction of individuals at income level wi. The discrete earnings
grid should be considered as an approximation of the continuous empirical earnings den-
sity. As a result,         hi       represents the number of individuals whose wages are between                                        wi       1


and   wi .    I can thus normalize these weights                              hi   by introducing h(wi ) =                 hi =(wi     wi    1   )
which is the      normalized density                     at income level            wi .   Using this normalized density and
equation (11) to replace i in the optimal tax formula (9), we obtain,
                                             "                                                                         #
                          i            1        (1      gi )hi   + (1        gi+1 )hi+1       + :: + (1      gI )hI
                                    =                                                                                      :            (12)
                      1        i       "i                                      wi h(wi )


                                                                         20
From now on, I use the labor supply elasticity "i when expressing optimal tax formulas.

    Optimal rates at the bottom
   To cast light on optimal rates at the low end of the income distribution, it is useful to
consider the continuous case. In the continuous limit, equation (12) becomes,18

                       T 0 (w )              1         Z1
                                   =                        [1       g (c(w 0 ))] h(w 0 )dw 0 ;   (13)
                    1     T 0 (w )
                                "(w) w h(w ) w
, Similarly, in the continuous case, formula (2) becomes,

                                       Z1
                                            g (c(w 0 ))h(w 0 )dw 0   = 1;
                                       0


and thus, equation (13) can be rewritten as,

                        T 0 (w )             1         Zw
                                   =        [g (c(w0)) 1] h(w0 )dw0:            (14)
                  1 T 0 (w) "(w) w h(w) 0
If there is no unemployment and the bottom wage w0 is strictly positive with positive
density h(w0 ), then the denominator in (14) tends to a positive limit while the integral
term tends to zero as w tends to w0 . Therefore the optimal rate at the bottom must be
zero (Seade (1977)). However, this result is no longer true when the bottom wage is equal
to zero or when there is an atom non workers.
   In the original Mirrlees (1971) formulation, there is a threshold skill level under which
individuals do not work. This implies that the intensive elasticity at the bottom is in nite.
Therefore, there is an element of labor force participation in the intensive model of Mirrlees
(1971). But the labor force participation choice is only between unemployment and an
in nitesimal amount of work. This feature is not empirically realistic, because of xed
costs of work; the model developed in Section 3.1 is closer to the actual economic situation.
Within the framework of this paper, it is conceptually useful to distinguish clearly the
extensive response model from the intensive response model. Therefore, we consider here
 18 This   equation was developed by Diamond (1998) and Saez (2000a).



                                                      21
the pure intensive model with no participation element whatsoever. Consequently, we
assume that everybody works and that the intensive elasticity is nite at the bottom.19
    Assuming that the bottom wage is zero and that h(w) tends to a nite limit h(0+ )
when w tends to zero, using equation (14), we obtain in the limit,

                                           T 0 (0)       g (c(0))   1
                                                     =     :                           (15)
                                  1          T 0 (0)"(0)
Therefore, the higher the redistributive tastes of the government at the bottom, the higher
the optimal rate at the bottom.20 The intuition for this result is that the best way to
redistribute to zero or low income earners, is by making the lumpsum transfer                      T (0)   as
large as possible, this can be achieved only by imposing large rates at the bottom. Note
also that, as usual, the optimal rate is decreasing the the elasticity level "(0) because high
elasticity levels imply that tax rate distortions have high eÆciency costs. As an example,
consider the case where "(0) = 0:5 and where g (c(0)) = 3. That is, the government values
3 times as much a one dollar transfer to a worker with income close to zero than a three
dollar transfer uniformly spread over all individuals. In that case, equation (15) implies
that the optimal rate at the bottom is 80%. Saez (2000a) presents a number of simulations
in the pure intensive model. The optimal rates obtained at the bottom are fairly high, in
general in excess of 70%.
    The general conclusion of the pure intensive model is that redistribution should take
place through a guaranteed income level that should be taxed away as income increase.
The transfer program takes the form of a traditional Negative Income Tax and no Earned
Income Credit component should be included.
  19 This   particular case has not been studied in detail and thus the formula I give below has not, to the
best of my knowledge, been obtained before.
  20 In the extreme Rawlsian case where g (c(0)) is in nite, the optimal rate at the bottom is one.




                                                     22
4      A General Model with Extensive and Intensive Re-

       sponses

The previous Section has illustrated the contrast between the intensive and extensive
model for designing an optimal transfer scheme. However, the real world is obviously
a mix of the two models. The goal of this section is thus to develop a model which
incorporates both the extensive and the intensive margin of response in order to assess
how these two e ects interact and to perform numerical simulations.
     In the pure extensive response model, the number of individuals in occupation i de-
pends on   ci    c0 .   In the pure intensive model, the number of individuals in occupation
i   depends on   ci     ci   1   and on      ci+1     ci .   In the general model with both extensive and
intensive responses, the supply in each job i is given by hi (ci                           c0 ; ci+1    ci ; ci    ci   1   ).
     The optimal tax formulas in the mixed model are derived in appendix using the same
methodology as in Section 3. The optimal tax formula expressed in terms of the labor
supply elasticities "i and the participation elasticities i is given by,

                             i                   1          X "                      Tj   T0
                                                                                                #
                                       =                       hj   1    gj      j                 :                       (16)
                         1        i       "i wi h(wi ) j i                          cj   c0

Comparing equations (12) and (16), we see that the mixed model is identical to the
intensive model with weights                gj   replaced by g^j =      gj   + j (Tj      T0 )=(cj     c0 ).     Therefore,
adding the participation margin amounts to attributing a higher welfare weights g^j to
income groups that are prone to leave the labor force and that receive a lower transfer
than the unemployed (Tj                > T0 ).   It is also possible to derive the optimal tax formula in
the continuous case (see appendix).
     Each of the two polar cases analyzed in Section 3 can be obtained from equations
(16) or (22) by letting either one of two elasticities ( or ") tend to zero. As a result, if
the participation elasticity is large relative to the earnings elasticity, the optimal schedule
will have an EIC component with larger transfers for low income workers than for the
unemployed. More precisely, because of the extensive margin of response, the pseudo

                                                              23
weights g^i need not be decreasing even if the real weights          gi   are decreasing. As a result,
optimal tax rates are not necessarily non-negative as in the pure intensive model. On the
other hand, if the elasticity         is small relative to ", then the optimal schedule will have
non-negative rates everywhere as in the standard intensive model.


5     Empirical Calibration

5.1     Empirical Literature


As mentioned in Introduction, the empirical literature on labor supply and behavioral
responses to taxes and transfers is large. Hausman (1985), Pencavel (1986), and Blundell
and MaCurdy (1999) provide extensive reviews of the literature. Most studies nd that
the intensive labor supply elasticities of males are small. However, elasticities of labor
force participation have been found to be much larger for some classes of the population
such as the elderly, single mothers or secondary earners. It should be noticed, though, that
studies often do not separate participation and intensive elasticities. For example, many
structural studies estimate substitution and income e ects and do not provide speci c
estimates on the participation margin of response.
    For our simulations, we need to pay special attention to elasticities of earnings and
participation at the bottom of the income distribution. Four pieces of evidence are of
particular interest.
    First, in the late 1960s, a series of Negative Income Tax experiments were implemented
in the U.S. These experiments provide in principle an ideal set-up to estimate both par-
ticipation and intensive elasticities of labor supply. Robbins (1985) surveys the empirical
results based on NIT experiments. Both intensive and extensive elasticities for males are
small (around 0.2). The behavioral response for wives, single female heads and the young
is higher and concentrated along the participation margin. Participation elasticities are
often in excess of 0.5 and sometimes close to 1.21
  21 Ashenfelter   (1978), for example, using data from the North Carolina-Iowa Rural Income Maintenance


                                                    24
    Second, a number of studies have used actual transfer programs in the U.S. (mostly
AFDC) to estimate behavioral responses (see the surveys by Danziger et al. (1981) and
MoÆtt (1992)). However, most studies regress labor supply hours or participation on
parameters of the welfare programs such as the guaranteed income level, the phasing-out
rate, or the break-even level. As a result, it is diÆcult to compare those estimates to
intensive and extensive elasticities used in the present paper. Moreover, there is substan-
tial disagreement about the size of the e ects. Nevertheless, recent studies exploiting the
recent increases in the EITC (see e.g. Eissa and Liebman (1996), Meyer and Rosenbaum
(1998)), have shown that the e ect on participation of single female heads is substantial.22
    Last, following the recent discontent with the classical NIT programs, some U.S. states
and Canada have carried out experimental welfare programs with lower implicit tax rates
or with minimum weekly hours of work requirements (see Blank et al. (1999)). In Canada,
in particular, a large experiment called the Self-SuÆciency Project (SSP) has been imple-
mented. SSP increased substantially the wedge between disposable income when working
and when non-working. Card and Robbins (1996) estimate large e ects on employment
which suggests participation elasticities between 0.5 and 1 for current welfare recipients.
    To summarize, the literature suggests that participation elasticities at the low end of
the income distribution maybe large (perhaps above 0.5). Elasticities of earnings with
respect to the tax rate are substantially smaller (perhaps around 0.25). The elasticity of
participation at the middle and high end of the income distribution is very likely to be
small. There is little consensus about the magnitude of intensive elasticities of earnings
for middle income earners, though this elasticity is likely to be of modest size for middle
income earners and higher for high income earners. Gruber and Saez (2000) summarize
this literature and display empirical estimates between 0.25 and 0.5 for middle and high
income earners.
Experiment, reports elasticities for wives around 0.9 while elasticities for husbands are only around 0.2.
  22 For example, Eissa and Liebman (1996) report participation elasticities for single mothers with low

education around 0.6.




                                                   25
5.2       Numerical Simulations


 Calibration
     Numerical simulations are based on the discrete model mixing the extensive and inten-
sive margin of behavioral response. The discrete model is preferred because it is far easier
to implement numerically while very little is lost by replacing a continuum of incomes
by a suÆciently high number of income groups. In the simulations, I use a discrete grid
of 17 income levels (see Table A1). I describe in appendix the technical details of the
simulations. A number of parameters are crucial for tax schedule simulations.
     First, the elasticity parameters summarizing the behavioral responses are prominent.
As there is no strong consensus on the size of these parameters, I present simulations
using a range of plausible parameter values. The values for the participation elasticity 
has been taken as constant and equal to 0, 0.5 or 1 for incomes below $20,000 and equal
to 0 for incomes above $20,000. The intensive elasticity                "L   for incomes below $20,000
is taken as constant and equal to 0, 0.25 or 0.5. The middle and high income (above
$20,000) elasticities "H is taken as constant and equal to 0.25 or 0.5. All simulations have
been carried out assuming no income e ects.23
     Second, the social welfare weights which summarize the redistributive tastes of the
government may also a ect the optimal level and patterns of taxation. I summarize the
redistributive tastes of the government using a simple parametric form for the curve of
marginal weights g (c) = 1=(p  c ) where p denotes the marginal value of public funds and
   is a scalar parameter. The higher is  , the higher are the redistributive tastes of the
government.          = +1 corresponds to the Rawlsian criterion while  = 0 corresponds no
redistributive tastes. Most of the simulations are presented with  = 1 which represents
fairly strong redistributive tastes. With                = 1, the government values        N   times less
marginal consumption when disposable income is multiplied by N .
    23 Simulations   including income e ects in the pure extensive model of Section 3.1 have been performed.
Income e ects have little e ect of the size and shape of the optimal transfer program but can have a
substantial e ect on the percentage of unemployed workers.


                                                      26
   Third, the income distribution is calibrated using the empirical yearly earnings dis-
tribution from the March 1997 Current Population Survey (CPS). I limit the sample to
individuals aged 18 to 60 and I exclude students. The details are explained in appendix.
The rate of non-labor force participation (zero yearly earnings reported) for this group is
slightly above 15%.
   Last, the exogenous revenue requirement of the government        H   obviously a ects the
general levels of taxation and transfers. I assume that the government wants to collect
the same amount that is actually collected with the income tax (state and federal) net
of redistribution done with the earned income tax credit. This amount is around $8,000
per household, implying an average annual tax per adult around $5,000. Therefore, in
the simulations, H is taken as equal to $5,000. Therefore, the tax schedules presented are
roughly comparable to the actual welfare and income tax schedule.

    Results
   The results of numerical simulations are presented in the four panels of Figure 2 and in
Tables 1 and 2. Figure 2 displays optimal disposable income schedules c(w) = w         T (w )

as a function of earnings w. As the emphasis is on the low income end, the graphs are
plotted for the income range $0 to $20,000. The 45o degree line gives the benchmark
schedule with no tax or subsidy. Each gure displays the optimal schedules for three
values of the participation elasticity      (0, 0.5 and 1) and xed values of the intensive
elasticities for high and low incomes ("L and "L ) and the redistributive tastes (parameter
 ).Income   e ects are assumed away in all simulations.
   In the top-left panel, "L = 0:25, "H = 0:25 and  = 1 and there are no income e ects.
This panel shows that increasing  a ects substantially the shape of the optimal transfer
program. With        = 0, the program is a traditional NIT with a substantial guaranteed
income ($9,900) and high phasing out rates (around 70%). However, when  increases, an
EIC bubble appears at the low end. The guaranteed income is reduced ($4,500 for  = 1)
and earnings are slightly subsidized over the income range $0 to $6,000. From $6,000 to


                                               27
$15,000, the transfer is taxed away at a high rate (in excess of 50%).
      The top-right panel of Figure 2 displays the same graphs with a higher intensive
elasticity for low incomes "L = 0:5. Increasing "L , reduces the size of the EIC bubble. It
also decreases slightly the guaranteed income level and decreases the phasing out rate.
      The bottom panels of Figure 2 consider variations in the redistributive parameter
.    In the bottom-left panel,          = 4 which represents extremely strong redistributive
tastes close to the Rawlsian case.24 Relative to the top-left panel benchmark, the size of
the guaranteed income is substantially higher (around $12,000), the phasing out rates is
very high (around 80%), and the EIC bubble has completely disappeared: the elasticity
of participation         has little e ect on the optimal schedule. In the bottom-right panel,
    = 0:25 which represents a very low taste for redistribution.25 Relative to the top-left
panel, the guaranteed income is very small (less than $2,000 for  = 0:5; 1). Both the EIC
bubble and the phasing out rates are small.
      Tables 1 and 2 summarize the optimal schedules for a wide range of parameters.
Optimal schedules are summarized by 5 numbers. First, the guaranteed income level
    T (0)   that is provided to the unemployed. Second, the average marginal tax rate from
$0 to $6,000 ([T (6000)          T (0)]=6000)   measures the tax distortion at the lowest end of
the earnings distribution. Third, the average marginal tax rate from $6,000 to $15,000
([T (15000)        T (6000)]=[15000       6000]) measures the phasing out rate of the transfer
program. Fourth, the break-even point is the income level at which transfers are equal
to zero (T (w) = 0) and the consumption schedule c(w) crosses the 45o line. Fifth, the
average marginal tax rate from $30,000 to $100,000 measures the tax burden for middle
and high income earners. Finally, the level of unemployment induced by the optimal
transfer program is reported.
      Table 1 focuses on the case where the redistributive taste parameter  is equal to one.
    24 With    = 4, the government values 16 times less marginal consumption when disposable income
doubles.
  25 With  = 0:25, the government values only 2 times less marginal consumption when disposable

income is multiplied by 16.


                                                   28
In the left side of the table (columns (1) to (6)), "H = 0:25 while in the right side, (columns
(7) to (12)),       "H   = 0:5. Table 1 con rms the graphical results. Unsurprisingly, a higher
elasticity "H reduces the optimal rates for high incomes and thus the size of the optimal
transfer program. The simulations show that, when  is high, the level of transfers a ects
signi cantly the unemployment rate and hence the cost of the transfer program. With
   = 1, the optimal transfer program reduces the non-labor force participation rate to less
than 3% which is only a fth of the baseline level of non labor force participation. It is
clearly unrealistic to assume that changing the parameters of the tax schedule can have
such a large e ect on labor force participation. Therefore, if the participation elasticity
   evaluated around the current tax schedule is really equal to one, it seems likely that
this elasticity is going to decrease as more and more people are induced to join the labor
force and as only the individuals who really do not want to work are left in the pool of
non-participants. In other words, though formula (16) is perfectly valid even if elasticities
vary with the program parameters, it is no longer appropriate to use current elasticities
estimates and apply them to a tax situation very di erent from the present one.26
      Table 2 investigates the e ect of the redistributive taste  . The cases  = 0:25,  = 1
and       = 4 are considered in Panels A, B and C. Unsurprisingly, higher redistributive
tastes lead to a larger guaranteed income level and higher phasing out rates and higher
rates for middle and high incomes.
      From the empirical literature, we can consider the case                    = 0:5,   "L   = 0:25 and
"H    = 0:25 as a plausible benchmark. In that case with                     = 1, the optimal transfer
program should consist in a guaranteed income level with a modest tax rate for the rst
few thousands dollars of earned income (tax rate around 10% for the rst $4,000 earned).
The transfer income should then be taxed at fairly high rates further up the income
distribution (tax rate around 60% from $4,000 to $15,000). Tax rates should then be lower
(around 50%) for middle and high income earners. The size of the guaranteed income level
    26 This   illustrates the well known diÆculty to perform out of sample predictions using empirical esti-
mates that are in principle valid only in the sample.



                                                      29
is relatively large at $7,300. Therefore, the simulations suggest that combining a sizeable
Negative Income Tax program with a tax exemption for the rst ve thousands dollars
of annual earnings might be a desirable way to redistribute toward the disadvantaged.
The guaranteed income provides income support for the really needy, and the earnings
exemption does not discourage too severely work participation of people with low earnings
potential.

    Comparing Simulations to the Current Transfer System
   The model used in the paper is of course a crude approximation to the actual economic
situation and therefore simulations should be regarded as illustrative only. It is nonethe-
less interesting to speculate what type of elasticity parameters could justify the current
structure of the U.S. transfer program policy. The current U.S. system applies very dif-
ferent tax schedules depending on the family status of the households. Two parents low
income families are not in general eligible for welfare programs and thus can only collect
EITC bene ts implying that they face negative marginal rates of -32% (including Social
Security Employee Payroll Taxes) over the rst $10,000 dollars of household earnings and
tax rates around 30% on the next $10,000 of earnings. Participation elasticities for two
parent families should be very large to justify such a large program. Note that there is
no universal program providing a minimum guaranteed income to these type of families
with no earnings at all.
   On the other hand, single parent families are also entitled to TANF and Food Stamps
which are NIT type programs. This programs provide a basic support (around $10,000
but which large variations across states). The sum of Individual income taxation, EITC,
TANF and food stamps generates tax rates around 20% for the rst $9,000 of earnings
but much higher rates, around 70%, for the next $9,000 of earnings. As discussed above,
most estimates suggest that participation elasticities for these group are large (in excess
of 0.5). It is striking to see how close this schedule is to our benchmark simulation result
( = 0:5, H = L = 0:25, and  = 1).


                                            30
    Finally, families or individuals with no children are entitled to very little bene ts.
This is a well-known gap in the U.S. welfare structure that is not justi ed in the type of
model we have considered. Therefore, the current welfare U.S. comes fairly close to our
simulation results only for single parents families. This group, however, represents a large
fraction of the population in need of income support.


6     Conclusion

This paper has shown that the nature of labor supply responses to taxes and transfers is
critical to design optimal income transfer programs. If the behavioral response is mainly
along the intensive margin then the optimal program is a classical Negative Income Tax
program with a large guaranteed income level which is taxed away at high rates. However,
if the behavioral response is concentrated along the extensive or labor force participation
margin then the optimal program is an Earned Income Credit with a smaller guaranteed
income level and transfers that    increase   with earnings at low income levels. Formulas
for optimal tax rates have been derived in terms of the behavioral elasticities and the
redistributive tastes of the government.
    The main lesson from the numerical simulations is that the optimal program is fairly
sensitive to the size of the participation elasticity. When the participation elasticity is zero,
the optimal program is a large Negative Income Program with a guaranteed income in
excess of $10,000 and a high phasing-out rate (around 70%). However, if the participation
elasticity is substantial, then the guaranteed income level should be lower but the rst
$5,000 to $7,000 should be exempted from taxation (or even slightly subsidized). The
guaranteed income should then be taxed at a fairly high rate for incomes between $6,000
and $15,000. It is therefore critical to distinguish carefully participation and intensive
elasticities in empirical studies. If the participation elasticity is large, then very strong
redistributive tastes are needed to obtain an optimal guaranteed income level above the
poverty level. The combined EITC and welfare U.S. system for single mothers is close


                                               31
to our optimal simulated schedules if, as evidenced by empirical studies, participation
elasticities are substantial.
     The present model could be extended in three directions. First, the paper considered
a model of individual labor supply decisions. An important feature that is missing is the
secondary earner labor supply decision. There is ample empirical evidence that the labor
participation decision of wives is very elastic. This suggests that a tax on total household
earnings as in the U.S. might be ineÆcient. Eissa and Hoynes (1998) argue that the
EITC program which is based on total earnings in the household discourages female labor
participation. At the same time, a tax on individuals, as in the U.K., is more eÆcient
but also less equitable because total household income is a better indicator of well-being
than individual income. The secondary earner problem raises an interesting and diÆcult
optimal income tax problem which could be tackled using the methods developed in this
paper. Note also that participation elasticities is likely to be correlated with xed costs
of work. As a result, single headed families with young kids for example are more likely
to be very elastic on the participation margin and should be encouraged to work through
EIC type programs.
     Second, there is evidence in the labor literature that long term unemployment experi-
ences may have an adverse e ect on human capital and thus on subsequent wages. This
problem is especially acute in Europe. This extra cost of unemployment has not been
taken into account in the present paper. Plausibly, if this extra cost is high, then the
optimal policy should be tilted even more toward EIC type programs and away from NIT
programs. An important element to consider when designing the optimal policy in this
case is whether individuals fully internalize the extra cost of unemployment.
     Third, using empirical elasticities, it would be interesting to infer the social weights
gi   that make the actual US tax and transfer system optimal. Even if the government
does not explicitly maximize welfare, it may be interesting to know what are the implicit
weights that the government is using. For example, if some of the weights appear to be



                                              32
negative then the tax schedule is not second-best Pareto eÆcient.27
    Last, this study has been carried out in a timeless economy and has ignored the
important question of the time period on which tax liability is computed. This implicit
time period obviously a ects the relative scope of extensive versus intensive margin. If the
time period is a lifetime, then, as almost every person does some work over his lifetime,
the extensive margin becomes irrelevant and the behavioral responses are necessarily
intensive. On the other hand, if the time period is very short, such as a day or an
hour, the extensive margin becomes prominent. Therefore, introducing time raises the
important but diÆcult question on the optimal period that should be taken into account
to compute tax liability. Relatively little work has been done on this subject.28 It might
be the case that the time dimension for assessing optimal tax and transfers programs
is important and that applying EIC programs on a monthly or quarterly basis could be
more e ective than an annual basis. This largely under-explored issue is left for future
research.
  27 This   analysis has been used frequently in the commodity taxation literature where it is known as the
inverse optimum problem (Ahmad and Stern (1984)) but has never been applied to the transfer program
problem.
  28 Vickrey is the economist who has studied the issue the most carefully. He advocated a system of

life-time taxation (see Vickrey (1947)).




                                                     33
     Appendix

      Relating i and "i
     Consider as seen in Section 3.2, a small change                                  dT   in all tax levels             Tj   for   j    i.    By
de nition of the implicit marginal tax rate i , this tax change is equivalent to a change in
the marginal rate i equal to di =(1                     i )   = dT =(ci            ci   1   ).
     Using the mobility elasticity i , this small tax change induces a loss in tax revenue
equal to,

                                                         dT                                                       di
                          (Ti    Ti        )hi i                    =   :    i hi (wi    (17)wi       )i
                                       1
                                                    ci    ci     1  1 i                            1



     In the classic labor supply supply model, by de nition of the earnings elasticity "i , this
tax change reduces earnings of the individuals with income wi by dw =                                                     "i wi di =(1        i ).

As there are     hi   individuals with income                    wi ,     the total e ect on tax revenue is equal to
i hi dw   which can be written as,

                                                                              di
                                                    :    i wi hi "i              (18)
                                             1 i
Therefore, comparing (17) and (18), we see that the two models produce the same behav-
ioral response when,


                                                    i (wi       wi      1   ) = "iwi :                                                        (19)

      Optimal Tax Formula in the General Model
     The optimal tax formula can be derived as in Section 3.2 by considering a small change
dT   in the tax rates for jobs         i; i + 1; ::; I : dTi             = dTi+1 = :: = dTI = dT . This tax change
raises [hi + hi+1 + :: + hI ]dT additional taxes through the mechanical e ect which are
valued [(1      gi )hi   + (1    gi+1 )hi+1         + :: + (1             gI )hI ]dT       by the government.
     As in Section 3.2, this tax change decreases ci                             ci   1   by dT and leaves unchanged all the
other di erences cj         cj   1   which induces dhi =                        hi i dT =(ci           ci    1   ) individuals in job i to

                                                                     34
switch to job i 1 reducing tax revenue by (Ti                             Ti   1   )dhi = (Ti                Ti          1   )hi idT =(ci    ci    1   ).
     This tax change also changes all the di erences                               cj       c0    for    j    i and thus induce a
number         hj j dT =(cj      c0 )     of individuals in each occupation j  i to become unemployed.
Therefore the total behavioral cost due to movements in and out unemployment is equal
           P
to    dT     j i   (Tj     T0 )hj j =(cj          c0 ).

     At the optimum, the sum of these e ects is zero, implying,
                                                                      "                                      #
                                 Ti 1 X    Ti           Tj   T0
                               =             hj 1 gj
                                                1
                                                     j          :                                                                                (20)
                     ci ci 1      i hi j i            cj   c0
Using (11), we can express this formula using the usual labor supply elasticities                                                            "i    and
the normalized density h(wi ) introduced in Section 3.2,

                                 i                   1          X "                             Tj      T0
                                                                                                                 #
                                           =                         hj   1        gj       j                       :                            (21)
                             1        i        "i wi h(wi ) j i                                cj      c0

      Optimal Tax Formula in the Continuous Model
     The optimal tax formula takes the following form,


           T 0 (w )                    1            Z 1"                                         T^ (w 0 )
                                                                                                                  #
                        =                                    1   g (c(w 0 ))       (w0 )                                h(w 0 )dw 0 :            (22)
       1       T 0 (w )     "(w) w h(w ) w                                                  w0        T^ (w 0 )

      Numerical Simulations
     The numerical simulations are performed using the empirical earnings distribution.
The data used to calibrate the earnings distribution is annual individual earnings data
from the March 1997 Current Population Survey. The simulations are performed using the
discrete model of Section 4. Therefore, the empirical earnings distribution is approximated
using a discrete grid. The vector of discrete values for earnings levels is reported in Table
A1. The vector of density weights                      h0i   estimated using data on the empirical distribution
is also reported in Table A1. The non labor force participation rate is equal to 15%.
     The system consists in                 I   + 2 simultaneously equations (2), (1), (16) for                                       i   = 1; ::; I .
The welfare weights are gi = 1=(p  ci ) where p is the marginal value of public funds and

                                                                   35
   is the redistributive tastes parameter. There are I + 2 unknowns, the tax levels Ti for
i   = 0; 1; ::; I and the marginal value of public funds p. The system has                                         I    + 2 equations
and I + 2 unknowns and thus yields in practice a unique solution.
     The main complication of simulations comes from the endogeneity of the density
weights         hi .        The density weights       hi   are endogenous because the distribution of earn-
ings and the unemployment level are a ected by taxes and transfers. Formally, Section 4
has shown that the functional form of the density weights is hi (ci                                         c0 ; ci+1      ci ; ci    ci+1 ).

In principle, the weights                  hi   should satisfy two conditions. First, the functional form of
the weights             hi   should be chosen so as to be compatible with the structure of behavioral
elasticities           i   and   i   de ned in equations (3), and (8)). Second, the weights                                  hi    should
coincide with the empirical weights h0i when the tax schedule (Ti ; i = 0; 1; ::; I ) is equal to
the actual schedule (Ti0 ; i = 0; 1; ::; I ).
     However, it is impossible to nd functions                            hi (ci           c0 ; ci+1    ci ; ci   ci+1 )    that satisfy
equations (3), and (8) for constant elasticities                           i , i     and      Æi   for all possible values of           c0

and    ci ; i   = 0; 1; ::; I . Therefore, in the simulations, I ignore the e ect of the intensive
behavioral response on hi . The density weights are taken as,
                                                                                  !   i
                                                                     ci     c0
                                                    hi   = hi
                                                            0
                                                                   c0i     c00
                                                                                           ;

where c0i ; I = 0; 1; ::; I is the actual after-tax schedule. The schedule c0i used in simulations
is a very simpli ed approximation of the real schedule. The real schedule is approximated
with a linear tax schedule with constant tax rate of 40% and a guaranteed income c00 =
$6; 000. Sensitivity analysis shows that the optimal schedules are not signi cantly a ected
when other assumptions for the actual schedule c0i are made.




                                                                    36
References

[1] Ahmad Ehtisham and Nicholas Stern, \The Theory of Reform and Indian Indirect
   Taxes", Journal of Public Economics, 25(3), 1984, pp. 259-298.

[2] Ashenfelter, Orley, \The Labor Supply Response of Wage Earners", in J. Palmer
   and J. Pechman, eds.,     Welfare in Rural Areas,   Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
   Institution, 1978.

[3] Atkinson, Anthony B. \Income Maintenance and Social Insurance." in A.J. Auerbach
   and M. Feldstein (eds.),    Handbook of Public Economics,      Volume II, Amsterdam:
   North-Holland, 1987.

[4] Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. \Workfare versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments
   fro Work Requirements in Poverty Alleviation Programs."       American Economic Re-
   view,   1992, 82(1), pp. 249-61.

[5] Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. \The Design of Income Maintenance Pro-
   grammes." Review of     Economic studies,   1994, 62, pp. 187-221.

[6] Blank, Rebecca M., Card David and Philip K. Robins. \Financial Incentives for
   Increasing Work and Income Among Low-Income Families.", NBER Working Paper
   No. 6998, 1999.

[7] Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy, \Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
   Approaches", in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, eds.,       Handbook of Labor Economics,
   Volume 3A, 1999.

[8] Card, David and Philip K. Robins. \Do Financial Incentives Encourage Welfare
   Recipients to Work? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation of the Self-SuÆciency
   Project.", NBER Working Paper No. 5701, 1996.




                                           37
 [9] Danziger, Sheldon, Robert Haveman and Robert Plotnick. \How Income Transfer
    Programs A ect Work, Savings, and the Income Distribution: A Critical Review.",
    Journal of Economic Literature,   19, 1981, pp. 975-1028.

[10] Diamond, Peter. \Income Taxation with Fixed Hours of Work."          Journal of Public
    Economics,   1980,13, pp. 101-110.

[11] Diamond, Peter. \Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern
    of Optimal Marginal Tax Rates." American Economic Review, 1998, 88(1), pp. 83-95.

[12] Diamond, Peter, L. Helms and James Mirrlees. \Optimal Taxation in a Stochastic
    Economy: A Cobb-Douglas Example."          Journal of Public Economics,   1980, 14, pp.
    1-29.

[13] Diamond, Peter, and James Mirrlees. \A Model of Optimal Social Insurance with
    Variable Retirement." Journal of     Public Economics,   1978, 10, pp. 295-336.

[14] Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes. \The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor
    Supply of Married Couples.", NBER Working Paper No. 6856, 1998.

[15] Eissa, Nada and Je rey Liebman. \Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income
    Tax Credit.", The Quaterly    Journal of Economics,   111, 1996, pp. 605-37.

[16] Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez, \The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence
    and Implications.", NBER Working Paper No. 7512, 2000.

[17] Hausman, Jerry, \Taxes and Labor Supply." in A.J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein
    (eds.), Handbook of Public   Economics,   Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985.

[18] Heckman, James. \What has been learned about Labor Supply in the Past Twenty
    Years?", American Economic Review, 1993, 83(2), pp. 116-121.




                                              38
[19] Kanbur, Ravi, Keen, Michael and Tuomala, Matti. \Optimal Non-linear Income
    Taxation for the Alleviation of Income-Poverty." European Economic Review, 38(8),
    1994, pp. 1613-32.

[20] Kesselman, Jonathan. \Labor-Supply E ects of Income, Income-Work, and Wage
    Subsidies."Journal   of Human Resources,       4(3), 1969, pp. 275-92.

[21] Meyer, Bruce and Daniel Rosenbaum. \Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
    the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.", NBER Working Paper No. 7363, 1999.

[22] Mirrlees, James A. \An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation.",
    Review of Economic studies,    1971, 38, pp. 175-208.

[23] Mirrlees, James A. \Migration and Optimal Income Taxes.", Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics,   1982, 18(3), pp. 319-41.

[24] MoÆtt, Robert. \Incentive E ects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.", Journal
    of Economic Literature,   30, 1992, pp. 1-61.

[25] Pencavel, John. \Labor Supply of Men." in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.),
    Handbook of Labor Economics,     1986, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3-102.

[26] Piketty, Thomas. \La Redistribution Fiscale face au Ch^omage."          Revue Francaise
    d'Economie,   1997, 12(1), pp. 157-201.

[27] Robins, Philip K. \A Comparison of the Labor Supply Findings from the Four Neg-
    ative Income Tax Experiments."Journal          of Human Resources,   20, 1985, pp. 567-82.

[28] Saez, Emmanuel. \Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates.", NBER
    Working Paper No. 7628, 2000a.

[29] Saez, Emmanuel. \Optimal Income Taxation, Production EÆciency and Tari s:
    Short-Run Versus Long-Run.", Harvard mimeograph, 2000b.


                                              39
[30] Seade, Jesus K. \On the Shape of Optimal Tax Schedules."    Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics,   1977, 7(2), pp. 203-236.

[31] Seade, Jesus K. \On the Sign of the Optimum Marginal Income Tax."       Review of

    Economic Studies,    49(4), 1982, pp. 637-643.

[32] Tuomala, Matti. Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
    1990.

[33] Vickrey, William.   Agenda for Progressive Taxation,   The Ronald Press Company:
    New York, 1947.

[34] Zeckhauser, Richard J. \Optimal Mechanisms for Income Transfer.", American Eco-
    nomic Review,   61(3), 1971, pp. 324-34.




                                            40
                                                       Figure 1: Optimal Transfer Schedules, Extensive Margin
After Tax Income cL(w) and cH(w)




                                       High Redistributive Tastes                           o
                                                                                          45 Degree Line
                                       Schedule c (w)
                                                   H




                                   c (0+)         Low Redistributive Tastes
                                    H
                                                  Schedule c (w)
                                   c (0)                     L
                                    H




                                   c (0)=c (0+)
                                    L     L

                         0
                                   0
                                                                         Before Tax Income w
                                              Figure 2. Optimal Tax Schedules
                                 ν = 1, ε = 0.25, ε = 0.25                                               ν = 1, ε = 0.25, ε = 0.5
                                          H        L                                                             H         L
                        $20K                                                                   $20K
After Tax Income c(w)




                                                                       After Tax Income c(w)
                        $15K                                                                   $15K


                        $10K                                                                   $10K


                        $5K                               η=0                                  $5K                                η=0
                                                          η = 0.5                                                                 η = 0.5
                                  o                                                                      o
                                45 line                   η=1                                          45 line                    η=1
                        $0K                                                                    $0K
                          $0K     $5K      $10K      $15K       $20K                             $0K     $5K      $10K      $15K        $20K
                                    Before Tax Income w                                                    Before Tax Income w
                                 ν = 4, εH = 0.25, εL = 0.25                                           ν = 0.25, εH = 0.25, εL = 0.25
                        $20K                                                                   $20K
After Tax Income c(w)




                                                                       After Tax Income c(w)




                        $15K                                                                   $15K


                        $10K                                                                   $10K


                        $5K                               η=0                                  $5K                                η=0
                                                          η = 0.5                                                                 η = 0.5
                                  o                                                                      o
                                45 line                   η=1                                          45 line                    η=1
                        $0K                                                                    $0K
                          $0K     $5K      $10K      $15K       $20K                             $0K     $5K      $10K      $15K        $20K
                                    Before Tax Income w                                                    Before Tax Income w
                                                Table 1: Numerical Simulations with redistributive tastes parameter ν = 1.



                        Middle-High Income Elasticity εH = 0.25                                       Middle-High Income Elasticity εH = 0.5

          Guaranteed         Average    Average       Break-      Average   Unem-      Guaranteed Average       Average      Break-    Average     Unem-
                Income      M.T.Rate    M.T.Rate       Even     M.T.Rate ployment        Income     M.T.Rate M.T.Rate         Even     M.T.Rate   ployment
                Level        $0-$6K    $6K-$15K        Point      $30K+      rate        Level       $0-$6K    $6K-$15K       Point     $30K+       rate
                 (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)       (11)       (12)
Low Income
Participation
Elasticity η
           PANEL A: Intensive Elasticity for low incomes ε L = 0

η= 0        $11,600             82         90        $14,100        42       15.6       $10,500        85          92        $10,700     31         15.7

η = 0.5         $7,700          7          84        $12,900        46       11.8        $6,900        15          87        $14,600     34         13.5

η= 1            $5,400         -23         71        $17,000        48        2.6        $4,300        -23         76        $13,800     35         2.9


           PANEL B: Intensive Elasticity for low incomes ε L = 0.25

η= 0            $9,900          83         67        $14,300        46       15.2        $8,800        85          69        $11,400     34         15.3

η = 0.5         $7,300          37         60        $12,900        49       13.8        $6,500        42          64        $10,300     36         14.2

η= 1            $4,500          -8         51        $16,800        50        2.5        $3,500        -7          55        $14,400     37         2.8


           PANEL C: Intensive Elasticity for low incomes ε L = 0.5

η= 0            $8,800          78         56        $14,400        48       15.0        $7,800        80          59        $11,800     35         15.0

η = 0.5         $7,000          45         50        $13,000        51       13.9        $6,200        51          54        $10,900     38         14.0

η= 1            $4,000          -2         42        $16,700        51        2.3        $3,000         0          45        $10,100     38         2.5

Notes: Simulations performed using redistributive taste parameter ν=1. No income effects included.
                                                   Table 2: Numerical Simulations with varying redistributive tastes



                          Elasticity εH = 0.25, Elasticity εL = 0.25

                Guaranteed Average       Average      Break-     Average     Unem-
                 Income      M.T.Rate M.T.Rate         Even      M.T.Rate ployment
                  Level       $0-$6K    $6K-$15K       Point      $30K+       rate
                   (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
Low Income
Participation
Elasticity η

                PANEL A: Low Redistributive tastes parameter ν = 0.25

η= 0              $5,500        68          47        $9,600           27     14.6

η = 0.5           $1,900        12          34        $8,500           30      7.7

η= 1               $540          -5         25        $8,300           31      2.7


                PANEL B: Medium Redistributive tastes parameter ν = 1

η= 0              $9,900        83          67        $14,300          46     15.2

η = 0.5           $7,300        37          60        $12,900          49     13.8

η= 1              $4,500         -8         51        $16,800          50      2.5


                PANEL C: High Redistributive tastes parameter ν = 4

η= 0             $12,900        92          81        $17,400          62     16.0

η = 0.5          $11,800        69          79        $16,800          63     26.0

η= 1             $11,200        54          79        $16,600          64     27.2

Notes: Simulations performed using low income intensive elasticity εL = 0.25 and high income elasticity εH = 0.25.
                 Table A1: Empirical Earnings Distribution Calibration




Income     Density weights
 Levels     (in percent)
   (1)           (2)

   $0           14.2
 $2,000          3.3
 $4,000          2.7
 $6,000          2.8
 $8,000          3.0
 $10,000         4.8
 $12,500         5.2
 $15,000         6.5
 $17,500         4.7
 $20,000         8.2
 $25,000         9.8
 $30,000        16.4
 $50,000        14.5
$100,000         3.9
