                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               TIME LIMITS AND WELFARE USE


                                             Jeff Grogger


                                         Working Paper 7709
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7709

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2000




The author thanks Phillip Levine, David Ribar, and David Zimmerman for helpful suggestions and Duncan
MacRae and David Yamanishi for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by Jeff Grogger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Time Limits and Welfare Use
Jeff Grogger
NBER Working Paper No. 7709
May 2000
JEL No. I3, J2



                                            ABSTRACT

       Time limits are a central component of recent welfare reforms and represent a substantial
departure from previous policy. However, several recent studies suggest that they have had no effect
on welfare use. In this paper I attempt to reconcile those findings with results from Grogger and
Michalopoulos, who find time limits to have substantial effects that vary by the age of the youngest
child in the family. Using data from the Current Population Survey, I obtain results similar to those
of previous analysts when I estimate models that constrain the effects of time limits to be
independent of age. When I allow for age dependence and employ controls for time-varying state-
level unobservables that may be correlated with the timing of welfare reform, however, I find that
time limits have negative effects on welfare use and that those effects are stronger, the younger the
youngest child in the family. The estimates suggest that time limits may account for 16 to 18 percent
of the recent decline in welfare use among female-headed families.


Jeff Grogger
School of Public Policy and Social Research
3250 Public Policy Building
Box 951656
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
jgrogger@ucla.edu
I. Introduction

          Time limits are a central component of recent welfare reforms and they represent

a substantial departure from previous policy. Prior to welfare reform, cash aid was an

entitlement under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program,

payable to all poor, single-parent families with at least one child under age 18. Families

could receive benefits as long as they satisfied the eligibility criteria. In contrast, as a

results of welfare reform, federal law now limits families to 60 months of federal aid over

their lifetimes. Many states have exercised their authority under the federal Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Restoration Act (PRWORA) to set even shorter

limits.

          Although time limits provide poor families with an incentive to conserve their

benefits by reducing their welfare use, previous studies have found them to have little

effect on behavior. A number of analysts have studied annual state-level data on welfare

cases, whereas others have analyzed welfare utilization rates computed from the Current

Population Survey (CPS). Most of the authors of these so-called "caseload" studies agree

that welfare reform has contributed to the recent decline in the welfare rolls. Those who

have attempted to estimate the effects of time limits specifically, however, report that

they have had little effect on caseloads (CEA 1997; Ziliak, et al. 1997; CEA 1999).

          In contrast, Grogger and Michalopoulos' (1999; hereafter, GM) results suggest

that time limits substantially reduce welfare use. Their study differs from the caseload

literature in two ways. First, GM analyze data from a randomized demonstration project

that was conducted in a single county, whereas the caseload studies analyze data from
nationwide sources. Second, GM allow the effects of time limits to depend on the age of

the youngest child in the family, whereas the caseload studies do not.

       The age of the youngest child is important because, under U.S. welfare law, only

families with children under age 18 are eligible for aid. Thus the age of the youngest

child determines the length of the horizon over which the family may be eligible to use its

time-limited benefits. For families at risk of using welfare, which are likely to be credit-

constrained and face substantial earnings uncertainty, welfare performs an insurance

function, but only until the family exhausts its benefits. Since the risk of prematurely

exhausting one's benefits is greater, the longer one's eligibility horizon, families with

younger youngest children should have a greater incentive to bank their benefits than

families with older youngest children.

       GM note that this result, in conjunction with recent findings on the effects of

income on children's educational success, may have substantive implications for the well-

being of children in poor families. Duncan et al. (1998) and Guo (1998) both find that

poverty in early childhood has greater adverse consequences for children's educational

outcomes than poverty in later childhood. Unless time limits somehow raise income in a

manner that counters their effect on welfare use, they could limit the educational success

of poor children.

       In this paper, I attempt to reconcile the results from the caseload literature with

the results from GM. As in a subset of the caseload literature, I analyze data from the

March CPS. As in GM, I allow the effects of time limits to depend on the age of the

youngest child in the family. This will let me determine whether it is the data source or

age-dependence that underlies the difference in the results across the two sets of studies.




                                              2
        More generally, I seek to shed further light on the effects of time limits. GM's

results suggest that it is important to account for age dependence in estimating the effects

of time limits. However, they must impose some potentially restrictive assumptions in

order to identify the effects of time limits in the context of a demonstration project that

also involved other reforms. Here I can see whether similar estimates result from the

different sources of identifying variation that arise in nationwide data due to differences

in states' welfare policies.

        In using state-level differences in welfare policy to estimate age-dependent effects

of time limits, there are four principal identification issues to be dealt with, three of

which have received considerable attention in the caseload literature. The first problem is

policy endogeneity. If changes in state welfare policy were motivated by factors that also

affect welfare use, then models that fail to control for those factors may yield biased

estimates of the effects of welfare reform. The problem is that many of these factors,

such as public sentiment toward welfare recipients, are likely to be unobservable to the

analyst and therefore impossible to control for directly.

        This problem has been dealt with in the caseload literature by estimating models

that include state-fixed effects and state-specific trends. State-fixed effects control for

unobservable determinants of welfare use that vary between states but remain constant

within states over time. State-specific trends further control for unobservables that trend

linearly within states over the sample period. Policy endogeneity persists, however, if

welfare reform in a state is motivated by unobservable determinants of welfare use that

are neither fixed nor smoothly trending.




                                               3
        Fortunately, this problem can be largely solved in the presence of age

dependence. With age dependence, the effects of time limits vary across families even

within a single state at a single point in time. In other words, the effects of time limits

vary among families within cells defined by state and year. This means that I can

estimate the effects of time limits using models that include state-specific period effects,

that is, state-year-fixed effects. State-year-fixed effects provide controls for all state-

level unobservables regardless of how they might vary over the sample period. Thus they

solve the policy endogeneity problem as it has been posed in the caseload literature.

        Three further identification issues remain, however. The first is distinguishing the

effects of welfare reform from the effects of other factors that influence welfare use.

Welfare reform was implemented between roughly 1993 and 1997, first under state-level

waivers from the AFDC program and then under PRWORA. At the same time, the

economy improved substantially, with real wages in low-skill labor markets rising for the

first time in twenty years.

        The caseload literature deals with this problem by controlling for the state

unemployment rate. In some of the specifications that I report below, I follow this

approach as well. The state-year-fixed effects estimator provides an alternative, more

general, strategy for controlling for business cycle effects as well.

        The next problem is disentangling the effects of time limits from the effects of

other provisions of welfare reform. Prior to PRWORA, some states included time limits

in their welfare reform packages, whereas other states did not. Other provisions included

in the states' welfare reform bills include an assortment of work requirements, enhanced

work incentives, and sanctions for non-compliance with program rules, among others.




                                               4
        Ideally, one would like to isolate the effects of time limits from the effects of each

of these other reforms individually. To do this adequately would require one to

characterize each of those other reforms, however. Although others have made such

efforts, the measures constructed by previous researchers are not necessarily useful in

other studies. For example, previous analysts have studied time limits using measures

that confound time limits with the "time frame for work," which is the time by which

welfare recipients must begin working in order to continue receiving aid (CEA 1997,

Ziliak, et al. 1997, CEA 1999). Since my focus here is on time limits, those measures are

not useful for my purposes.

        Although ultimately it is important to distinguish the individual effects of each

welfare reform measure, it will be some time before researchers are able to characterize

all of them in a comprehensive manner. In the interim, I adopt the alternative strategy of

attempting to distinguish the effects of time limits from the collective effects of other

reforms. Essentially, I code states as having implemented welfare reform or not, then ask

whether time limits have a significant (and age-dependent) interactive effect.

        The final specification issue arises from the possibility that other determinants of

welfare use have effects that vary by the age of the youngest child. To avoid attributing

to time limits the effects of other factors that may vary with age, I interact a number of

important determinants of welfare use with the age of the youngest child. These

estimates show that the effects of benefit levels and minimum wages indeed vary

substantially by the child's age. Since these appear to be the first age-specific estimates

of the effects of welfare benefits, they constitute a contribution to the welfare incentives

literature in their own right.




                                              5
       The next section provides some further background on welfare reform and the

existing literature on its effects. The additional background helps both to further

motivate my research questions and to clarify the details of my empirical strategy. The

goal of the next subsection is to describe the recent history of welfare reform in a manner

that delineates the sources and nature of the policy variation that are available to estimate

the effects of welfare reform generally and time limits specifically.

II. Background

       A. A Brief Review of Welfare Reform in the 1990s

       Although PRWORA is the centerpiece of welfare reform at the federal level,

many states implemented substantial reforms prior to its passage. By the time PRWORA

became law, 37 states had implemented some kind of state-wide welfare reform waiver

(Department of Health and Human Services 1996). The earliest of these took effect in

1993; the last was implemented just before PRWORA became effective in October 1996.

After PRWORA became law, states implemented their Transitional Aid for Needy

Families (TANF) programs, which replaced AFDC, between October 1996 and January

1998. Thus the timing of welfare reform varied from state to state. This provides an

important source of variation for identifying the effects of welfare reform.

       Further identifying variation comes from the differences in welfare reform

packages that were implemented by different states. Common elements of welfare

reform plans instituted under both waivers and TANF include time limits, work

requirements, and enhanced earnings disregards, among others. PRWORA sets certain

requirements, but gives the states substantial leeway in designing their own TANF

programs. Thus in the transition from waivers to TANF, many states effectively




                                              6
continued the reforms that they had initiated under waivers, adding to their TANF

programs the additional reforms necessary to comply with PRWORA. This means that

the states whose initial waivers did not include time limits eventually imposed time limits

in their TANF programs.

       Thus there are two sources of variation in the data to identify the effects of time

limits and to distinguish the effects of time limits from the effects of other welfare reform

provisions. First, time limits were implemented at different times in different states.

Second, many states first implemented a welfare reform program that did not include

time limits, then added time limits later on.

       Table 1 summarizes the number of states implementing each of a number of

welfare reforms by the year in which the reforms were implemented. It shows that 19

states implemented state-wide reforms by the end of 1995. Six of these included time

limits, six included work requirements, and seven included enhanced earnings disregards.

Of the 21 states newly implementing time limits in 1996, seven already had some type of

state-wide reform program in effect.

       B. The Caseload Literature on the Effects of Welfare Reform

       This state-level variation in welfare policy has been used by a number of analysts

to estimate the effects of welfare reform on welfare utilization rates. This literature can

be usefully disaggregated into two sets of studies: one that focuses on pre-PRWORA

waivers and another that considers the effects of TANF as well. Most of the waiver

studies analyze annual state-level data on welfare recipients per capita (Blank 1997; CEA

1997; Ziliak, et al. 1997; Figlio and Ziliak 1999; Wallace and Blank 1999). The




                                                7
exception is Moffitt (1999), who studies annual state-level welfare utilization rates

calculated from the CPS for populations defined by the mother's age and education level.

         For the most part, the structure of these papers is similar. All include in their

regression models some measure of pre-PRWORA welfare reforms. In most cases, this

involves a single dummy variable indicating whether a state had implemented a state-

wide welfare reform waiver. CEA (1997) and Ziliak, et al. (1997) attempt to estimate the

effects of individual reform provisions, including time limits, as well.

         To distinguish the effects of welfare reform from the effect of the business cycle

and other influences, all studies control for such factors as the state unemployment rate

and the maximum benefit payable under the state's AFDC program. Blank (1997) and

Wallace and Blank (1999) include a broader set of business cycle controls, but Blank

(1997) shows that they have little effect on the welfare reform parameters. As mentioned

above, all of the studies include state-fixed effects and several include state-specific

trends in attempt to control for potential policy endogeneity.

         Most authors agree that waivers had some effect on welfare use.1 Not

surprisingly, Moffitt (1999) finds larger effects for women with low levels of education

than for women with more education. He also notes that the importance of waivers is

somewhat sensitive to the business cycle one uses to estimate the effect of

unemployment. Neither of the studies that attempts to isolate the effects of time limits

finds time limits to have a significant effect on the caseload (CEA 1997, Ziliak, et al.

1997).

         Two studies extend the sample period through 1998 and include information

about states' TANF plans as well as their pre-PRWORA waivers. Schoeni and Blank




                                               8
(2000) analyze grouped data from the CPS like that used by Moffitt (1999) and, like

Moffitt (1999), they find that welfare reform affects welfare utilization the most among

high school dropouts. CEA (1999), which analyzes administrative caseload data, finds

welfare reform to have significant effects on welfare caseloads. Like its predecessor,

however, CEA (1999) attributes none of this effect to time limits.

          C. Grogger and Michalopoulos (1999)

          GM, in contrast, find time limits to have important effects on welfare use that

vary by the age of the youngest child in the family. They estimate that time limits reduce

welfare utilization by 12 percentage points among families with youngest children age 3

to 11, but only by 3.4 percentage points among families whose youngest children are 12

to 15 years old. In the aggregate, they estimate that time limits would have caused

welfare use to fall by 19 percent within the first two years after they were imposed, all

else equal.

          However, the treatment group in the demonstration project was subject not only to

time limits but also to more generous work incentives and social services than their

counterparts in the control group. Because the treatment group was subject to more than

one experimental treatment, GM were required to impose the assumption that the effects

of the other treatments were age-invariant in order to identify the effects of time limits.

Although this assumption was consistent with some specification tests presented by the

authors, it clearly would be desirable to provide estimates of the effects of time limits that

were based on alternative identifying assumptions.

          A further assumption imposed by GM follows from a corollary to their main age-

dependence result. For families whose youngest children exceed a threshold age, time

1
    Ziliak, et al (1997) provide an exception.

                                                 9
limits amount to a non-binding constraint. The threshold age is equal to eighteen minus

the length of the time limit, and so is equal to thirteen in the case of the federal five-year

limit. Families whose youngest children exceed the threshold age will lose their

eligibility before the time limit could bind. Thus time limits should have no effect on

their behavior.

       GM imposed this condition as part of their identification strategy. Here I can test

it, at least with one of the estimators that I employ. Before developing my estimation

strategy, however, I discuss the data that I analyze.

III. Data

       A. Family Welfare Use Data from the CPS

       Data from the March CPS provide the key pieces of information required to

estimate age-dependent effects of time limits: information on welfare utilization and

information on family composition, from which I can determine the age of the youngest

child in the family. I use data from all March CPS surveys fielded between 1979 and

1999. Since the welfare utilization measure is constructed from a question about the

family's sources of income over the previous calendar year, I refer to the data by the year

to which the welfare information pertains, rather than by the survey year. Therefore the

sample period extends from 1978 through 1998.

       My unit of observation is the family. I limit the sample to female-headed families

because female-headed families are the primary target for cash aid under U.S. welfare

law. In 1993, female-headed families accounted for 90 percent of all cash welfare

expenditures and constituted 93 percent of the families using welfare (Committee on

Ways and Means 1994).




                                              10
       Restricting the sample in this way may give rise to a type of sample selection bias

because time limits, and welfare reform generally, may alter marriage and childbearing

incentives in a way that changes the composition of the women who constitute the

population of female family heads. Some researchers have dealt with this issue by

studying the effect of welfare reform on the entire population of women rather than

female heads of families (Moffitt 1999; Schoeni and Blank 2000). Although this

approach clearly solves the sample selection problem, it introduces a parameter

heterogeneity problem, which is another type of specification error.

       Since both married and childless women are ineligible for welfare, none of the

welfare reform variables affects their welfare use. Put differently, in a regression of

welfare use on welfare reform measures, all of the welfare reform coefficients are equal

to zero for married women. Since women who are ineligible for welfare outnumber those

who are eligible, analyzing the effect of welfare reform on all women could lead one to

conclude that welfare reform had little or no effect on welfare use, even if its effect on

eligible women was substantial.

       Perhaps the ideal way to solve this "targeting" problem (Ellwood and Bane 1985)

would be to fit a sample selection model that predicted whether a woman was a female

family head and then use those predictions to obtain consistent estimates of the effects of

welfare reform from the sample of female-headed families. However, this approach

would require an instrumental variable, that is, a variable that predicted female headship

but did not predict welfare use conditional on headship. Lacking any plausible

candidates for such an instrument, it may be useful to discuss the bias that is likely to

result from limiting the analysis to female-headed families.




                                             11
       Moffitt and Pavetti (1999) have noted that time limits reduce the generosity of the

welfare system, and as such may result in fewer women forming female-headed families,

either by increasing marriage or reducing out-of-wedlock childbearing. Presumably, the

women who are induced to marry (or forego out-of-wedlock childbearing) as a result of

time limits are the most "marriageable" of those at risk of female headship. If

marriageability and labor market productivity are positively correlated, then the women

who compose the population of female family heads after the imposition of time limits

will be more welfare-prone than the women who compose the population of female

family heads prior to time limits. In other words, the composition effect that results from

time limits may actually cause welfare utilization among female-headed families to rise,

all else equal, since the women with the best non-welfare alternatives are no longer

observed as female family heads. Thus the sample selection problem may lead me to

understate the negative effect of time limits on welfare utilization.

       B. Determinants of Welfare Use

       To explain welfare use, I use many of the variables that have appeared previously

in the caseload literature and in the earlier literature on welfare incentives. The CPS

identifies the state in which each family resides, so I can match annual state-level

information on economic conditions and welfare policy to each family's data record. In

addition to the central time limit measure and the general measure of welfare reform

described below, my regression models include the state unemployment rate, the

maximum benefit available to a family of three, and the real minimum wage. These latter

variables appear in the specification employed by CEA (1999), and all but the minimum

wage appear in the other caseload studies as well.




                                             12
       My time limit variable differs somewhat from the time limit variable employed in

the CEA (1999) analysis. In the CEA study, the time limit variable was a dummy

variable that was equal to one for states with either a termination time limit or a "time

frame for work." The former is the focus of my interest. The time frame for work is a

different reform provision: it stipulates a maximum period of time after which the

recipient is required to engage a specified type and amount of work activity in order to

continue receiving a full aid check. The type and amount of work activity, and sanctions

for non-compliance, vary by state. For each state, CEA's (1999) time limit variable is a

modified dummy variable that is equal to one in all years after which either the time limit

or the time frame for work could actually be binding on aid recipients. It is equal to zero

in previous years, except for the first year in which either provision could have begun to

bind. In that year, the variable is equal to the fraction of the year in which either

provision could have been binding.

       The time limit variable that I employ in most of the analysis below pertains only

to termination time limits, which I refer to hereafter simply as time limits. It differs from

the CEA (1999) measure in regards to timing as well. Since the theory of GM indicates

that families should anticipate the consequences of time limits, rather than wait for them

to become binding, I focus on the date that time limits were implemented rather than the

date on which they could begin to bind. For each state, my time limit variable is a

modified dummy variable equal to one in all years after time limits are implemented. It

is equal to zero for all years prior to implementation; in the year of implementation, it is

equal to the fraction of the year during which time limits were in effect.




                                              13
          States' time frames for work, like all welfare reform provisions other than time

limits, are captured in my general reform variable. For each state, this variable is a

modified dummy that is equal to one in all years after the state first implemented state-

wide welfare reform under either waivers or TANF. It is constructed from the "Any

waiver" and "TANF" variables used in both CEA (1999) and Schoeni and Blank (2000).2

          C. Welfare Use by Age Group Before and After Time Limits

          Table 2 provides a cross-tabulation of welfare utilization before and after the

implementation of time limits for three age groups defined by the age of the youngest

child in the family. For the purposes of this table, post-time limit observations are taken

from all state-year cells in which time limits were in effect for at least half the year,

although alternative definitions yield similar results. The data here are weighted, as they

are throughout in order to deal with the CPS sample stratification scheme. Unweighted

results are similar, however.

          From the totals at the bottom of the table, one sees that welfare use has fallen

substantially in the post-time limit period, which is consistent with trends in

administrative caseload data (Department of Health and Human Services 1999). The

extent of the decline varies by age group. Among the youngest, 0-6 age group, welfare

utilization has fallen by 17.5 percentage points; among the intermediate, 7-12 age group,

it has fallen by nearly 10 percentage points. Welfare use has fallen by five percentage

points among the oldest age group, where the youngest child is aged 13 to 17.

          This oldest group would be unaffected by time limits if all states had implemented

the federal five-year time limit. Since over half of the states did adopt the five-year limit,

we can take the five-percent reduction among this age group as a first approximation to

2
    I am grateful to Bob Schoeni for kindly providing me with his data.

                                                     14
the overall decline in welfare use that is attributable to causes other than time limits. This

decline may be due to the other reforms that were implemented over the same period or

to the rapidly improving economy.

       Under some restrictive assumptions, the change in welfare use among this oldest

group can be used to construct difference-in-difference estimates of the age-specific

effects of time limits themselves. Such estimates are presented in the last column of the

table. Taken at face value, they suggest that time limits led to a 12.5 percentage point

reduction in aid utilization among families in the youngest age group and a 4.8

percentage point reduction among families in the intermediate age group. These are

sizeable changes.

       Of course, there are a number of reasons why one should be hesitant to embrace

these differences-in-differences as estimates of the effects of time limits. First, they

implicitly assume that the effects of other factors, such as other welfare reforms and the

business cycle, are age-invariant. Second, they provide limited controls for possible

policy endogeneity. In the next section I describe the regression model that I use to

account for these important specification issues.

IV. Estimation

       I first write down a regression model that is applicable to family-level data but

otherwise comparable to the specifications fit to aggregate data in the caseload literature.

This initial model does not make use of the predicted age-dependence of time limits. I

offer it because one of my goals is to reconcile the caseload results with those of GM.

Therefore I first estimate models that that take the effects of time limits to be independent




                                             15
of age in order to see whether I obtain estimates similar to those reported in previous

studies when I estimate similar models. The model is given as:

y ist = W st β + Z st γ+ X ist δ+ µ st + ε ist   i = 1,...,nst; s = 1,...,S; t = 1,...,N   (1)

where yist is a welfare utilization dummy for the ith family in state s at time t; Xist is a

vector of family attributes that influence welfare use; and the data include S states, N time

periods, and nst families in the s, t-th state-year cell. Wst is a vector of welfare reform

variables pertaining to state s at time t and Zst is a vector of other time-varying state-level

variables that influence welfare utilization.

        In CEA (1999), as in the analyses below, Zst includes the (logarithm of the)

maximum welfare benefit payable to a family of three, the (logarithm of the) real

minimum wage, and the unemployment rate. The vector Xist does not appear in prior

studies since they use aggregate data. Here, Xist includes information on the mother's

education level, her age, her race, the number of children in her family, and the age of her

youngest child.

        In all of the caseload studies, one specification of Wst includes a single modified

dummy variable that is equal to one in all years after state-wide welfare reform was

implemented in state s. A number of the studies also consider an alternative specification

of Wst that contains a number of modified dummies, each of which represents the

presence of a particular welfare reform measure such as time limits, work requirements,

or enhanced earnings disregards. The specification of Wst that I offer in my main analysis

represents something of a hybrid of these two approaches.

        In most of the specifications reported below, Wst consists of two variables. The

first is the general reform variable, which is the modified dummy that is equal to one in



                                                 16
all years after the implementation of state-wide welfare reform, as in the caseload studies.

The second is the time limit variable described above, interacted with the age of the

youngest child in the family. Irrespective of the age interaction, however, the time limit

variable itself effectively interacts with the general reform variable. This is because there

were no state-wide welfare reforms that involved only time limits: many reform packages

included time limits, but they always included other reforms as well. Thus the questions

addressed with the models that I employ for the bulk of the analysis are: (1) whether time

limits have an independent effect on welfare use beyond the effect of welfare reform

generally; and (2) whether the effects of time limits are greater, the younger the youngest

child in the family.

        This approach allows me to control for the collective effects of other welfare

reforms. It does not allow me to distinguish the separate effects of individual reform

provisions. Even though one would ideally like to distinguish the individual effects of all

of the different welfare reform provisions implemented during the last decade, such a

study will have to wait until more comprehensive data are available to characterize other

reforms. There is also a question of whether enough time has yet elapsed to disentangle

the separate effects of a number of individual reform provisions. This degrees-of-

freedom problem is exacerbated in my case, since I need to allow the effects of reform to

vary by age in order avoid attributing to time limits effects that are actually due to other

reforms.

        Indeed a similar qualification pertains to estimating the effects of time limits. The

time limit provisions of the states' welfare reform laws vary in a number of ways. They

vary as to the length of the time limit, as to whom the limit applies to (i.e., the entire




                                              17
family or only the adult), and as to the leniency with which exemptions and extensions

are granted. In principle, it would be valuable to know how each of these factors affects

welfare use. In practice, however, there are insufficient data available now to draw these

fine distinctions. For now, I limit my attention to the question of whether the presence of

a time limit affects welfare use, and whether it does so in a manner that interacts with the

age of the youngest child in the family.

        I interact time limits with age in two different ways. I first classify children into

the age groups defined in Table 1 above and interact age group dummies with the time

limit dummy. This gives estimates that can be compared with the difference-in-

difference estimates presented in Table 2. I refer to the resulting model as the step-

function specification:

y ist = βT 1 A1ist Tst + βT 2 A2ist Tst + βT Tst + β R Rst + Z st γ+ X ist δ+ µ st + ε ist   (2)

where Tst is the time limit variable described above, Rst is the reform variable described

above, A1ist and A2ist are age group dummies defined as A1ist = 1 if Aist ≤6, A1ist =0

otherwise; A2ist = 1 if 6 < Aist < A , A2ist = 0 otherwise; Aist is the age of the youngest child

in family i in state s at time t; and A is the threshold age as described above. For most of

the analysis I set the threshold age to 13, which is the threshold corresponding to the

federal five-year time limit. Although a number of states have shorter time limits, and

thus higher threshold ages, results based on the uniform threshold age of 13 are generally

similar to those based on the state-specific thresholds.

        In equation (2), βT1 gives the effect of time limits on families in the youngest age

group, over and above general effect of welfare reform, which in equation (2) is assumed

to be age-invariant. The term βT2 gives the effect of time limits on the intermediate age



                                                       18
group and the term βT gives the effect of time limits on the oldest age group. Given the

results of GM, we expect to find βT1 < βT2 < 0 and βT = 0. The parameter βR gives the

effect of welfare reform generally.

         The second functional form that I use to allow for age dependence I refer to,

somewhat inaccurately, as a linear interaction between age and the time limit variable. It

is written as

y ist = βTA Aist* Tst + βT Tst + β R Rst + Z st γ+ X ist δ+ µ st + ε ist                 (3)

where Aist* = ( Aist − A ) if Aist < A and Aist* = 0 if Aist ≥ A . With this specification, the

age-dependent effects of time limits are a function of βTA, which should be positive based

on GM's predictions. The effect of time limits on families in the oldest age group is

given by βT, which again should be zero according to GM's theoretical model.

         The key issues for estimation involve the composite disturbance term, which

consists of two independent components: a state-year-specific component µst and an

idiosyncratic component εist. A problem for estimation arises if µst, which captures the

unobservable determinants of welfare use that vary between states and over time, is

correlated with the time limit variable Tst. If unobservable determinants of welfare use

within a state were among the factors that influenced the timing of welfare reform within

the state, then OLS estimates of the regression models above may be biased. This is the

policy endogeneity problem addressed in the caseload literature.

         The caseload studies have offered two potential solutions to this problem. The

first is to assume that the state-year error component can be further decomposed as

µ st = α s + τ t + ν st




                                                       19
where the αs terms are state-fixed effects and the τt terms are period effects. Under the

assumption that the νst terms are independent of the welfare reform variables, adding

state dummies (and year dummies) to the regression model controls for the state-fixed

effects and solves the policy endogeneity problem. The implicit assumption under which

this approach is valid is that the only unobservable determinants of welfare use that

influence welfare reform are time-invariant, varying only between states. If time-varying

unobservables influence the timing of welfare reform, however, then the state-fixed

effects approach may yield inconsistent estimates.

         A generalization of this approach allows for state-specific trends, positing that

µ st = α s + θs t + η st .

Under the assumption that ηst is uncorrelated with Tst, adding state dummies and state-

specific trends to the regression solves the policy endogeneity problem. This formulation

accounts not only for state-specific time-invariant unobservables, but also for state-

specific time-varying unobservables that trend smoothly over the sample period.

         Even the state-specific trends model may fail to control adequately for the policy

endogeneity problem. Indeed, Martini and Wiseman (1997) argue that the politics of

welfare reform is likely to give rise to non-linearities in state-specific unobservables that

render even the state-specific trends estimator inconsistent. They argue for the need for

more general controls for unobservable determinants of welfare use that vary both

between states and over time. In some of the specifications reported below, I generalize

the state-specific trends model by allowing for quadratic as well as linear trends.

         Even more general controls are available to estimate the age-dependent effects of

time limits, however. The reason is that, due to age dependence, the effects of time limits



                                              20
vary among families even in the same state and year. Thus the state- and year-specific

component of error can be fully controlled for by including a set of state-year dummies in

equations (2) and (3). Of course, this state-year-fixed effects estimator also absorbs the

effects of all other variables that vary only by state and year. Since this includes the

variables in Zst, such as the unemployment rate, the state-year-fixed effects model can be

thought of as providing more general controls for the business cycle than the state-fixed

effects and state-specific trends models. The state-year-fixed effects model also absorbs

the effect of other welfare reforms Rst.

        For the same reason, the state-year-fixed effects approach has one important

drawback. Because the time limit variable Tst also varies only by state and year, it cannot

be used to test whether βT = 0 as predicted by GM's model. Only the estimates from the

models that include state-specific quadratic trends can be used to construct this test.

        Although age dependence in the effects of time limits allows me to pursue more

general controls for business cycle effects and policy endogeneity than could other

analysts, age-dependence introduces another issue that need to be addressed. For

example, as discussed by GM, the effects of other aspects of the environment besides

time limits could depend on age as well. The other reforms could have age-varying

effects, as could welfare benefits and the unemployment rate. Thus I generalize

equations (2) and (3) in some of the results presented below by allowing the reform

variable Rst and all of the variables in Zst to interact with the age of the youngest child.




                                              21
V. Results

        A. Time Limits without Age Dependence

        Since one of the goals of this study is to reconcile the results of the caseload

literature with the results of GM, it is useful to begin by asking if I obtain results that are

similar to those of previous analysts when I estimate models that are similar to theirs.

One would not expect the results to be identical since the data and samples are different.

Nevertheless, the results that I obtain when I estimate a model like equation (1) that

includes state-fixed effects seem fairly comparable to the findings of previous

researchers.

        The first column in Table 3 reports results from a specification that is similar to

that employed by CEA (1999) and Schoeni and Blank (2000). Welfare reform is

captured by two variables: one modified dummy that is equal to one in all years

following the implementation of a state-wide waiver but preceding the implementation of

TANF ("Any waiver"), and another that is equal to one in all years following the

implementation of TANF ("TANF"). The other state-level variables in the model include

the logarithm of the state's maximum welfare benefit for a family of three, the log of the

minimum wage, and the state's unemployment rate; these variables are also included by

Schoeni and Blank (2000) and CEA (1999). I include only the contemporaneous

unemployment rate, whereas Blank and Schoeni (1999) and CEA (1999) include the first

two lags as well. As I show below, omitting the two lags has essentially no effect on my

results, although it has the advantage of simplifying some of the highly interacted




                                              22
specifications below. I also include a number of family characteristics as regressors in

the model, whereas previous studies that utilized aggregate data clearly could not.3

         Column (1) of Table 3 indicates that both statewide waivers and TANF are

associated with a 2.1 percentage point reduction in welfare use. The TANF estimate is

much less precise than the waiver estimate because there are fewer post-TANF

observations in the sample. These estimates are at least roughly comparable to estimates

from Schoeni and Blank (2000), who find that, among women without high school

diplomas (who are disproportionately represented in the population of female-headed

families), waivers reduce aid use by about one percentage point and TANF reduces aid

use by about two percentage points.

         To construct the reform variable that I will use throughout the remainder of the

analysis, I add the wavier and TANF variables. Such pooling seems quite reasonable in

light of the estimates in column (1). This reform variable is now equal to one in all years

after a state-wide reform is implemented, regardless of whether reform was first instituted

under waivers or TANF. Its coefficient indicates that reform generally is associated with

a 2.1 percentage point reduction in welfare use.

         In column (3) I add the time limit variable from CEA (1999). The resulting

estimate is similar to that found by CEA (1999): the coefficient is numerically small and

statistically insignificant. Here, the estimate even has the wrong sign.

         In column (4) I replace the CEA (1999) time limit variable with my time limit

variable that is constructed along the lines described above. As discussed above, this


3
  These variables include a cubic polynomial in the mother's age, dummies for the mother's education
(dropout, some college, college or more), dummies for the mother's race (black, other non-white), dummies
for the number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more), and the age of the youngest child. Means of
these variables are provided in the Appendix Table.


                                                     23
variable is effectively an interaction term, measuring the extent to which time limits have

an additional effect beyond that of welfare reform generally. It too yields a small,

insignificant coefficient. The basic result is thus the same whether I use the CEA (1999)

measure or my own. As in the other studies that use state-level policy variation to

estimate the effects of time limits, I estimate their effect to be essentially zero in models

that do not allow for age dependence.

        B. Age-Dependent Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits

        In Table 4, column (1) presents age-dependent estimates of the effects of time

limits from the step function specification in equation (2) above. Column (2) presents

estimates from the linear interaction specification in equation (3). Column (3)

generalizes the linear interaction model by adding a quadratic interaction term. All of the

models include state dummies and year dummies.

        All of these specifications show evidence of age dependence along the lines

predicted by GM. In the step function specification, families in the youngest age group

are nearly 15 percentage points less likely than families in the oldest age group to use

welfare after time limits are imposed. For families in the intermediate age group, the

corresponding reduction is nearly 5 percentage points.

        The linear interaction specification in column (2) indicates similarly that, after the

imposition of time limits, families with older youngest children are more likely to be on

welfare than families with younger youngest children. The quadratic term in column (3)

is small and insignificant, and adding it has little effect on the coefficient on the linear

term. The estimates from the linear interaction specification indicate that, relative to the

oldest group, a family whose youngest child is 10 is 3.9 percentage points less likely to




                                              24
use welfare, whereas a family whose youngest child is 3 is 13 percentage points less

likely to use welfare. Thus the estimates of age dependence from the linear interaction

specification are fairly similar to those from the step function specification, although the

linear interaction specification fits the data better as measured by the adjusted R-square.

Both specifications indicate that time limits have their greatest effect on families with the

youngest children.

       At the same time, however, both specifications yield positive estimates of βT, the

effect of time limits on the oldest age group. Taken at face value, these estimates suggest

that time limits cause welfare use to rise by about 11 percentage points among families in

the oldest age group. This is clearly at odds with the prediction from GM, which

indicates that time limits should have no effect on this age group.

       One potential explanation of this result is policy endogeneity. Since the model

includes both state dummies and year dummies, the positive coefficient on the main time

limit effect suggests that states that experienced larger-than-average increases in welfare

utilization rates imposed time limits earlier than states with smaller-than-average

increases. To better account for the policy endogeneity problem, I estimate the state-

specific quadratic trends and state-year-fixed effects models that control more generally

for unobservable time-varying state characteristics that may have influenced both welfare

use and the imposition of time limits.

       The estimates in columns (1) and (3) of Table 5 are based on models that include

state-specific quadratic trends whereas the estimates in columns (2) and (4) are based on

models that include a full set of state-year dummies. Besides providing more general

controls for policy endogeneity, the models reported in table 5 allow the age of the




                                             25
youngest child to interact with other determinants of welfare use, including the general

reform dummy, the unemployment rate, welfare benefits, and the minimum wage. In the

presence of these interactions, the quadratic trend specification has the advantage that it

can be used to estimate both the main effects (i.e., the terms that appear without

interactions) and the interaction effects. It has the disadvantage that it provides

somewhat restrictive controls for time-varying state-level unobservables. The state-year-

fixed effects model has the advantage that it provides general controls for state-specific

unobservables that vary over time. Its disadvantage is that the main effects of both time

limits and the other determinants of welfare use are unidentified.4

          Generalizing the controls for policy endogeneity and allowing for more general

age interactions reduces the estimated effects of time limits on families in the oldest age

group. In column (1), the main time limit effect is now only 0.032, with a t-statistic of

1.62. In the model in column (3), which provides a better fit to the data, the main time

limit effect is only 0.018, which is only slightly larger than its standard error.

          The state-specific quadratic trends are themselves highly significant, with F-

statistics in both specifications of about 4.1. Many of the additional age interactions are

significant as well, as I discuss in more detail below. Generalizing the controls for policy

endogeneity and allowing for additional age interactions yields results that are consistent

with the prediction that time limits should have no effect on aid utilization among

families in the oldest age group.


4
    Note that, in the linear interaction specifications, the unemployment rate, benefit level, and minimum
                                                                                    *
wage are interacted with Aist , whereas the time limit variable is interacted with Aist . Theory indicates that
                                                                                                *
time limits should have no effect on the oldest age group, and interacting time limits with Aist provides a
way to test that prediction. Theory provides no such predictions as to the effects of the other determinants
of welfare use, however, so it is appropriate to interact them with Aist.


                                                      26
        These changes to the specification also have reduced the estimated effects of time

limits on families in the younger age groups. In column (1), time limits are estimated to

reduce welfare use by 8.6 percentage points among families in the youngest age group

and 5.4 percentage points among families in the intermediate age group. The estimates in

column (3) indicate that time limits lead families whose youngest child is 10 to reduce

aid utilization by 2.1 percentage points on average. Among families whose youngest

child is 3, aid use falls by 7 percentage points. Although these estimates are smaller than

their counterparts from the more restrictive specifications reported in table 4, they remain

significant and indicate that time limits reduce welfare use by the greatest amount among

families with the youngest children.

        As for the other estimates in the table, those in column (1) suggest that the effects

of welfare reform generally are slightly greater for the youngest group than for the oldest,

and slightly less for the intermediate group. Although these coefficients are individually

insignificant, they are almost jointly significant at the 5 percent level, with an F-statistic

of 2.88. This is consistent with the specification in column (3), where the age-reform

interaction is significant and indicates that reform reduces aid utilization by a greater

amount, the younger the youngest child in the family. In the linear interaction

specification, the main reform coefficient remains negative and is roughly the same

magnitude as its counterpart in table 4, although it is somewhat less significant..

        The effect of unemployment does not vary significantly with the age of the

youngest child in the family, although both benefit levels and minimum wages exhibit

important age interactions. The estimates in both columns (1) and (3) indicate that higher

benefits increase aid utilization the most among families with the youngest youngest




                                              27
children. This makes intuitive sense. If women with the youngest youngest children are

those with the worst labor market opportunities, all else equal, then a given increase in

benefits results in a greater expansion of the budget set for those women than for other

women who face greater alternatives.

       This is roughly consistent with the next results, which show that minimum wage

increases reduce welfare use by a greater amount among women with older youngest

children than among those with younger youngest children. Minimum wages have

ambiguous a priori effects on welfare use. To the extent that they raise wages, they make

work more attractive relative to welfare, presumably decreasing welfare use. To the

extent that they reduce employment, however, they may increase welfare use. If the least

productive workers are the ones most likely to be rationed out of jobs, and women with

younger youngest children are less productive than women with older youngest children,

all else equal, then higher minimum wages would have the smallest negative effect (or

possibly even a positive effect) on the welfare use of women with the youngest youngest

children.

       Finally, it is possible to explain why the estimated effects of time limits fall when

one relaxes the restriction that the other determinants of welfare use have age-invariant

effects. At the time that time limits were being imposed, mean real benefit levels were

falling and the minimum wage was rising. Rising minimum wages reduced welfare use

on average by the greatest amount among families with older youngest children. Falling

benefit levels decreased welfare use, all else equal, by the greatest amount among

families with the youngest children. Taken together, the apparent positive effect of time




                                             28
limits on families in the oldest age group falls, and the effect of time limits on the

youngest age group falls relative to their effect on the oldest age group.

       The estimates in columns (2) and (4) of table 5 come from the models with state-

year-fixed effects. None of the main effects, either of time limits or the other

determinants of welfare use, are identified under this specification. The interaction

terms, however, are nearly the same as those obtained from the model with state-specific

quadratic trends. In particular, the estimates of the effects of time limits on families

whose youngest children are below the threshold age are nearly identical under the two

specifications.

       C. The Effect of Time Limits on Welfare Utilization

       The estimates above provide evidence of substantial age dependence in the effects

of time limits. As a result, one might expect time limits to have important effects on

welfare utilization among the population of female headed families as a whole. The

regression coefficients presented in table 5 can be used in conjunction with the sample

age distribution of youngest children to estimate how time limits have affected welfare

use among this important population.

       The coefficients from the step function specification, in conjunction with pre-

reform data on the age distribution of youngest children in the sample, indicate that time

limits caused the 1998 welfare utilization rate to be 2.3 percentage points lower than they

would have been in the absence of time limits. The corresponding estimate from the

linear interaction specification is 2.6 percentage points. Since the sample welfare

utilization rate stood at 18.6 percent in 1998, this means that welfare use would have

been 12 to 14 percent higher if time limits had not been imposed.




                                              29
          Further light can be shed on this magnitude by comparing the effect of time limits

with the reduction in the welfare utilization rate over the post-reform time period.

Between 1993 and 1998, the welfare utilization rate among female-headed families fell

by 14.5 percentage points, from 33.1 percent to 18.6 percent. The exercise above

suggests that time limits account for 16 to 18 percent of this decline.

          D. Robustness of the Estimates

          Table 6 presents estimates from some additional regressions that are provided to

assess the robustness of the estimates to a number of potential specification issues. To

save space, I present only the coefficients of the time limit variable and the age-time limit

interactions. Columns (1) and (6) include three lags of the state unemployment rate, as

do the specifications reported by CEA (1999); they also include interactions between the

lagged unemployment rates and the age of the youngest child in the family. Including the

additional unemployment terms has little effect on the estimates of the effects of time

limits.

          Columns (2) and (7) report estimates from models that include age-group-specific

quadratic trends. Bavier (1999) reports that underreporting of welfare use may have risen

over time in the CPS. If this change in underreporting occurred independently of the age

of the youngest child in the family, then it would difference out between age groups and

have no effect on my age-dependent estimates of the effects of time limits. If it occurred

differentially by age group, however, then the estimates could be biased, although the

direction of the bias cannot be assessed a priori. There are no direct measures of the

extent of underreporting; to account for this problem at least to some extent I have

allowed for differential quadratic time trends by age group. The trend coefficients are




                                              30
jointly insignificant, with an F-statistic of 1.56 in the step-function specification in

column (2) and 1.76 in the linear interaction specification in column (7). Adding these

terms has little bearing on the estimated effects of time limits.

        The estimates in columns (3) and (8) are based on samples that exclude 1998 data

from Connecticut, which is the only state whose time limit is sufficiently short that

families could have actually exhausted their benefits by the end of 1998. Since my

interest here focuses on anticipatory responses to time limits, I drop these observations to

ensure that my results are not merely stemming from the effect of families reaching their

limits and being forced off the rolls. Dropping these observations has little effect on the

estimates.

        The next set of estimates are based on specifications in which the age groups are

defined in a manner that accounts for differing time limit lengths across states. As noted

above, time limits amount to a non-binding constraint for families whose youngest child

exceeds a threshold age, where the threshold age in turn depends on the length of the

state's time limit. For states imposing the federal five-year limit, the threshold age is 13,

and that is the threshold age that I have used in all the specifications above. Here,

however, I allow the threshold age to vary by state, and include in the oldest age group

only families whose youngest children exceed the state-specific threshold. In the step

function specification, the intermediate age group is defined correspondingly as

extending from age 7 to the threshold age. These changes to the model have little effect

on the estimated effects of time limits.

        The final set of estimates, in columns (5) and (10), are based on data from the

period 1989-1998. Moffitt (1999) found that his estimates of the effects of welfare




                                              31
reform were sensitive to the particular business cycle he used to estimate the effect of

unemployment on welfare use. By restricting the sample to the 1989-1998 period, I

utilize only data from the most recent recession, during which welfare caseloads were

particularly sensitive to economic conditions (Blank 1997). Although the estimated

effect of the unemployment rate (not shown) was indeed somewhat larger than that

obtained from the full sample, the estimated effects of time limits are little affected by

restricting the sample in this way.

VI. Conclusions

       When I estimate models that constrain the effects of time limits to be independent

of age, I obtain results that suggest that time limits have had no effect on welfare use.

When I allow for age dependence, however, the estimates indicate that time limits have

reduced welfare use by the greatest amount among families with the youngest children,

consistent with the prediction from GM. Models that include state-fixed effects yield

evidence of policy endogeneity which suggests that states that experienced above-average

caseload growth were earlier to implement time limits than states with below-average

growth. Models with more general controls for state-specific unobservables largely

eliminate the evidence of policy endogeneity. Estimates from these models suggest that

1998 welfare use among female-headed families would have been 14 to 16 percent higher

in the absence of time limits.

       Although these estimates suggest that time limit have played an important role in

reducing welfare use, it would be useful to refine them in a number of ways in future

work. First, it would be useful to more fully characterize other aspects of states' welfare

reform programs. Here I have allowed time limits to interact with other welfare reforms




                                             32
generally without specifically characterizing those other reforms. Characterizing other

reforms in greater detail would have two benefits. First, it would allow one to determine

the effects of those other reforms. Second, it would allow one to test for interactions

between time limits and specific welfare reform provisions along the lines suggested by

Moffitt and Pavetti (1999).

       Indeed it would be useful to characterize time limits more fully as well. States'

time limit policies vary in a number of ways. Their lifetime limits vary in length from 21

to 60 months. Some states have implemented intermittent limits as well, whereby

families may receive benefits consecutively for no more than a given number of months

(typically, 24), even though they have not yet exhausted their lifetime limit. Some states

drop the entire family from the aid rolls when it reaches its time limit; others drop only

the adult. States also vary as to their policies for granting exemptions and extensions.

This study has answered a fairly general question, which is how the imposition of time

limits affects welfare use. In the future it would be valuable to estimate how specific

aspects of time limit policies alter those general effects.




                                              33
References

Bavier, Richard. "An Early Look at the Effects of Welfare Reform." Mimeo, Office of
       Management and Budget, March 1999.

Blank, Rebecca. "What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?" NBER working
       paper 6343, December 1997.

Committee on Ways and Means. 1994 Green Book. Washington: Government Printing
     Office, 1994.

Council of Economic Advisers. "Technical Report: Explaining the Decline in Welfare
      Receipt, 19993-1996." May 1997.

Council of Economic Advisers. "Technical Report: The Effects of Welfare Policy and the
      Economic Expansion on Welfare Caseloads: An Update." August 1999.

Department of Health and Human Services. Setting the Baseline: A Report on State
      Welfare Waivers. http://aspe.os.dhhs.gov/hsp/isp/waiver2/title.htm. 1997.

Department of Health and Human Services. Changes in TANF Caseloads.
      http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/news/stats/caseload.htm. December 1999.

Duncan, GJ; Yeung, WJ; Brooks-Gunn, J; Smith, JR (1998). How Much Does
      Childhood Poverty Affect The Life Chances Of Children?. American Sociological
      Review, 63(N3):406-423.

Ellwood, David and Mary Jo Bane. "The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure and
      Living Arraignments." In Ron G. Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics,
      vol. 7. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, 1985.

Figlio, David N. and James P. Ziliak. "Welfare Reform, the Business Cycle, and the
        Decline in AFDC Caseloads." In Sheldon Danziger, ed., Welfare Reform and the
        Economy: What Will Happen When a Recession Comes? Kalamazoo, MI:
        Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1999.

Gallagher, L. Jerome, Megan Gallagher, Kevin Perese, Susan Schreiber, Keith Watson. ”
       One Year After Federal Welfare Reform: A Description of State Temporary
       Assistance for Needy Families(TANF) Decisions as of October 1997." Mimeo,
       Urban Institute, May 1998.

Grogger, Jeff and Charles Michalopoulos. "Welfare Reform Under Time Limits." NBER
      working paper 7353, September 1999.

Guo, Guang (1998). "The Timing of the Influences of Cumulative Poverty on Children's
      Cognitive Ability and Achievement." Social Forces 77: 257-288.
Martini, Alberto and Michael Wiseman. "Explaining the Recent Decline in Welfare
       Caseloads: Is the Council of Economic Advisers Right?" Mimeo, Urban Institute,
       July 1997.

Moffitt, Robert A. "The Effect of pre-PRWORA Waivers on AFDC Caseloads and
        Female Earnings, Income, and Labor Force Behavior." Mimeo, Johns Hopkins
        University, May 1999.

Moffitt, Robert A. and LaDonna A. Pavetti. "Time Limits." Mimeo, May 1999.

Schoeni, Robert and Rebecca Blank. What has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts
      on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure."
      NBER working paper 7627, March 2000.

Wallace, Geoffrey and Rebecca M. Blank. "What Goes Up Must Come Down?
       Explaining Recent Changes in Public Assistance Caseloads." Mimeo,
       Northwestern University, February 1999.

Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly.
        "Accounting for the Decline in AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or Economic
        Growth?" Mimeo, Institute for Research on Poverty, November 1997.




                                         35
                                       Table 1
       Number of States Newly Implementing Various State-Wide Welfare Reforms,
                              by Year of Implementation
Reform measure            1992      1993      1994      1995      1996     1997      1998     Total 1

Any state-wide              3         4         4         8        19        13        1        52
reform2

Time limit 3                          1                   5      21 (7)    21 (8)    2 (2)      50

Work requirement 2          1                   2         3      19 (9)    25(11)    2 (2)      52

Enhanced earnings           1         3         1         2      16 (4)    17 (6)    1 (1)      41
disregard


Notes: Numbers in parentheses give the number of states newly implementing a specific reform
that already had some type of state-wide reform in effect. Thus of the 21 states first
implementing time limits in 1996, 7 already had other state-wide reforms in place.

1 - Washington, DC is counted as a state.
2 - New Mexico implemented TANF (its first state-wide reform) in 1997 and again in 1998 after
its first plan was ruled unconstitutional. Thus it is counted twice, accounting for the totals of 52.
3 - Michigan and Vermont use state funds after federal funds are exhausted. These two states
effectively have no time limit. Because New Mexico is counted twice (see note 2), the total is 50.
                                      Table 2
   Welfare Utilization Rates among Female-Headed Families, by Age of Youngest
            Child, Before and After the Implementation of Time Limits

                            Before time       After time                       Difference-
Age of youngest child          limits           limits         Difference     in-differences
0-6                            0.413            0.238           -0.175            -0.125
                             [49,758]          [4,808]          (0.014)          (0.013)

7 - 12                          0.231            0.133          -0.098           -0.048
                              [26,096]          [2,492]         (0.010)          (0.012)

13 - 17                         0.160            0.110          -0.050
                              [14,826]          [1,419]         (0.013)

Total                           0.320            0.188          -0.132
                              [90,680]          [8,719]         (0.011)



Note: Sample size is 99,399. Figures in brackets are cell sizes, figures in parentheses are
standard errors that have been adjusted for clustering within state-year cells.
                                       Table 3
Regression Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits and Welfare Reform on Welfare
                Utilization, without Allowing for Age Dependence

Variable                  (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
Time limit (from                                              0.004
CEA 1999)                                                    (0.014)

Time limit (from                                                                0.015
author)                                                                        (0.017)

Any waiver              -0.021
                        (0.008)

TANF                    -0.021
                        (0.024)

Reform                                    -0.021             -0.021            -0.024
                                          (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.008)

Unemployment             0.009             0.009              0.009             0.009
rate                    (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)

Log(maximum              0.063             0.062              0.064             0.059
benefit)                (0.024)           (0.024)            (0.024)           (0.024)

Log(minimum             -0.131            -0.131             -0.131            -0.132
wage)                   (0.052)           (0.052)            (0.052)           (0.052)

Adjusted R-              0.213             0.213              0.213             0.213
square

Notes: Sample size is 99,399. The time limit variable included in regression (3) is taken
from CEA (1999). The time limit variable included in regression (4) was constructed by
the author in the manner described in the text. In addition to the variables shown, all
regressions include a cubic polynomial in the mother's age, dummies for the mother's
education (dropout, some college, college or more), dummies for the mother's race
(black, other non-white), dummies for the number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6
or more), dummies for the youngest child's age group (0-6, 7-12), year dummies, and
state dummies. Figures in parentheses are standard errors that are corrected for clustering
within state-year cells.




                                            38
                                         Table 4
             Estimates of the Effect of Time Limits on Welfare Utilization,
                             Allowing for Age Dependence

Variable                          (1)                 (2)                   (3)
Time limit × age of             -0.145
youngest child is 0 - 6        (0.014)

Time limit × age of             -0.050
youngest child is 7 - 12       (0.014)

Time limit × Age*                                    0.013                0.014
                                                    (0.001)              (0.003)

Time limit × Age*                                                         0.007
squared (÷ 100)                                                          (0.020)

Time limit                      0.110                0.107                0.109
                               (0.020)              (0.019)              (0.019)

Reform                          -0.025              -0.026               -0.026
                               (0.008)              (0.008)              (0.008)

Unemployment rate               0.009                0.009                0.009
                               (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)

Log(maximum benefit)            0.058                0.056                0.056
                               (0.024)              (0.024)              (0.024)

Log (minimum wage)              -0.130              -0.130               -0.130
                               (0.051)              (0.052)              (0.052)

Adjusted R-square               0.214                0.217                0.217

Notes: Sample size is 99,399. The time limit variable included in the regressions was
constructed by the author in the manner described in the text. Age* = Age - 13 if Age <
13 and Age* = 0 if Age ≥ 13, where Age denotes the age of the youngest child in the
family. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions include a cubic polynomial in
the mother's age, dummies for the mother's education (dropout, some college, college or
more), dummies for the mother's race (black, other non-white), dummies for the number
of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more), year dummies, and state dummies. The
model in column (1) also includes dummies for the youngest child's age group (0-6, 7-
12); the models in columns (2) and (3) include a cubic polynomial in the age of the
youngest child. Figures in parentheses are standard errors that are corrected for
clustering within state-year cells.




                                            39
                                                     Table 5
                    Age-Dependent Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits on Welfare Utilization
                                 With Various Controls for Policy Endogeneity
Variable                              (1)                (2)                 (3)                    (4)
Time limit × age of                 -0.086             -0.087
youngest child is 0 - 6             (0.020)            (0.019)

Time limit ×age of youngest         -0.054             -0.054
child is 7 - 12                     (0.023)            (0.021)

Time limit × Age*                                                           0.007               0.007
                                                                           (0.002)             (0.001)

Time limit                           0.034                                  0.018
                                    (0.021)                                (0.017)

Reform × age of youngest            -0.020             -0.017
child is 0 - 6                      (0.015)            (0.015)

Reform × age of youngest             0.016              0.017
child is 7 - 12                     (0.017)            (0.016)

Reform × Age                                                                0.003               0.003
                                                                           (0.001)             (0.001)

Reform                               0.005                                 -0.019
                                    (0.014)                                (0.011)

Unemployment × youngest              0.003              0.003
child is 0 - 6                      (0.002)            (0.002)

Unemployment × youngest             -0.001             -0.000
child is 7 - 12                     (0.003)            (0.002)

Unemployment × Age                                                         -0.0003            -0.0003
                                                                           (0.0002)           (0.0001)

Unemployment                         0.004                                  0.007
                                    (0.003)                                (0.002)

Log (maximum benefit) ×              0.091              0.090
youngest child is 0 - 6             (0.010)            (0.009)

Log (maximum benefit) ×              0.034              0.034
youngest child is 7 - 12            (0.010)            (0.010)

Log (maximum benefit) ×                                                    -0.007              -0.007
Age                                                                        (0.001)             (0.001)

Log (maximum benefit)               -0.003                                  0.100
                                    (0.041)                                (0.041)

Log (minimum wage) ×                 0.052              0.054
youngest child is 0 - 6             (0.039)            (0.039)

Log (minimum wage) ×                -0.019             -0.032
youngest child is 7 - 12            (0.042)            (0.042)

Log (minimum wage) ×                                                       -0.008              -0.009
Age                                                                        (0.003)             (0.003)

Log (minimum wage)                  -0.023                                  0.050
                                    (0.058)                                (0.056)

State-specific quadratic             Yes                                     Yes
trends
State-year dummies                                       Yes                                       Yes

Adjusted R-square                   0.217               0.218               0.220                  0.221


                                                        40
Notes: Sample size is 99,399. The time limit variable included in the regressions was constructed by the
author in the manner described in the text. Age* = Age - 13 if Age < 13 and Age* = 0 if Age ≥ 13, where
Age denotes the age of the youngest child in the family. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions
include a cubic polynomial in the mother's age, dummies for the mother's education (dropout, some
college, college or more), dummies for the mother's race (black, other non-white), dummies for the
number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more), year dummies, and state dummies. The models in
column (1) - (2) also includes dummies for the youngest child's age group (0-6, 7-12); the models in
columns (3)- (4) include a cubic polynomial in the age of the youngest child. Figures in parentheses are
standard errors that are corrected for clustering within state-year cells




                                                    41
                                                               Table 6
                                      Additional Age-Dependent Estimates of the Effects of Time Limits from Models
                                                          with State-Specific Quadratic Trends
                                   (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)                  (9)           (10)

    Time limit × age of          -0.091      -0.096     -0.083      -0.091     -0.105
    youngest child is 0 - 6     (0.021)     (0.022)    (0.021)     (0.029)    (0.023)

    Time limit × age of          -0.056      -0.060     -0.051      -0.047     -0.064
    youngest child is 7 - 12a   (0.023)     (0.025)    (0.023)     (0.032)    (0.026)

    Time limit × Age*                                                                      0.006       0.006       0.007       0.006          0.008
                                                                                          (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)        (0.002)

    Time limit                   0.042       0.042      0.039       0.039      0.047       0.021       0.013       0.024       0.020          0.035
                                (0.021)     (0.022)    (0.024)     (0.030)    (0.024)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.019)     (0.018)        (0.019)

    First two lags of             Yes                                                      Yes
    unemployment and age
    interactions

    Age group-specific                        Yes                                                      Yes
    quadratic trends

    Delete 1998                                          Yes                                                        Yes
    observations from
    California and
    Connecticut

    State-specific threshold                                         Yes                                                        Yes
    ages

    1989-1998 data only                                                         Yes                                                           Yes

    Adjusted R-square            0.217       0.217      0.217       0.217      0.199       0.220      0.218       0.220        0.218         0.201

    Sample size                  99,399      99,399    99,354      99,399     48,802      99,399      99,399      99,354      99,399         48,802

Notes: The time limit variable included in the regressions was constructed by the author in the manner described in the text. Age* = Age - 13 if
Age < 13 and Age* = 0 if Age ≥ 13, where Age denotes the age of the youngest child in the family. In addition to the variables shown, all
regressions include a cubic polynomial in the mother's age, dummies for the mother's education (dropout, some college, college or more),
dummies for the mother's race (black, other non-white), dummies for the number of children in the family (2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or more), and state-year
dummies. The models in column (1) - (4) also include dummies for the youngest child's age group (0-6, 7-12); the models in columns (5) - (8)
include a cubic polynomial in the age of the youngest child. In addition, the models in columns (1) and (5) include two lags of the
unemployment rate and corresponding age interactions; the models in columns (2) and (6) include quadratic age-group-specific trends. The
models in columns (3) and (7) exclude 1998 observations from California and Connecticut. Figures in parentheses are standard errors.
a
    In column (4) the intermediate age group runs from 7 to the state-specific threshold age, which depends on the length of the state's time
limit. In column (8), . Age* = Age -     Ast if Age < Ast   and Age* = 0 if Age ≥   Ast , where Ast   is the state-specific threshold age.




                                                                               42
                                             Appendix Table
                        Means (Standard Deviations) of Variables Used in the Analysis
Welfare use                                                                     0.309

Time Limit                                                                     0.110

Reform                                                                         0.194

Age of youngest child                                                           6.21
                                                                               (5.20)

    0-6                                                                        0.553

   7 - 12                                                                       0283

  13 - 17                                                                      0.164

Unemployment rate                                                               6.58
                                                                               (1.95)

Log (maximum benefit)                                                           1.49
                                                                               (0.46)

Log (minimum wage)                                                              1.89
                                                                               (0.10)

Mother's age                                                                   33.23
                                                                               (8.38)

Mother's education
   Dropout                                                                     0.250

    High school only                                                           0.407

    Some college                                                               0.247

    College or more                                                            0.096

Mother's race
   White                                                                       0.648

    Black                                                                      0.323

    Other non-white                                                            0.029

Number of children
   1                                                                           0.504

    2                                                                           0313

    3                                                                          0.123

    4                                                                          0.040

    5                                                                          0.013

    6 or more                                                                  0.007


Note: Data are weighted.
                                                    43
