                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC BANK PARTICIPATION IN EMERGING
                 MARKETS: LESSONS FROM MEXICO AND ARGENTINA


                                                  Linda Goldberg
                                                  B. Gerard Dages
                                                   Daniel Kinney


                                               Working Paper 7714
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w7714



                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          May 2000



The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Kevin
Caves provided careful and dedicated research assistance. Jennifer Crystal provided excellent general assistance on issues
in Argentine and Mexican banking. Useful comments were provided by Giovanni Dell’Arricia, Jane Little, anonymous
referees, and participants at the February 2000 IMF/ World Bank/ IADB Conference on Financial Contagion, the April
2000 Federal Reserve System Committee on International Economics, and the April 2000 SUERF Colloquium on
Adapting to Financial Globalization.

© 2000 by Linda Goldberg, B. Gerard Dages, and Daniel Kinney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Foreign and Domestic Bank Participation in Emerging Markets:
Lessons from Mexico and Argentina
Linda Goldberg, B. Gerard Dages, and Daniel Kinney
NBER Working Paper No. 7714
May 2000
JEL No. F3, F34, G21, N20


                                           ABSTRACT

      The Asian Crisis has highlighted the importance of strong domestic financial systems in
  overall economic development and stabilization. Less agreement is evident on the role of
  foreign banks in achieving this goal. We explore this issue by studying bank-specific data on
  lending by domestically- and foreign-owned banks in Argentina and Mexico. We find that
  foreign banks generally have had higher loan growth rates than their domestically-owned
  counterparts, with lower volatility of lending, contributing to lower overall volatility of credit.
  Additionally, in both countries, foreign banks show notable credit growth during crisis periods.
  In Argentina, the loan portfolios of foreign and domestic privately-owned banks are similar, and
  lending rates analogously respond to aggregate demand fluctuations. In Mexico, foreign and
  domestic banks with lower levels of impaired assets have similar loan responsiveness and
  portfolios. State-owned banks (Argentina) and banks with high levels of impaired assets
  (Mexico) have more stagnant loan growth and weak responsiveness to market signals. Overall,
  these findings suggest that bank health, and not ownership per se, is the critical element in the
  growth, volatility, and cyclicality of bank credit. Diversity in ownership appears to contribute
  to greater stability of credit in times of crisis and domestic financial system weakness.


  Linda Goldberg                                              B. Gerard Dages
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York                            Federal Reserve Bank of New York
  33 Liberty Street                                           33 Liberty Street
  New York, NY 10045                                          New York, NY 10045
  and NBER
  Linda.Goldberg@ny.frb.org

  Daniel Kinney
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York
  33 Liberty Street
  New York, NY 10045
1. Introduction

         During the past decade, numerous financial systems have opened up to direct foreign
participation through the ownership of local financial institutions, frequently as a direct
consequence of -- and a perceived solution to -- financial crises. Significant increases in
foreign participation in domestic financial systems have characterized the transition experience
of Eastern Europe, and the post-Tequila period in Latin America. The experience in Crisis
Asia has been markedly different to date, however, and is more notable for the limited nature
of majority investments by foreign banks, despite the need for large-scale recapitalization of
the region’s troubled financial systems.
         Arguments supporting a policy of openness to foreign participation are far from
universally accepted. The benefits for emerging markets of foreign participation in domestic
financial systems are widely exposited and argued to be broad-based. These arguments are,
however, mirrored by a set of concerns over the potentially adverse effects of opening to
foreign participation (or at least opening too quickly). There is a shortage of hard evidence to
support either side.
         This paper attempts to contribute factually to the debate over the role of financial
openness in emerging markets by exploring the experiences of Argentina and Mexico – two of
the emerging markets that exhibit a significant degree and duration of foreign bank activity.
Our first steps are to recap the opposing arguments regarding the role of foreign-owned banks
in emerging markets. Next, we argue that ownership per se is not a reason to expect differences
in the lending patterns of domestic and foreign banks: instead, differences would arise because
of lending objectives, funding patterns, market access, and health.
         We then review recent liberalization efforts in both Argentina and Mexico, and
examine patterns in local lending by foreign-owned and domestically-owned local banks,
including state-owned banks.1 Our goal is to document the relative stability in lending by these
banks to different client bases and to examine the cyclical properties of such lending.
Throughout, we base our analysis on published quarterly loan data for individual banks in
Mexico and in Argentina in the 1990s. We examine total lending, personal/consumer lending,



1
 We define “foreign-owned” to reflect majority control; this definition does not necessarily imply majority share
ownership.


                                                        1
mortgage lending, and the broad remaining group that includes commercial, government, and
other loans.
       Econometrically, we show that in Mexico and Argentina differences in behavior are
apparent across some types of banks. The differences are related to whether or not a bank is
public or private, potentially reflecting the role of different lending motives across these
institutions. Bank responsiveness also is significantly related to the asset quality of the bank
portfolio. In response to some types of economic fluctuations, domestic privately-owned banks
with low impaired-loan shares can have more volatile lending than their foreign bank
counterparts. We argue that these differences are plausible and to be expected, especially if
these banks rely on different sources of funds.
       Overall, based on bank lending patterns from 1994 through the middle of 1999, we do
not find any support for the view that foreign banks contribute to instability or are excessively
volatile in their responses to market signals. In Argentina, the extensive and rapid reforms in
banking have led to a system where both foreign and domestic privately-owned banks are
responsive to market signals, but where behavior is now consistent with a more diversified
funding base. In Mexico, despite reform efforts in the second half of the 1990s, many domestic
banks continue to face significant asset quality problems. We find that these banks have had
shrinking loan portfolios in the post-crisis period. Healthy foreign banks have emerged as an
important engine of growth for funding local investment and growth opportunities, without
raising lending volatility in comparison to their local counterparts.

2. Foreign Ownership of Emerging Market Financial Institutions

Arguments in Favor of Foreign Bank Participation

        Arguments in favor of opening domestic financial sectors to foreign ownership have
been primarily threefold. First, consistent with traditional arguments in support of capital
account liberalization, foreign bank presence is argued to increase the amount of funding
available to domestic projects by facilitating capital inflows. Foreign bank presence may also
increase the stability of available lending, by diversifying the capital and funding bases




                                                  2
supporting the supply of domestic credit, an argument that appears especially persuasive for
small and/or volatile economies.2
           Second, foreign banks are argued to improve the quality, pricing, and availability of
financial services, both directly as providers of such enhanced services and indirectly through
competition with domestic financial institutions (Levine 1996). Finally, foreign bank presence
is argued to improve financial system infrastructure, including accounting and transparency,
financial regulation, and through stimulating the increased presence of such supporting agents
as rating agencies, auditors, and credit bureaus (Glaessner and Oks 1994). A foreign presence
may also enhance the ability of financial institutions to effectively measure and manage risk.
Foreign bank presence may import financial system supervision and supervisory skills from
home country regulators. While many of these goals may ultimately be achievable without
foreign financial institutions, increased foreign presence may meaningfully accelerate the
process.
         While there is a sizeable body of research exploring the potential benefits of financial
liberalization broadly defined, few studies have focused specifically on the potential benefits of
increased foreign participation in banking and finance.3 For the most part, these studies focus
on bank efficiency spillovers, but not lending behaviors. For example, a recent cross-country
study shows that foreign bank presence has been associated with lower profitability and lower
overhead expenses for domestic banks, hence with enhanced domestic bank efficiency
(Claessens, Demirguc-Kunt, and Huizinga 1998)4.                    Findings of increased domestic bank
efficiency and heightened competition also are supported in the Argentine experience in the
mid-1990s (Clarke, Cull, D’Amato, and Molinari 1999). Increased foreign competition in
corporate loan markets reduced associated net margins and before-tax profits; margins and
profits remained higher in the consumer sector that had not attracted comparable foreign




2
  Some of these arguments parallel those supporting the recent repeal in the United States of the McFadden Act,
which restricted interstate bank branching and limited diversification of U.S. bank loan portfolios. Meltzer (1998),
for example, emphasizes the importance of risk diversification as an argument for removing legal and regulatory
obstacles to bank branching internationally.
3
  Other work considers the post-liberalization dynamics of deposit taking and its responsiveness to bank riskiness
in Mexico, Argentina, Chile, and Canada (Peria and Schmukler, 1999; Gruben, Koo, and Moore, 1999).
4
  Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Ross Levine, and Hong-Ghi Min (1998) present similar results.


                                                         3
entry.5 Evidence on behavioral comparisons between foreign and domestically-owned banks
remains largely undocumented.


Arguments Against Foreign Bank Participation
         Arguments against opening domestic financial systems to foreign ownership in part
mirror the arguments presented above. One strand of concern argues that foreign-owned
financial institutions will in fact decrease the stability of aggregate domestic bank credit, by
providing additional avenues for capital flight, or by more rapidly withdrawing from local
markets in the face of crisis (either in the host or home country). A second argument relates to
concerns that foreign financial institutions “cherry pick” the most lucrative domestic markets
or customers, leaving less competitive domestic institutions to serve other (more risky)
customers and increasing the risk borne by domestic institutions. Independent of the effect on
aggregate credit generally or during crisis, the distribution of credit may be impacted, resulting
in redistribution and potential crowding out of some segments of local borrowers.
         These concerns blur into similar arguments centered on the principle that financial
services represent a strategic industry that is best controlled by domestic interests, especially in
the context of a state-directed development model in which domestic banks serve identified
development interests. Such arguments, however, are especially likely to be voiced by
domestic concerns that will be most negatively affected by financial sector opening – whereas
any benefits are likely to accrue across broader segments of the economy.
         Contrary to the argument that increased foreign ownership imports improved financial
supervision, others have voiced concern over the multiple challenges to supervision raised by
complex financial institutions active in a number of jurisdictions. These concerns are
accentuated by asymmetries in information between home and host country supervisors.
         Even among those who support increased foreign ownership, many argue that the
sequencing of such opening is critical, and that it should follow the consolidation and
strengthening of the domestic financial system and/or the development of necessary financial
infrastructure, including supervision. Most of these concerns are generally unsupported by
empirical evidence. However, recent research into the sources of financial crises has fueled an

5
 Burdisso, D’Amato and Molinari (1998) also show that bank privatization increased Argentine bank efficiency,
and that consolidation of retail banking led to scale efficiency gains. Privatization led to reduced portfolio risk and
more efficient allocation of credit.


                                                          4
additional concern by establishing a pattern in which financial crises tend to be preceded by
financial liberalization (Kaminsky and Reinhart 1999, Rojas-Suarez 1997). Such studies,
however, generally have not focused specifically on, or identified the role of, foreign-owned
financial institutions in contributing to or mitigating crises. The exception is Demirguc-Kunt,
Levine and Min (1998): over the 1988 to 1995 period and for a large sample of countries,
foreign bank entry was generally associated with a lower incidence of local banking crises.
         The need for an understanding of the implications of increased foreign bank presence
is especially compelling in the wake of financial crises. In this context, foreign institutions may
represent important sources of equity capital for domestic financial systems, especially in post-
crisis recapitalization efforts like those currently underway in Asia. In addition to serving as a
means towards accomplishing the goal of having an active and efficient private banking
network, foreign institutions may bring important attributes not present in domestic financial
institutions.


Conceptualizing Differences Among Banks in Loan Supply and Volatility
        The crux of some of the arguments for and against foreign bank participation could be
better understood within the context of a conceptual framework of bank lending volatility and
funding availability. Specifically, we expect that lending patterns will vary among state-owned,
private domestically-owned and private foreign-owned banks to the extent that there are
corresponding differences in bank motives or goals, in balance-sheet health, and in funding
sources.6 These differences in motives, health, and funding diversity would influence the
interest-rate sensitivity of loan supply by any bank, and the extent to which a bank expands or
contracts lending in response to various market signals.
        Some of the points raised in the aforementioned debate on credit volatility hinge on the
idea that interest rate sensitivity of lending is likely to be greatest for banks with closer ties to
international capital markets, all else equal, given a wider access to profitable investment
opportunities. In emerging markets, banks with foreign affiliates are likely to have such ties,
potentially leading them to have more interest-rate elastic loan supply than private
domestically-owned banks. Moreover, if profitability is more of a motive for private domestic

6
 The exposition in this section closely follows from Goldberg (2000). In a domestic banking system, arguments
about lending sensitivity to fluctuations follows the tradition of Peek and Rosengren (1997 and forthcoming) and
Hancock and Wilcox (1998).


                                                       5
banks than for state-owned banks, the latter would be expected to have the lowest interest-rate
sensitivity among this group.
        However, despite such presumed differences across banks, it is inappropriate to
conclude that foreign banks will necessarily have more volatile lending patterns. Loan supply
and demand may differ across banks for numerous reasons. One reason is that banks may be
distinct from each other in terms of lending motives with respect to the clients they serve.
Under “transactions-based” lending, improved economic conditions generate opportunities for
expanding production and investment. Bank loans expand to accommodate part of this
demand. Alternatively, under “relationship lending” motives, bank lending helps established
customers smooth over the effects of cyclical fluctuations or consumption smooth. In adverse
economic conditions, lending expands to offset some of the revenue shortfall of clients; in
good economic conditions, net lending by banks declines as borrowers pay back prior loans.
Under these stylized conditions, relationship lending is counter-cyclical, while transactions-
based lending is pro-cyclical.
        The quality of bank balance sheets also can influence bank responsiveness to any types
of market signals. Banks focussed on balance sheet repair will concentrate less on expanding
loan availability when aggregate demand conditions improve, leaving profitable local
investment opportunities under-funded. Thus, poor health of banks could be associated with
reduced loan variability, lower sensitivity to market signals, and missed opportunities for
profitable and efficient investment. An alternative and potentially more dangerous scenario
arises when less healthy banks, instead of undertaking balance sheet repair, focus on lending
expansion in a gamble for redemption. Overall, if the local banking system health is
compromised, the presence of healthy foreign banks should reduce some of the negative
current and future externalities attributable to unhealthy local lenders. In this scenario, foreign
bank presence fills a domestic vacuum by providing finance for worthy local projects.
        Lending sensitivity across banks will also depend on the bank’s sources of loanable
funds. If domestically-owned banks rely more heavily on local demand deposits and cyclically-
sensitive sources of funds,7 basic aggregate demand shocks should generally lead to more
volatile lending by private domestic banks than from their foreign-owned counterparts. In the


7
 As argued by Peek and Rosengren (1997) and Hancock and Wilcox (1998), local demand deposits are positively
correlated with the local business cycle.


                                                     6
same vein, smaller domestic banks with more narrow funding bases are likely to demonstrate
the greatest degree of credit cyclicality, all else equal.


3. Case Studies: Foreign versus Domestic Banks in Argentina and Mexico
        As we turn to the specific experiences of Mexico and Argentina, our goal is to
document some patterns in lending activity and provide factual evidence on two main
questions. First, did foreign bank participation in local markets deepen or diversify local
financial markets and improve the stability of bank lending? And, second, did foreign bank
participation increase the sensitivity of lending to market signals? Our conceptual discussion
leads us to expect that (healthy) foreign banks will be more sensitive to market signals than
unhealthy banks or state-owned banks with different lending goals. On the other hand, some
types of aggregate fluctuations --- such as those arising from local GDP cycles --- may lead to
more lending fluctuation by healthy local banks than by healthy foreign banks, especially if
domestic banks have less diversified funding bases.
        Argentina and Mexico are both instructive case studies for examining the implications
of broader foreign bank participation in domestic markets. Over the course of the last decade,
both countries implemented reforms facilitating foreign bank entry and then experienced a
substantive internationalization of domestic financial markets, with the pace of foreign entry
sharply accelerating in the wake of severe financial crises. However, their experiences have
also contrasted markedly with regard to the pace, depth and nature of foreign bank penetration.
In Argentina, foreign banks now participate on an equal footing with domestic institutions and
are active in all broad segments of the loan market.         In Mexico, foreign banks face a
competitive landscape dominated by large domestic banks. Furthermore, the financial sector
as a whole remains in fragile condition with real loan growth yet to recover from the 1994
Tequila Crisis. We briefly outline the experiences of each country, focusing on enabling
financial sector reforms and the evolution of the foreign bank presence before turning to the
data analysis.




                                                   7
Argentina: Financial Reforms and Foreign Entry
        Introduction of the Convertibility Plan in 1991 marked a turning point in Argentine
financial history – heralding profound monetary and fiscal reform, broad deregulation of
domestic markets, privatization of a majority of government-owned entities, trade
liberalization, elimination of capital controls and, more generally, a macroeconomic
environment conducive to foreign investment.
        The Convertibility Plan succeeded in stemming hyperinflationary pressures and
restoring economic growth relatively quickly. Within the financial sector, this contributed to
enhanced intermediation: credit to the private sector almost doubled, to 19% of GDP by year-
end 1994, up from close to 10% of GDP in 1990. Following the removal of restrictions on
foreign direct investment and capital repatriation, the number of foreign banks operating in
Argentina increased, but remained under 20% of system assets through year-end 1994 (Table
1).


          Table 1: Penetration of Foreign Banks into Argentine Lending Markets
                             (as percentage of total lending in each category)


             Type of Loan                          1994                   1997           1999

                Personal                           25.4                   48.5            45.8

               Mortgage                            10.3                   20.4            31.9

  Commercial, Government, & Other                  19.0                   37.4            53.2

              Total Loans                          18.0                   35.0            48.1

Source: Author’s calculations using data from Información de Entidades Financieras, Banco Central de la
Republica Argentina, various issues.


        Beginning in early 1995, contagion from Mexico’s Tequila Crisis severely tested the
Argentine financial sector – sparking an outflow of almost 20% of system deposits. It was in
the wake of the Tequila Crisis that the transformation of the Argentine financial sector
accelerated. Efforts undertaken to re-establish confidence in the banking sector included the
introduction of deposit insurance, a renewed commitment to privatizing inefficient public


                                                    8
sector banks, the liquidation and/or consolidation of nonviable entities, and the dedication of
substantial resources to strengthening supervisory oversight and the regulatory framework.
Within this context, foreign banks were permitted to play an important role in recapitalizing the
Argentine banking system.
        Prior to the 1990’s, very few foreign banks were present in Argentina, with U.S.- based
institutions – primarily Citibank and BankBoston – among the more active. Subsequent entry
occurred mainly via the acquisition of existing operations, with foreign shareholders acquiring
stakes in private institutions with a national or regional franchise – generally in better condition
and with stronger distribution networks than privatized provincial and municipal banks. Such
acquisitions accelerated dramatically beginning in 1996 with foreign banks acquiring
controlling stakes in a majority of Argentina’s largest private banks. 8 By 1999, roughly half of
banking sector assets were under foreign control (with foreign shareholders holding significant
minority stakes in a number of other financial institutions).
        The growing foreign bank presence dramatically altered the competitive landscape of
Argentina’s banking sector and catalyzed aggressive competition for market share, primarily
via retail expansion. As is evident in Table 1, foreign-controlled banks have been particularly
successful in penetrating commercial, government, interbank and personal loan markets.
While they still appear to lag domestic counterparts in mortgage lending, this may change in
the wake of the January 1999 privatization of a controlling stake in the national mortgage bank.
        Overall, foreign and domestic banks in Argentina appear to compete aggressively in all
segments of the local loan market. Details of foreign and domestic bank loan portfolios are
provided in Table 2.9 It is striking that foreign banks generally engage in the same types of
broad lending activities as domestic banks, but are more heavily weighted toward relatively
lower-risk commercial, government and other lending.10 Overall, the recent growth in foreign


8
   This distribution is documented in Appendix Table 1. The timing of acquisitions of domestic banks is
documented in Appendix Table 2.
9
  Our sample of Argentine bank data was constructed by identifying and including all data for all banks that were
among the largest 25 in any sample year. This resulted in a total sample of 37 institutions, with as few as 25
institutions and as many as 32 in any given quarter. All loan data that we discuss are measured in real terms,
constructed using CPI deflators. Loan data come from various editions of the Informacion de Entidades
Financieras, a publication of the Banco Central de La Republica Argentina. This publication was formerly
entitled “Estados Contables de las Entidades Financieras.” Other data: Argentina Real GDP (source: Board of
Governors, in thousands of 1986 pesos); Real interest rate was calculated using Nominal Interest Rate (period
average) and CPI series from the International Financial Statistics.
10
   These findings are consistent with the observations of Burdisso, D’Amato, and Molinari (1999).


                                                       9
bank presence and in commercial and government lending share imply that foreign banks play
an increasingly important role in this aspect of local financing. In addition, Argentine private
lending patterns appear to be much more similar to those of foreign banks than to the lending
patterns of state-owned banks. Like foreign bank portfolios, Argentine private banks tend to
have lower mortgage shares and higher shares of commercial, government, and other lending.


                       Table 2 Argentine Bank Loan Portfolio Composition
                                         (as percentage of Total Loans)

                               Domestically-Owned Banks
                                                                                  Foreign-owned Banks
                            State-Owned        Privately-Owned
 Type of Loan       1994      1997      1999      1994        1997    1999       1994        1997        1999

     Personal         5.2      5.8       5.9      13.2        10.4     6.1       14.1         13.3        5.5

     Mortgage        32.1      32.2      35.1      9.4        13.2    15.0       11.0         11.7       14.7
 Commercial,
 Government,         62.7      62.0      59.0     77.4        76.4    78.9       74.8         75.0       79.8
 & Other
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from Información de Entidades Financieras, Banco de Central la
Republica Argentina, various issues.


The foreign bank effect on loan supply patterns in Argentina
          One key issue in the ongoing policy debate is whether patterns in loan issuance by
banks have become more stable over time, as foreign banks have become more entrenched.
Using lending data from individual banks operating in Argentina, we compute weighted and
unweighted averages of quarterly bank loan growth rates. We report the mean of these growth
rates over time. We also compute the standard deviations of the loan growth rates, normalized
by mean levels of loan growth. These normalized standard deviations are an indicator of
average volatility per unit of loan growth. The unweighted numbers reflect averages across
banks, regardless of their importance in various lending markets. The weighted numbers reflect
implications for overall availability of loans by the respective classes of lenders (state-owned,
domestic private, foreign private banks).11

11
  For computing the reported statistics, we first calculate the percentage change in current loan volumes for each
individual bank within each period. Then, unweighted and weighted averages of these loan growth rates are


                                                         10
          Among domestically-owned banks, the state-owned banks exhibit relatively low
average loan portfolio growth.12 The loan growth and volatility figures for these banks are
quite striking in the crisis period, with average loan expansion close to zero and average
normalized volatility at a very high level. In all periods, private foreign banks had both the
highest quarterly loan growth and the lowest normalized variability of this growth. In the crisis
and post-crisis periods, domestic private and foreign private banks had higher loan growth and
lower normalized volatility than did domestic state-owned banks.



               Table 3: Argentina Average Quarterly Bank Loan Growth Rates
                     (in percent, with normalized standard deviations reported in parentheses)


                                   Panel A: Unweighted Average Across Individual Banks
 Time Period                All               State-Owned           Private Domestic        Private Foreign
                           Banks                 Banks                   Banks                   Banks
 Pre-Crisis                 3.6                    3.8                     2.4                     5.0

 Crisis                      2.0                     0.3                     2.1                     3.0
                            (0.7)                  (14.3)                   (1.9)                   (1.1)
 Post-Crisis                 3.2                     1.5                     3.2                     4.3
                            (0.9)                   (2.4)                   (1.0)                   (0.8)

                                    Panel B: Weighted Average Across Individual Banks
 Pre-Crisis                  2.2                    1.4                      1.4                     5.9

 Crisis                      2.5                    2.4                      2.6                     2.8
                            (0.7)                  (2.0)                    (1.9)                   (1.3)
 Post-Crisis                 4.0                    1.9                      4.6                     5.6
                            (0.7)                  (1.2)                    (0.8)                   (0.8)
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from Información de Entidades Financieras, Banco de Central la
Republica Argentina, various issues. For single missing observations, we use data averaged across prior and
following periods. Calculations use real balances of outstanding loans of individual banks. The pre-crisis period
for which data is available is 1994:2-94:3, too short for standard deviations on the average loan growth rates. The
Tequila crisis period for Argentina is 1994:4-95:4. The post-crisis period ends 1999:2.


constructed by period. The mean and normalized standard deviations of these series over respective periods of
time and for respective samples of banks are reported in the Table 3 for Argentina and in Table 8 for Mexico.
12
   State-owned banks include Banco de la Provincia de Buenos Aires, Banco de la Nacion Argentina, Banco
Hipotecario, Banco de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Banco de las Provincia de Cordoba, Banco de la Pampa, Bice,
Caja Ahorro, and Banco Social de Cordoba.


                                                        11
         When we consider the implications for lending volumes weighted by bank size (Table
3, Panel B), the crisis and post-crisis periods register generally higher growth for all types of
banks. These findings, in comparison with those of panel A, imply that among all banks the
larger banks grew faster than the smaller banks. Larger foreign banks have greater average loan
growth and equal or lower average volatility per unit of loan growth than their public and
private domestic counterparts.
         As we discussed in section 2, another metric of lending stability controls for whether
changes in loan volumes arise because of differing responses to market signals; alternatively,
changing loan volumes can be more random and unrelated to macroeconomic fundamentals.
Using time-series data from individual bank balance sheets, we perform pooled time-series
regressions to test for differences across domestic, foreign, and state-owned banks in loan
responsiveness with respect to real GDP and real interest rates.13 This responsiveness is
estimated using both weighted and unweighted regressions: weighted regressions measure the
responsiveness of total lending by a class of banks, and unweighted regressions measure the
responsiveness of an average bank regardless of its size. The difference across these types of
regressions can be interpreted as suggesting differences across larger versus smaller banks (or
across total lending volumes versus average bank behavior) in the respective specific lending
areas, i.e., in total lending, mortgage lending, personal lending, and commercial and other
lending. The results for 1996Q2 through 1999Q2 are summarized in Table 4, below.14
         In the post Tequila-Crisis period, total lending by Argentine state-owned banks was
largely insensitive to GDP and interest rate fluctuations, attributable to a lack of responsiveness

13
   Specifically, we perform ordinary least squares regressions over the time-series panels of individual bank data.
The percentage change in real loans (nominal loans deflated by the CPI) is regressed against the percentage
change in real GDP, and levels of real interest differentials vis-à-vis the United States, and bank-specific fixed
effects. Regressions test for differences in estimated responses across banks in relationship to public, private
domestic, or foreign ownership. “Gaps” in loan series, defined as missing observations with nonmissing
observations for the time periods immediately before and after them, are filled in by taking the mean of the
surrounding observations. We also have generated results (available from the authors) based on an alternative
methodology, using clustering of errors by quarter across all banks. This approach specifies that the observations
are independent over time (clusters) but not necessarily independent within a period. The error correction
algorithm affects the estimated standard errors and variance-covariance matrix of the estimators, but not the
estimated coefficients. In general, as implemented this approach provides a more conservative view of the
statistical significance of the estimated elasticities with respect to GDP and other time-series variables. The terms
that are marginally significant at the 10 percent level sometimes lose statistical significance at this level.
14
   In the regression results presented for Argentina and for Mexico, we do not report coefficients on interest rate
terms. In all regressions, the estimated coefficients are small, so that a 1 percentage point increase in the interest
rate differential is associated with a 0.01 to 0.03 percent change in loan volumes. These estimated effects often are




                                                         12
of both mortgage lending and commercial and related lending.15 Personal lending, which only
accounts for about 6 percent of the portfolio of state-owned banks, has been counter-cyclical.
A 1 percent rise in GDP is associated with a 7.7 percent contraction in personal lending by the
average state-owned bank, with a slightly higher contraction by larger banks.


             Table 4: Bank Loan Sensitivity to GDP, Argentina 1996 Q2-1999 Q2

                                     Panel A: Unweighted Elasticities
                                                                                                  Commercial,
                                                              Personal           Mortgage         Government
Type of Bank                          Total Loans              Loans              Loans           &Other Loans
                                          0.37                -7.73***            -5.56               0.08
State-Owned
                                        (0.58)                  (1.66)            (7.83)             (0.77)
                # observations             90                     73                73                 73
                                        1.44**                -4.56***            -0.04             1.71**
Domestic Privately Owned
                                        (0.61)                  (1.53)            (7.17)             (0.70)
                # observations            104                    101               101                101
                                         0.90*                -6.28***             2.87             1.31**
Foreign Privately Owned
                                        (0.46)                  (1.32)            (5.52)             (0.54)
             # observations               143                    140               140                140
Domestic Private =
                                           Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Foreign Private?

                       Panel B: Elasticities, Weighted by Bank Size
                                  0.15          -8.25***          0.28                                  0.15
State-Owned
                                (0.47)            (1.66)         (1.72)                                (0.60)
                                 1.26*          -4.59***          1.06                                  1.12
Domestic Privately Owned
                                (0.66)            (1.75)         (3.64)                                (0.74)
                                1.00**          -7.44***          0.52                                1.63***
Foreign Privately Owned
                                (0.46)            (1.44)         (2.73)                                (0.52)
Domestic Private =
                                  Yes              Yes            Yes                                    Yes
Foreign Private?

*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are reported
beneath the average elasticities drawn from OLS regressions over the percent change in real loans against bank
fixed effects, the percent change in real GDP, and local real interest rate differentials vis-à-vis the United States.
The equality test rows ask whether statistically the coefficients on private domestic and foreign banks may be
equal to each other. Some outlier observations were omitted from the regression analysis.




not statistically significant. Generally, we cannot reject equality of interest rate coefficients on lending by
domestic and foreign banks.
15
   This general insensitivity to market signals also characterized the loan volumes of public banks in the pre-crisis
and crisis period for which we have data (1994Q2 to 1996Q1: see Appendix Table 3, Panels A and B.)


                                                         13
       In stark contrast to the state-owned banks, private banks in Argentina -- both
domestically owned and foreign owned -- have been significantly more responsive to economic
signals in the post-crisis period. Total lending tends to be pro-cyclical for both domestic and
foreign banks, driven by the highly procyclical nature of lending to “commercial, government,
and other” clients. This type of lending is consistent with transactions-based or arms-length
activity. The point estimate of the cyclical response by domestic private banks (at 1.44) is
stronger than the response by foreign banks (at 0.90), as would arise with domestic private
banks more heavily reliant on local sources of funds. Yet, despite consistent patterns in the size
of point estimates, statistically we cannot reject that both private domestic banks and private
foreign banks have identical proportionate responses to cyclical forces in Argentina.
       Both types of privately-owned banks also have strong countercyclical patterns of
personal lending. When GDP expands by 1 percent, personal lending contracts by 4.6 percent
for the average domestic privately-owned banks and by 6.3 percent for their average foreign-
owned counterparts. Finally, a comparison of elasticities from the unweighted and weighted
regressions suggests that smaller domestic banks have greater credit cyclicality compared with
the larger domestic banks, which may lend additional support to the funding composition
hypothesis.
       Overall, the evidence on loan activity in Argentina supports a claim of differences in
behavior across state-owned banks and private banks. However, domestic and foreign private
banks exhibit comparable loan behavior, coexist in the distribution of larger and smaller banks
within the top 25 banks nationally, and have similar composition of loan portfolios. The banks
respond similarly to market signals, including real GDP growth and real interest rates. Overall,
foreign-owned banks appear to have provided greater loan growth than observed among
domestic-owned banks, while reducing the volatility of loan growth for the financial system as
a whole. Foreign banks also exhibited notable loan growth during the crisis period, suggesting
that foreign banks may be important stabilizers of credit during such episodes. It also is notable
that state-owned banks had higher variability of lending, as well as having a smaller portion of
this variability explained by macroeconomic fundamentals.




                                               14
Mexico: Financial Reforms and Foreign Entry
        In Mexico, recent efforts at financial liberalization began in the early 1990s with the re-
privatization of the financial sector, following a decade of nationalization and government-
orchestrated bank consolidation.16 Following several years of rapid expansion by the newly
privatized banks, however, Mexico’s financial crisis -- triggered by the 1994 peso devaluation -
- both revealed and exacerbated significant weaknesses in a large number of institutions. Since
the crisis, authorities have responded with an array of support programs for financial
institutions and their borrowers intended to bolster the health of the financial sector, and have
also opened to foreign investment beyond the schedules that had been originally negotiated
under NAFTA.17 Pressures on bank condition, however, remain significant and widespread,
and continue to be an important driver for Mexican bank behavior.
        Only one foreign bank, Citibank, was permitted to conduct local banking operations in
the early 1990’s, accounting for less than 1 percent of total loans. With the initiation of
NAFTA in 1994, restrictions on foreign bank participation were gradually eased. Initial
entrants generally established very small de novo subsidiaries engaged in wholesale, non-loan
banking activities. On average, these foreign bank operations consisted of a single branch
office with fewer than 100 employees and captured about 0.1 percent of loan market share. As
Table 5 shows, in 1995 foreign banks cumulatively represented about 1 percent of the
consumer and commercial, government, and interbank loans.
        Similar to the Argentina experience, it was in the aftermath of the 1994-1995 Tequila
crisis that foreign banks began establishing a significant local retail presence (see Appendix
Table 5) Despite a variety of support programs, 12 Mexican banks (accounting for roughly 20
percent of total loans) failed outright and were intervened by the authorities. The subsequent
sale of these franchises (or portions thereof) provided an avenue for foreign bank entry into,
and partial recapitalization of, the Mexican retail banking sector. As outlined in Appendix
Table 5, there have been six foreign bank acquisitions of domestic retail operations since mid-
1995, with Spanish banks among the most active. There were 6 additional mergers of domestic
banks with other domestic banks.



16
   During the nationalization of the Mexican banking system, only two banks remained independent: Citibank,
which had been active in Mexico since 1929, and domestically- owned Banco Obrero.
17
   See Graf (1999), among others, for an extensive discussion of these reforms.


                                                    15
              Table 5: Penetration of Foreign Banks into Mexican Lending Markets
                                (as percent of Current Loans in each category)


       Type of Lending Activity                1992                     1995                1998
               Consumer                         0.0                      0.9                11.1

               Mortgage                         0.0                      0.0                6.4

     Commercial, Government, &
                                                0.2                      1.0                19.7
            Interbank

              Total Loans                       0.2                      0.7                17.8

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Comision Nacional Bancaria y de Valores.


           By 1998, foreign bank participation in the local loan market had grown from less than 1
percent prior to the crisis, to 18 percent (Table 5). Foreign banks controlled 2 of the 6 largest
banks (Santander Mexicano and BBV), held minority stakes in 3 more, and operated 19 fully-
owned local subsidiaries.18 However, restrictions on foreign ownership remained in place until
December 1998, prohibiting foreign control of Mexico’s three largest banks (in aggregate,
almost 60% of loan market share).
           As is evident in Table 5, foreign bank lending is concentrated in the commercial,
government and interbank sectors, with much lower penetration of consumer and mortgage
markets. This concentration may be less a function of strategic considerations than of pervasive
weaknesses in Mexico’s credit environment – characterized by high real interest rates, a
reportedly reduced pool of creditworthy borrowers and breakdown in borrower discipline, and
a legal environment which provides little creditor protection. This pattern is supported by a
noticeable shift in domestic bank loan portfolios away from consumer and mortgage lending
over this same time period, in part due to the government acquisition of a large portion of these
loans in the wake of the crisis.
           As shown in Table 6, pre-crisis domestic lending to the consumer and mortgage sectors
comprised about 30 percent of the lending portfolios of banks, a ratio that is very similar to


18
     See Appendix Table 4.


                                                      16
ratios observed in Argentina.19 However, by 1998 consumer and mortgage loans accounted for
less than 18 percent of domestic bank loan portfolios, and only 6 percent of foreign lending.
Foreign bank activity remained concentrated (93.6 percent) in the Consumer, Government, and
Interbank market.



                     Table 6: Mexican Bank Loan Portfolio Composition
                                   (as percentage of Total Current Loans)


                       Domestically-Owned Banks                         Foreign -owned Banks

 Type of Loan          1992          1995         1998           1992            1995            1998
     Consumer          12.0           5.6          3.3            0.3            6.9              1.9

     Mortgage          16.0          22.4          14.3           2.0            0.3              4.5
 Commercial,
 Government,           72.0          72.0          82.4          97.7            92.8            93.6
 & Interbank

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Comision Nacional Bancaria y Valores.


         In addition to the factors noted above, the condition of Mexico’s banks over this time
period has also played a significant role in influencing loan behavior. While objective
measurement of Mexican bank condition is impeded by a lack of full transparency (e.g., not all
banks publicly release financial statements) and changes in accounting standards over the
sample period, a measure of impaired loans as a proportion of total loans can be used as a
relative indicator of the depth of asset quality problems on bank balance sheets. Impaired
loans are here defined as the sum of reported non-performing loans, restructured loans, and the
full amount of loans sold to the government.
         The vast majority of domestic banks (88 percent), representing the bulk of domestic-
bank lending in Mexico, had impaired loan ratios (ILRs) under 10 percent at the beginning of
1994 (Table 7). By 1998, in part due to improved accounting and reporting conditions, 41

19
   Our sample of Mexican banks includes all banks active within Mexico each year, where data are provided by
the CNBV. This sample comprises a universe of 59 banks over the 1990s, although the number of banks active in
any given quarter varies due to bank closures, mergers, and acquisitions, as well as the establishment of de novo




                                                       17
 percent of the banks (representing 93 percent of total lending by domestic banks) had impaired
 loan ratios exceeding 30 percent. While the bulk of foreign-owned banks (90 percent)
 remained relatively healthy, the larger foreign-owned retail franchises (accounting for 76
 percent for foreign bank lending) also had impaired loan ratios in excess of 30 percent at year-
 end 1998 – largely reflective of post-crisis acquisitions of troubled domestic banks by foreign
 banks.


                    Table 7: Impaired Loan Ratios of Banks in Mexico

                                     ILR:                     ILR:                       ILR:
                                 0-10 percent             10-30 percent           30 percent or more
Nationality                              % Current                  % Current                  % Current
of Banks          Date      % Banks       Loans         % Banks      Loans        % Banks       Loans

Domestic        1994 Q1       86.4          94.4          13.6          5.5          0.0          0.0

                1998 Q4       58.8           7.2          0.0           0.0         41.2          92.8

                1994 Q1      100.0         100.0          0.0           0.0          0.0          0.0
Foreign
                1998 Q4       90.0          24.1          0.0           0.0         10.0          75.9

 Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Comision Nacional Bancaria y Valores. Impaired
 loans are the sum of reported non-performing loans, restructured loans, and the full amount of loans sold
 to the government.




 The foreign bank effect on loan supply patterns in Mexico
          The data presented thus far show that foreign banks operating in Mexico have focussed
 their efforts mainly on commercial, government and interbank lending. Given the condition of
 the Mexican banking sector, the potential for a broad and positive role for healthy foreign
 banks therefore seems substantial. Foreign banks could be an important absolute and
 diversified source of credit to firms, especially in an economy where government-operated and
 domestic banks are heavily focused on balance sheet repair, instead of new lending. In this
 environment, funds provided by foreign banks can be a source of much needed capital for
 local profitable growth opportunities.

 operations. The number of banks included in the analysis ranges from a low of 20 in 1991 and 1992 to a high of
 43 in 1996, and 37 at year-end 1998.


                                                         18
        Our conceptualization of differences across banks which can lead to distinct lending
behavior (section 2) emphasized bank health as a potentially important issue. Given the
preponderance of impaired loans in Mexican banking in the second half of the 1990s, we
consider the extent to which distinctions among banks in lending behavior are evident
according to broad indicators of bank health. We use the ILR previously defined as an
indicator of financial condition, whereby banks with an ILR in excess of 10 percent are
considered to be in relatively poor financial health.
        The loan growth activity and associated volatility by banks are documented in Table 8.
Sorting banks each period according to whether their ILR falls below or exceed 10 percent, we
observe significant differences in loan growth and the volatility of this growth across healthier
versus less healthy banks. These differences pertain to both domestically-owned and foreign-
owned banks. In general, banks with higher impaired loan ratios had more volatile loan growth
rates and lower (or negative) rates of loan portfolio expansion than the banks with less
problematic portfolios. In terms of average quarterly growth, both domestic and foreign banks
with low ILRs continued to extend credit fairly steadily in the post-crisis period. In this
healthier group, smaller foreign and domestic banks grew at a quicker pace than their larger
counterparts, without increasing measured volatility per unit of loan growth.
        Lending by banks with low ILRs grew at high rates, leaving these banks to play an
expanding role in mainly commercial finance, even as they remained a small part of the
Mexican banking system (about 30 percent of the total current loans at the end of 1998). While
the full financial system continues to show small average contraction in the post-crisis period,
it is evident that the extent of this loan contraction has been reduced by the presence of foreign
banks, and by healthy banks in general. As we observed in Argentina, the more extensive role
played by foreign banks in Mexico does not appear to have come at the expense of larger
lending volatility.




                                                19
                      Table 8: Mexico Average Quarterly Loan Growth Rates
                     (in percent, with normalized standard deviations reported in parentheses)
                                Panel A: Unweighted Average Across Individual Banks

 Time              All
 Period           Banks                  ILR < 10 percent                            ILR > 10 percent
                                   domestic               foreign              domestic               foreign
 Pre-               9.6               9.5                  26.9                   1.3                    --
 Crisis            (0.5)             (0.6)                 (1.8)                 (8.7)
 Crisis            16.0              20.1                  15.5                   1.7                    --
                   (1.1)             (0.8)                 (0.3)                 (9.9)
 Post-              9.6              11.7                  18.2                   -1.1                  7.4
 Crisis            (1.1)             (1.5)                 (1.2)                 (5.7)                 (3.1)

                                        Panel B: Weighted Average across Banks
 Pre-               4.5                4.4                  26.9                   2.0                   --
 Crisis            (0.8)              (0.8)                 (1.8)                 (6.1)
 Crisis             8.1                8.5                  15.5                   5.9                   --
                   (1.7)              (1.6)                 (0.3)                 (2.2)
 Post-             -0.3                9.1                  12.6                   -1.5                 7.4
 Crisis           (21.6)              (1.7)                 (1.3)                 (4.5)                (3.1)

For these calculations, we drop from our data sample the observations for individual new banks that represent
their initial periods of entry and expansion. Inclusion of these initial data points would otherwise artificially show
a sharp increase in the loan growth of foreign banks especially, along with higher variability of this loan growth.




          Next, we consider these lending fluctuations in the context of Mexican real demand
growth and real interest rate differentials vis-à-vis the United States.20 Since a small number
of very large banks have dominated lending activity in Mexico, we anticipate large distinctions
between our results presented as averages across individual banks and averages over all
lending, even when bank condition is considered. In general, however, the domestic banks with
sounder reported asset quality ratios are smaller banks engaged in limited retail lending.
          In the post Tequila-crisis period (1995Q2 through 1998Q4), our sorting of banks
according to domestic versus foreign ownership, and according to ILRs, is highly revealing



20
 Raw Mexican loan data exhibit many extreme observations related to new bank entry, government intervention,
mergers and acquisitions. We eliminate extreme single quarter changes from our sample.


                                                         20
(Table 9).2122 In Mexico, on an un-weighted basis the most responsive banks to cyclical
fluctuations were the domestically-owned banks with low non-performing loan shares
(particularly smaller banks). Indeed, behavior by these banks is strikingly similar to the
behaviors reported for the private banks in Argentina. Lending to Commercial (et al.) clients is
strongly pro-cyclical as consistent with transactions-based or arms-length lending, and as also
observed in Argentina. Lending to Consumer and Mortgage clients is generally statistically
insignificantly correlated with real GDP growth in Mexico. Our conceptual framework of
section 2 anticipated the findings here that the banks with lower impaired loan ratios are more
responsive to fluctuations and market signals than are banks with more problematic loan
portfolios.
         Among the foreign banks operating in Mexico, there appears to be a strong behavioral
distinction among banks with lower ILRs versus the few observations of banks with higher
ILRs. The foreign banks with low ILRs appear to behave similarly to domestically-owned
banks with low ILRs.           As anticipated, and as observed in the Argentine case, the point
estimates on responses are higher for the domestic banks in this group of banks with low
impaired loan ratios. Their larger response elasticities to GDP stimuli are consistent with
domestic banks having heavier reliance on domestic sources of funds. Still, also as we
observed for Argentine private banks, we cannot reject similar behavior by these banks with
low ILRs but different nationalities of owners. The foreign banks with high ILRs behave
differently from all categories of banks in our sample, with procyclical consumer lending and
counter-cyclical commercial and other lending.

21
   We present results using ILRs > 10 percent. Broadly similar results also arose using higher ratios (20, 30, 50
percent). The main difference is that the higher the ILRs of domestic banks, the lower their estimated
responsiveness to cyclical fluctuations. Our regression results for domestic unhealthy banks are potentially biased
by the fact that, once a bank is intervened by the Mexican government, data for that bank generally becomes
unavailable. We have a total of 17 banks in our sample which were intervened; if we had data for all of the
intervened banks going through the end of the sample period we would have an additional 100 observations on
unhealthy banks to use in the regressions. If one assumes that intervened banks would on average be less
responsive to market signals than nonintervened banks, then we would expect to see less responsiveness for this
bank class as a whole if we had access to a more complete dataset for Mexico.
22
   We also have generated results (available from the authors) based on an alternative methodology, using
clustering of errors by quarter across all banks. This approach specifies that the observations are independent over
time (clusters) but not necessarily independent within a period. The error correction algorithm affects the
estimated standard errors and variance-covariance matrix of the estimators, but not the estimated coefficients. In
general, as implemented this approach provides a more conservative view of the statistical significance of the
estimated elasticities with respect to GDP and other time-series variables. The terms that are marginally
significant at the 10 percent level sometimes lose statistical significance at this level.



                                                        21
            Table 9: Bank Loan Sensitivity to GDP, Mexico 1995 Q2-1998 Q4

                                   Panel A: Unweighted Elasticities
                                                                                  Commercial,
                                                    Consumer      Mortgage       Government &
                                Total Loans           Loans         Loans       Interbank Loans
                                                    Banks with ILR < 10 percent
                                  1.67***             -0.62        -2.02**          1.67***
Domestic Banks
                                   (0.56)             (0.69)        (0.97)           (0.57)
          # observations            153                 78             50              153
                                   0.93*              -0.04           0.29           1.02**
Foreign Banks
                                   (0.51)             (1.11)        (1.40)           (0.53)
       # observations               190                 28             20              182
Domestic = Foreign?                 Yes                Yes            Yes              Yes
                                                    Banks with ILR > 10 percent
                                    0.85*              0.09           0.26          1.35***
Domestic Banks
                                    (0.49)            (0.44)        (0.48)           (0.50)
          # observations             178               165            159              178
                                    -1.51             2.94*          -0.08            -1.58
Foreign Banks
                                    (1.81)            (1.55)        (1.72)           (1.85)
          # observations              16                16             15               16

                     Panel B: Elasticities Weighted by Bank Size
                                          Banks with ILR < 10 percent
                          1.55***           -0.43          -1.11                                1.52**
Domestic Banks
                           (0.49)           (4.14)         (2.26)                               (0.65)
       # observations       153               72             46                                   152
                            0.92             0.40           0.31                                 0.93
Foreign Banks
                           (0.71)           (1.42)         (17.7)                               (0.94)
       # observations       190               26             20                                   181
Domestic = Foreign?         Yes              Yes            Yes                                  Yes
                                          Banks with ILR > 10 percent
                          0.97***            0.15        -0.73***                              1.76***
Domestic Banks
                           (0.10)           (0.22)         (0.23)                               (0.15)
       # observations       178              165            158                                  178
                         -1.26***            2.81           0.26                               -1.37**
Foreign Banks
                           (0.44)           (1.73)         (1.67)                               (0.59)
        # observations       16               16             15                                   16
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are
reported beneath the average elasticities drawn from OLS regressions over the percent change in real loans
against bank fixed effects, the percent change in real GDP, and local real interest rate differentials vis-à-vis
the United States. The equality test rows ask whether statistically the coefficients on private domestic and
foreign banks may be equal to each other. For these calculations, we drop from our data sample the
observations for individual new banks that represent their initial periods of entry and expansion.




                                                         22
       Several findings stand out from this empirical analysis. First, bank health appears to be
a key factor distinguishing the responsiveness to market signals among both domestically-
owned and foreign-owned banks in Mexico. Second, point estimates show more volatile
lending with respect to GDP by domestically-owned banks, a finding that is consistent with our
conceptualization in section 2. Specifically, if healthy domestically-owned banks (all else
equal) rely more heavily on domestic sources of funding (particularly smaller banks), lending
by these banks will be more sensitive to local cyclical conditions than will be the lending by
their foreign-owned counterparts. In Mexico, we observe that foreign banks with low non-
performing loan shares have facilitated more overall responsiveness of the financial system to
market forces, and were important providers of credit during the crisis period and beyond, in
the context of financial system weakness. These results would appear to confirm that foreign
banks thus far have had a stabilizing impact on domestic financial system credit in both
countries.


4. Concluding Remarks

       The Asian Crisis amply demonstrated a range of deficiencies in local financial systems,
and has precipitated calls for reform in accounting and disclosure practices, bank corporate
governance, and home country supervision and regulation. It is often argued that opening
domestic financial sectors to increased foreign ownership can meaningfully accelerate
improvements in all three areas, and should be (and historically has been) a key element of
reform efforts in the aftermath of financial crisis. At the same time, various arguments
emphasize the potential adverse effects of foreign ownership. To date, the post-crisis financial
landscape in Crisis Asia has been characterized by only limited examples of majority foreign
ownership of domestic financial institutions.
       We have sought to contribute to the debate on financial sector openness in emerging
markets by reviewing the experiences of Mexico and Argentina with foreign bank local
lending. We conclude that in both Mexico and Argentina, foreign banks exhibited stronger
loan growth compared to all domestic-owned banks, with lower associated volatility,
contributing to greater stability in overall financial system credit. Additionally, in both
countries, foreign banks showed notable credit growth during recent crisis periods and



                                                23
thereafter. In Argentina, there have been striking similarities in the portfolio composition of
lending and the volatility of lending by private foreign and private domestic banks. In
Mexico, there are behavioral similarities in terms of cyclical fluctuations and loan portfolios
among banks with similar low impaired loan ratios but different ownership. Both
domestically-owned and foreign-owned banks with low problem loan ratios behaved
similarly, and we find no evidence that the foreign banks were more volatile lenders than
their domestic counterparts. The ranking of banks according to their responses to cyclical
fluctuations is consistent with an outcome that arises when foreign banks bring to the
emerging market a broader, more diversified supply of funds.
       Overall, these findings suggest that bank health, and not ownership per se, has been
the critical element in the growth, volatility, and cyclicality of bank credit. Diversity in
ownership has contributed to greater stability of credit in recent times of crisis and financial
system weakness. The positive first lessons from the Argentine and Mexican experiences are
broadly instructive for other emerging markets as they contemplate more extensive foreign
bank participation in their local economies.
       Of course, further analysis of these issues is essential. Additional country analysis,
particularly of the Eastern European experience with opening domestic financial sectors to
foreign ownership, would be useful. Moreover, this analysis is based on the relatively recent
experience with significant foreign ownership, and will need to be reviewed over a longer
time frame, given a range of variables, including ongoing evolution of competition between
foreign and domestic banks. The role of diversification of bank funding sources can also be
further explored, as could the importance of parent-subsidiary relationships internationally,
and the relationship between local and cross-border lending activities. Moreover, if local
governments seek to maintain certain wholesale or retail services that would not survive the
test of the market, there are broad policy questions to consider about the types of agencies
that should be involved in these transactions, and the scope and methodologies for their
implementation. Overall though, recent experience in Argentina and Mexico underscores the
importance of healthy banks, both foreign- and domestic-owned to market-based, private
sector lending in emerging markets. .




                                               24
References
Burdisso, Tamaro, Laura D’Amato, and Andrea Molinari, 1998. “The Bank Privatization
    Process in Argentina: Toward a More Efficient Banking System?’ manuscript, Banco
    Central de la Republica Argentina (October).
Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Harry Huizinga, 1998. “How Does Foreign Entry Affect
    the Domestic Banking Market?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 1918.
Clarke, George, Robert Cull, Laura D’Amato and Andrea Molinari. 1999. “On the Kindness of
    Strangers? The Impact of Foreign Entry on Domestic Banks in Argentina.” (August)
    manuscript, The World Bank.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Ross Levine, and Hong-Ghi Min, 1998. “Opening to Foreign Banks:
    Issues of Stability, Efficiency and Growth”, in The Implications of Globalization of World
    Financial Markets, The Bank of Korea.
Glaessner, T. and D. Oks. “NAFTA, Capital Mobility, and Mexico’s Financial System.”
    World Bank, mimeo, 1994.
Goldberg, Linda. “When is Foreign Bank Lending to Emerging Markets Volatile?”
    Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2000.
Graf, Pablo. "Policy Responses to the Banking Crisis in Mexico", Bank Restructuring in
    Practice, BIS Policy Papers, No. 6, August 1999.
Gruben, William, Jahyeong Koo, and Robert Moore, 1999. “When Does Financial
    Liberalization Make Banks Risky? An Empirical Examination of Argentina, Canada, and
    Mexico.” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Hancock, Diana and James Wilcox, 1998. “The Credit Crunch and the Availability of Credit to
    Small Business,” Journal of Banking and Finance August, 22 (6-8) pp. 983-1014.
Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-of-
    Payments Problems.” American Economic Review June 1999, 89 (3) pp. 473-500
Levine, Ross, 1996.     “Foreign Bank, Financial Development, and Economic Growth.”
    International Financial Markets: Harmonization versus Competition. Claude E. Barfield,
    Editor. (Washington: The AEI Press).




                                             25
Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad and Sergio Schmukler, 1999. “Do Depositors Punish Banks for
    “Bad” Behavior? Market Discipline in Argentina, Chile and Mexico.” World Bank Policy
    Research Working Paper 2058 (February).
Meltzer, Alan, 1998. “Financial Structure, Saving, and Growth: Safety Nets, Regulation, and
    Risk Reduction in Global Financial Markets,”in The Implications of Globalization of
    World Financial Markets, The Bank of Korea.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren. “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on
    Real Activity in the United States.” American Economic Review forthcoming.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren. “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The Case
    of Japan” American Economic Review September 1997, 87 (4) pp. 495-505.
Rojas-Suarez, Liliana, 1998. “Early Warning Indicators of Banking Crises: What Works for
    Emerging Markets? With Applications to Latin America” working paper Deutsche Bank
    Securities.




                                            26
       Appendix Table 1        Top 25 Argentine Financial Institutions: Credit Market Share

Rank Bank                           Total Market Foreign Ownership       Voting Share/ Date
                                    Loans Share
  1   Banco de la Nacion Argentinas 10,113   12%
  2   Banco de la Provincia de               11%
      Buenos Aires*s                 8,932
  3   Banco de Galicia y Buenos               8% O'Higgins Central               10.0%/ 98:4
      Aires                          6,744       Hispanoamericano
  4   Banco Rio de la Plata          5,530    7% Banco Santander Central          64.3%/97:2
                                                 Hispano
  5   BankBoston National                     6% BankBoston              100.0%/Before 94:2
      Association                    5,259
  6   Banco Frances                  5,151    6% Banco Bilbao Vizcaya             58.8%/96:4
  7   Citibank                       4,524    5% Citibank                100.0%/Before  94:2
                        s
  8   Banco Hipotecario              4,122    5%
  9   HSBC Banco Roberts             2,706    3% HSBC                          100.0%/1Q98
 10   Banca Nazionale del Lavoro     2,326    3% Banca Nazionale del     100.0%/Before 94:2
                                                 Lavoro
 11   Banco Bansud                   2,077    3% Banamex                          60.0%/95:4
 12   Banco Quilmes                  1,506    2% Bank of Nova Scotia              70.0%/95:1
 13   Banco de la Ciudad de Buenos            2%
      Airess                         1,470
 14   Banco Credicoop cooperativo             2%
      Limitado                       1,264
 15   Banco del Suquia               1,122    1%
 16   Banco de la Provincia de                1%
               s
      Cordoba                          948
 17   Banco Bisel                             1% Caisse Nationale de              30.0%/96:1
                                       842       Credito Agricole
 18   Banco Tornquist                  794    1% O'Higgins Central              100.0%/95:4
                                                 Hispanoamericano
 19   Banco Sudameris Argentina        757    1% Banque Sudameris         99.9%/Before 94:2
                         s
 20   Banco de la Pampa                700    1%
 21   ABN Amro Bank                    674    1% ABN Amro                       100.0%/95:2
 22   Lloyds Bank                      666    1% Lloyds Bank             100.0%/Before  94:2
 23   Banco de Inversion y Comercio           1%
      Exterior                         649
 24   Banco Mercantil Argentino        636    1%
 25   Banco Supervielle Societe               1% Societe Generale         75.4%/Before 94:2
      Generale                         616
      Loan Subtotal of Top 25 Banks 70,128   85% Foreign Share of Top 25              46.4 %
      Total System Loans            82,544 100%
*Data at November 1998. Source: Estados Contables de las Entidades Financieras, Banco de la Republica Argentina
 s
   indicates state-owned through end of 1998.


                                                     27
                                        Appendix Table 2
                            Summary of Argentina Bank Mergers
Bank Name                     Acquiring Bank                        Date of Acquisition
Foreign Banks Acquiring Domestic Banks:
Banesto Shaw                  Banamex, via Bansud                                 Q495
Del Sud                       Banamex, via Bansud                                 Q495
Credito Argentino             Bilbao Vizcaya                                      Q397
Quilmes*                      Bank of Nova Scotia                                 Q497
Roberts                       HSBC                                                Q198
Rio de la Plata               Santander                                           Q297
Frances                       Bilbao Vizcaya                                      Q496
Foreign Banks Acquiring Foreign Banks:
Credit Lyonnais               O’Higgins Central Hispano                           Q196
(formerly Tornquist)
Deutsche Bank                 BankBoston                                          Q197

Quilmes was effectively controlled by Bank of Nova Scotia by Q195, although a majority stake was not
acquired until Q397.




                                                      28
   Appendix Table 3: Bank Loan Sensitivity to GDP, Argentina 1994 Q2-1996 Q1

                                  Panel A: Unweighted Elasticities
                                                                                          Commercial,
                                     Total           Personal          Mortgage          Government &
                                     Loans            Loans             Loans           Interbank Loans
                                      0.10             1.30              2.17                 -0.19
State-Owned
                                     (0.53)           (1.63)            (3.23)               (0.58)
          # observations.              52               45                45                   45
Domestic Privately                    0.00           -2.50**             -3.41                0.52
Owned                                (0.38)           (1.08)            (2.14)               (0.39)
           # observations              99               99                98                   99
                                      0.37             0.74              0.57                 0.33
Foreign Privately Owned
                                     (0.46)           (1.30)            (2.74)               (0.47)
            # observations             65               65                59                   65
Domestic Private =
                                       Yes              No*                Yes                 Yes
Foreign Private?

                     Panel B: Elasticities Weighted by Bank Size
                              0.06            0.87          0.39                               -0.24
State-Owned
                             (0.30)          (1.78)        (0.32)                             (0.37)
Domestic Privately            0.16         -2.90***         -0.28                              0.31
Owned                        (0.30)          (1.09)        (0.59)                             (0.32)
                              0.56            0.63          0.79                               0.49
Foreign Privately Owned
                             (0.40)          (1.32)        (0.76)                             (0.44)
Domestic Private =
                              Yes            No**            Yes                               Yes
Foreign Private? On GDP
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are
reported beneath the average elasticities. These results are drawn from ordinary least squares regressions
over the percent change in real loans against individual bank fixed effects, the percent change in real GDP,
and local real interest rate differentials vis-à-vis the United States. The equality test rows ask whether
statistically the coefficients on private domestic and foreign banks may be equal to each other. Some outlier
observations were omitted from the regression analysis.




                                                        29
              Appendix Table 4: Mexican Financial System, Total Lending, by Institution

                                      (Millions of Pesos, December 1998)
Name of Mexican                   Total Share            Foreign Owner                       Stake (entry date, F if
Institution                      Loans                     (nationality)                      foreign controlled)
                                   872,485 100.0% (None)
Total
Banamex                            186,245    21.3% (None)
Bancomer                           191,407    21.9% Bank of Montreal (Canada)                17.0% (March 96)
Serfín                             115,680    13.3% HSBC, JP Morgan (US)                     29.0% (December 97)
Bital                                56,897    6.5% Santander, BCP (Spain)                   16.0% (September 93)
Santander Mexicano                   49,618    5.7% Santander (Spain)                        52.0% (September 97, F)
Bilbao Vizcaya                       52,899    6.1% BBV (Spain)                              67.0% (March 96, F)
Centro                               21,305    2.4% (None)
Mercantil del Norte                  25,003    2.9% (None)
Banpaís                              27,132    3.1% (None)
Citibank                             16,900    1.9% Citibank (US)                            100.0% (December 91, F)
Interacciones                         3,145    0.4% (None)
Inbursa                              21,999    2.5% (None)
Mifel                                 2,202    0.3% (None)
Invex                                 1,702    0.2% (None)
Banregio                              1,358    0.2% (None)
Del Bajío                             2,912    0.3% Sabadell (Spain)                         10.0% (December 98)
Quadrum                               1,411    0.2% (None)
Ixe                                   2,482    0.3% (None)
J. P. Morgan                          1,327    0.2% J. P. Morgan (US)                        100.0% (September 96, F)
Chase Manhattan                           9    0.0% Chase Manhattan (US)                     100.0% (June 96, F)
Afirme                                4,991    0.6% (None)
Fuji Bank                               831    0.1% Fuji Bank (Japan)                        100.0% (June 95, F)
Bank of Tokyo – Mitsubishi              907    0.1% Bank of Tokyo – Mitsubishi (Japan)       100.0% (March 95, F)
Bank of America                         989    0.1% Bank of America (US)                     100.0% (June 95, F)
ABN Amro Bank                           537    0.1% ABN Amro Bank (Netherlands)              100.0% (September 95, F)
Republic National Bank                  605    0.1% Republic National (US)                   100.0% (September 95, F)
Banco de Boston                         518    0.1% Bank of Boston (US)                      100.0% (December 95, F)
B. N. P.                              1,002    0.1% B. N. P. (France)                        100.0% (December 95, F)
Bansi                                   663    0.1%    (None)
Dresdner Bank                         2,414    0.3% Dresdner (Germany)                       100.0% (March 96, F)
Societé Generalé                        445    0.1% Societé Generalé (France)                100.0% (March 96, F)
I.N.G. Bank                           1,460    0.2% I.N.G. Bank (Netherlands)                100.0% (June 96, F)
First Chicago                            66    0.0% First Chicago (US)                       100.0% (September 96, F)
GE Capital (Alianza)                  1,005    0.1% GE Capital (Alianza)                     100.0% (December 97, F)
American Express                        391    0.0% American Express (US)                    100.0% (June 96, F)
Nations Bank                             64    0.0% Nations Bank (US)                        100.0% (December 96, F)
Comerica Bank                         2,410    0.3% Comerica Bank (US)                       100.0% (September 97, F)
        Source: Boletin Estadistico de Banco Multiple, Comision Nacional Bancaria y de Valores.



                                                            30
                        Appendix Table 5: Summary of Mexico Bank Mergers

Bank Name                     Acquiring Bank                   Date of              Date of
                                                               Intervention         Acquisition

The following mergers involve foreign banks buying domestic banks:
Merprob                       Bilbao Vizcaya                   -------              Q196
Oriente                       Bilbao Vizcaya                   Q195                 Q396
Cremi                         Bilbao Vizcaya                   Q394                 Q396
Mexicano                      Santander Mexicano               ------               Q297
Confia                        Citibank                         Q397                 Q398
Alianza                       GE Capital                       -----                Q497
The following mergers involve domestic banks buying domestic banks:
Union                         Bancomer                         Q394                 Q295
Obrero                        Afirme                           Q295                 Q197
Sureste                       Internacional (BITAL)            Q296                 Q198
Atlantico                     Internacional (BITAL)            Q497                 Q198
Centro                        Mercantil Del Norte              Q395                 Q297
Banpais                       Mercantil Del Norte              Q195                 Q397
The following mergers involve foreign banks buying foreign banks:
Chemical                      Chase                            -----                Q296
Santander de Negocios Santander Mexicano                       ------               Q497

Source: Effective dates of acquisitions, mergers, and interventions, compiled from press accounts and data
provided by the CNBV.




                                                          31
