                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CAN EMERGING MARKET BANK REGULATORS
                            ESTABLISH CREDIBLE DISCIPLINE?
                           THE CASE OF ARGENTINA, 1992-1999


                                         Charles W. Calomiris
                                           Andrew Powell


                                          Working Paper 7715
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7715



                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000



The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Central Bank of Argentina, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or any other institution. We wish
to thank Tamara Burdiso and Laura D'Amato for excellent assistance with the econometric analyses
presented in this research. We thank our discussant Douglas Diamond, other conference participants, and
Charles Himmelberg and Alejandra Anastasi for helpful comments and discussions. All mistakes naturally
remain our own.

© 2000 by Charles W. Calomiris and Andrew Powell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Can Emerging Market Bank Regulators Establish Credible Discipline?
The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999
Charles W. Calomiris and Andrew Powell
NBER Working Paper No. 7715
May 2000


                                           ABSTRACT

       In the early 1990s, after decades of high inflation and financial repression, Argentina
embarked on a course of macroeconomic and bank regulatory reform. Bank regulatory policy
promoted privatization, financial liberalization, and free entry, limited safety net support, and
established a novel mix of regulatory and market discipline to ensure stable growth of the banking
system during the liberalization process. Argentina suffered some fallout from the Mexican
tequila crisis of 1995, but its response to that crisis (allowing weak banks to close) and the
redoubling of regulatory efforts to promote market discipline after the crisis made Argentina’s
banking system quite resilient during the Asian, Russian, and Brazilian crises. Argentina’s bank
regulatory system now is widely regarded as one of the two or three most successful among
emerging market economies. This paper traces the evolution of the regulatory policy changes of
the 1990s and shows that the reliance on market discipline has played an important role in
prudential regulation by encouraging proper risk management by banks. There is substantial
heterogeneity among banks in the interest rates they pay for debt and the rate of growth of their
deposits, and that heterogeneity is traceable to fundamental attributes of banks that affect the
riskiness of deposits (i.e. asset risk and leverage). Moreover, market perceptions of default risk
are mean-reverting, indicating that market discipline encourages banks to respond to increases in
default risk by limiting asset risk or lowering leverage.


Charles W. Calomiris                                          Andrew Powell
Graduate School of Business                                   Central Bank of Argentina
Columbia University                                           Reconquista 266
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall                               (1003) Capital Federal
New York, NY 10027                                            Argentina
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
I. Introduction

         In common with many other emerging market countries, Argentina’s banking sector was
liberalized in the 1990s. That liberalization followed decades of severe “financial repression.”
The return to deposits placed in banks previously was substantially negative; if $100 worth of
deposits had been placed in an Argentine bank in 1944, it would today be worth roughly 3 cents
in real terms today (and 1 cent in 1990).1 As recently as 1990, bank deposits were frozen as part
of an emergency fiscal adjustment. As elsewhere, liberalization involved lifting controls on
interest rates, deregulation of the banking sector, allowing the entry of foreign capital,
privatization and adopting international regulatory standards.

        Nevertheless, the experience of the Argentine banking sector over the past decade has
been unique in several respects. Many observers view Argentina’s reforms as among the most
radical attempts to overhaul a banking system. Traditionally in Argentina, credit was allocated
either to the public sector or through public intervention to specific sectors or projects in the
private sector. Moreover, the banking sector suffered from ineffective regulation and
supervision and repeated, forced government rescues contributed significantly to Argentina’s
past fiscal and inflationary problems. In contrast, many have argued that today there is a
credible, restrictive safety net and high regulatory and supervisory standards. For example, as
shown in Table 1, one World Bank study rated Argentina’s regulatory regime on par with Hong
Kong, second only to Singapore, and higher than the longer-lived and much-admired regime in
Chile2. In particular, the Argentine system is praised for its attempt to introduce elements of
private market discipline as a central component of its regulatory regime.

                Table 1. World Bank Comparison of Bank Regulatory Quality in
                                   Developing Economies
                     Total       Capital         Loan           Foreign    Liquidity       Operating Transparency
     Country         Score       Position    Classification    Ownership                  Environment
                                                              (management)

Singapore              16            1              6               2             5             1          1
Argentina              21            1              4               3             4             7          2
Hong Kong              21            3              9               1             2             2          4
Chile                  25            5              1               4             8             5          2
Brazil                 30            7              3               4             3             8          5
Peru                   35            5              2               6             1            11         10
Malaysia               41            5              9               8             8             3          8
Colombia               44            3              4              11             6            10         10
Korea                  45            7              9              10            11            3           5
Philippines            47            4              6               7             7            11         12
Thailand               52            7             12              12            8             6           7
Indonesia              52            7              8               9            12             8          8

Source: World Bank (1998), p. 54. Numbers indicate rankings, where low numbers mean high ranking.
The total score is a simple average of the six categories.

1
    Central Bank estimates.
2
    We note, however, that Chile has since revised and strengthened its capital requirements on banks.
        Private market discipline is enhanced by the following policies: (a) A strictly limited
safety net (comprised of a privately funded, limited deposit insurance scheme and restrictions on
the Central Bank's potential lender of last resort powers) exposes bank depositors to the
possibility of loss. (b) High and credible minimum risk-based capital requirements further ensure
that stockholders (rather than taxpayers) bear the risk of bank default. (c) National government
programs encourage the privatization of provincial government-owned banks. (d) A credit rating
scheme has been introduced whereby each bank must solicit a credit rating from an
internationally active rating agency. (e) A subordinated debt requirement mandates that banks
must issue a subordinated liability for some 2% of deposits each year. (f) Banks must satisfy a
“liquidity requirement” in addition to the capital requirement. This not only reduces portfolio
risk, ensures systemic liquidity, and further reduces the potential for taxpayer loss from failed
banks, but (because of the structure of the requirement) rewards banks with lower regulatory cost
when the market perceives that their risk of failure is low. (g) The Central Bank publishes basic
information about bank loans to individuals and firms that borrow from banks (which enhances
transparency of credit risk). (h) The quality of accounting data is enhanced by mandatory private
audits conducted according to Central Bank guidelines, and auditors must post a forfeitable
bond. (i) Argentina permits free entry and competition among foreign and domestic banks,
which not only encourages the efficient management of banks, but also enhances the ability of
bank depositors to punish weak banks by moving their funds to stronger institutions.

        The Argentine system’s high marks from the World Bank also reflect the fact that the
regulatory reforms put in place in the early and mid-1990s have been tested by external
shocks.The reactions of the banking authorities to those shocks have been encouraging to
advocates of market discipline. Rather than retreating from the reform process in the face of the
“tequila” crisis of 1994-1995, the Argentine authorities redoubled their efforts to ensure that
market discipline prevailed in the banking system. Indeed, many of the features of the current
regulatory system listed above were enacted or strengthened after the tequila crisis, as part of a
new plan for bank oversight developed at the central bank, which is known as the B.A.S.I.C.
system of bank regulation.

        We define the key elements of that system, and explain its evolution, in Section II below.
These included the new liquidity requirement system (replacing a more traditional reserve
requirement approach), capital requirements that reflect banks' trading risks and banking book
interest rate risks, an expansion of the publicly available database on the condition of bank
borrowers, as well as the minimum mandatory subordinated debt and credit rating requirement.
The authorities have also negotiated a contingent liquidity facility with international banks in
order to be able to inject emergency liquidity on the basis of Argentine collateral in the case of a
sharp, systemic, liquidity shock (this facility currently stands at some $6.45bn excluding a $1bn
World Bank/IDB enhancement). Also over this period there was significant entry of foreign
capital to the banking system such that, at the time of this writing, some 60% of private sector
deposits are now in banks under foreign control, accounting for some 40% of the whole system.
There remains only one large (top 8) private retail bank that does not have a foreign controlling
interest.

        The only policy reaction to the 1995 crisis that could be construed as a weakening of the
commitment to market discipline was the reestablishment of deposit insurance. But the
significance of this change for market discipline should not be exaggerated. In November 1992,


                                               2
significantly in 1992, and the rest of the economy received large injections of foreign capital
between 1992 and 1996, it was only in the years 1997 and 1998 that the banking system saw a
very significant increase in foreign capital. One hypothesis is that these international banks
waited until the system was tested by its first major external shock before making such
significant investment decisions.

        Despite this record of apparent success, the reforms and transformation of the banking
system have not gone without criticism. Some have suggested that the enactment of limited
deposit insurance was unnecessary and counterproductive, that more institutions should have
been allowed to fail, and that some assisted mergers, particularly during the tequila period,
simply delayed a problem rather than solving it (see World Bank (1998)). Other critics have
suggested that Argentina's banking regulations are too tight (in particular capital, liquidity and
provisioning) and have diminished banking sector returns and placed the sector at a disadvantage
with respect to foreign banks. Other criticisms refer to particular regulations. Some suggest, for
example, that a regulatory authority should not establish requirements for the private rating of
banks. Others suggest that the effectiveness of the obligation to issue subordinated debt, and
therefore, market discipline, has been reduced because the penalties for non-compliance have
been lowered – a consequence of the perceived difficulties of issuing debt in the wake of the
international financial crises of 1997 and 1998. Finally, it has been suggested that the entry by
foreign banks may have a drawback; some perceive foreign banks as having more restricted
lending practices than national banks, and blame those lending policies for exacerbating the
current recession.

        In this paper we review the record of bank regulation and evaluate that record from the
perspective of evidence on the existence of market discipline. We consider evidence on the
question of whether and to what extent banks have been disciplined by the market. Section II
provides an overview of the evolution of the regulatory environment from 1992 to the present,
and an evaluation of its consequences for the structure and performance of banks and their
exposure to market discipline. Section III brings econometric evidence to bear on the question of
the extent to which market discipline penalizes risk and constrains bank behavior. Thus, in
addition to evaluating the record of regulatory enforcement in the narrow legal sense, we also
examine the economic evidence that market discipline exists, and that it has in fact achieved its
desired goal of limiting bank risk taking.

       Specifically, Section II summarizes the experience with privatization, foreign entry,
consolidation, bank failure and depositor loss experience. Section III focuses on differences in
bank deposit interest rate risk premia, and differences in deposit growth, with an emphasis on the
degree of diversity within the system with respect to these measures of market discipline. It then
develops a framework for identifying links between fundamentals that affect bank default risk
and market reactions to that risk (as seen through higher interest rates on deposits and lower
deposit growth). Finally, we consider evidence on the effectiveness of market discipline in
constraining bank risk taking. Section IV concludes.




                                              4
II. The Development of the Regulatory Framework, 1992-1999

The origins of banking reform

        The economic turbulence of the late 1980s and the hyperinflations of 1989 and 1990
virtually destroyed the Argentine financial system. M3/GDP, which had stood at almost 50% in
the 1940s, declined over the following decades and then fell very sharply, reaching a mere 5% as
of 1990. The fiscal reforms of 1989 and 1990 sowed the seeds of the end of inflationary
financing in Argentina. However, as part of those reforms, the 1989 Bonex plan (which included
replacing bank deposits with Bonex bonds trading at deep discounts) had a significant adverse
impact on the financial system. A path to reform based on the seizure of private property housed
in the banking system does not encourage rapid faith in the safety of bank deposits.

        Nevertheless, since 1990 confidence gradually has returned and deposits have grown
strongly. M3 has risen and is now some 30% of GDP. Although this is still a low level for a
country of Argentina's GDP per capita and level of development, this financial system growth
has been rapid and reflects the transformation of a private banking system, which has resumed its
role of allocating credit to the private sector.

        Macroeconomic stability returned with the imposition of the April 1991 currency board
(enshrined in the Convertibility Law), and a very significant opening and further liberalization of
the economy, including the banking system. The legal and regulatory environment in the
financial system was further defined with a new (September 1992) Central Bank charter. This
established Central Bank independence (as in its 1936 creation), and recreated the banking
Superintendency as a semi-autonomous unit within the Central Bank. The Central Bank has 10
full-time directors proposed by the executive and approved by the Senate) including the
President, Vice-President, Superintendent and Vice-Superintendent of banking supervision. The
Central Bank was given a significant degree of autonomy with respect to banking regulation and
supervision (e.g. capital and other requirements can be changed by a simple decision of the
Board) but its role in monetary policy and lender of last resort activities is severely restricted by
the 1991 Convertibility Law and 1992 charter..

        Table 2 lists the main regulatory changes over the period 1992-1999. The period 1992-
1994 was one of strong economic growth and fast development of the financial system, albeit
from a very small base. In this context the Central Bank worked to impose international capital,
accounting and provisioning standards and to improve banking supervision. The financial
system had lost virtually all deposits and hence banks were very highly capitalized implying that
high capital standards were not too difficult to impose at that time. A minimum of 9.5% of
assets at risk was the standard required as of the end of 1992, rising to 11.5% from January 1st
1995 (0.5% rises were effected each 6 months). On top of these requirements, Argentina also
introduced a capital requirement for credit risk, which uses the interest rate charged on each loan
as a signal of credit risk, and requires that capital rise accordingly. Actual minimum capital
requirements by the end of 1994 were then some 14% of assets at risk – well-above minimum
capital requirements set by the Basel standards, or those required in other developing economies.
Provisioning requirements were tightened significantly at the end of 1994 and through 1995.




                                                5
         Other improvements in banking supervision were underway well before the tequila crisis.
In 1992, the Central Bank created a database of the main debtors of the financial system (for
loans of more than $200,000). Argentina also maintained a system of high reserve requirements
which explicitly were viewed at the time as a liquidity tool (that is, both as a means of limiting
asset risk, and as a way of protecting the banking system from the risk of depositor flight).
These non-remunerated reserve requirements were also thought of as a tax on banks. The
required reserve ratios were set at high levels on sight deposits and at low levels on time
deposits. That difference did not reflect underlying liquidity risk differences between time and
demand deposits so much as the inelasticity of demand for sight deposits (i.e. the desire to avoid
financial disintermediation in reaction to the taxation of banks). As we discuss below, time
deposits actually displayed a greater withdrawal propensity during the crisis than demand
deposits.



                Table 2. Main Regulatory Advances in Argentina 1991-1999


April 1991 Currency Board Adopted (backing of monetary base and ex rate 10,000:1,
subsequently 1:1).

September 1992 New Charter of the Central Bank.

December 1992 Deposit Insurance Abolished.

1992-1994 Basel Capital Requirements Adopted, Raised to 11.5% at December 1994.

1994-1995 Provisioning Requirements Tightened.

April 1995 Limited, Fully Funded, Deposit Insurance, $20,000 (subsequently $30,000).

August 1995 Liquidity Requirement System (Rasied to 20% of Deposits through 1997).

September 1996 Market Risk Capital Requirements.

1997-1998 BASIC Introduced (B for Bonds, C for Credit Rating etc).

March 1999 Capital Requirements for Interest Rate Risk



         The nineteen eighties had left Argentina with a very large number of small financial
institutions, many of which disappeared in the 1990s. In the pre-reform period, these institutions
had become government financing vehicles rather than a proper means of channeling credit to
the productive sectors of the economy. With macroeconomic stability, low inflation and
liberalization many such institutions – which lacked the skills to survive in the new environment


                                              6
– faced the daunting challenge of transforming themselves into bona fide competitive providers
of credit. Many survived into the 1990s as they attempted to change their focus. According to
one view of that transition period, the strong economic growth and sharp rises in Argentine asset
prices in the period 1992-1994 (at least until the change in direction of US interest rate policy in
February 1994), coupled with high levels of bank capital, gave a breathing space to many
institutions as they attempted to adapt to the new circumstances. An alternative interpretation of
this period of economic boom is that it allowed many institutions to survive despite underlying
weaknesses that only became apparent in subsequent periods of stress.

        Table 3 gives statistics on the number and type of financial institutions in Argentina over
the 1990's and the total size of the system. Table 3 shows that there has been substantial
restructuring in the Argentine financial system. From 1980 to 1992 over 250 institutions closed.
While 210 of these were non-bank financial institutions, 48 were banks. Between 1992 and 1994
there was actually relatively little restructuring activity and while a set of further non-banks
closed their doors, new banks opened as the system re-orientated its focus. Also in this period
the privatization process commenced with 3 entities privatized. There was then a second quite
ferocious wave of restructuring activity through 1995 – the so-called tequila period – and to a
lesser extent this process has continued through 1999. From the end of 1994 to September 1999
over 90 institutions closed, including 54 banks and 14 non-banks. There were also a significant
number of privatizations (18). As these privatizations were banks transferred to the private
sector, the number of total bank closures (including both private and public banks) was 72
(54+18).

                 Table 3.          Structure of the Financial System

                                              1980         1992     1994       Sep-99


         Number of                              469         212       205         119
         Institutions

                 Private                       179          131       135           81
                                              n.a.           32        34           31
         Wholesale
                          Retail              n.a.           99       101           50

                          Foreign                27          31        31           48
         owned

                 Public                          35          36        33           15

                 Non-bank                       255          45        37           23
         Total Deposits                      55,020       26,002   42,278     74,693
         (¹)
         (¹) In millions of pesos of 1993.




                                                      7
The “Tequila” Crisis

         Despite the advances in regulation and supervision in 1992-1994, the events of late 1994
(particularly after the December 20th Mexican devaluation) and early 1995 exposed weaknesses
in many institutions. The tequila period was a very significant event for the financial system and
as such it is worth explaining the main events and regulatory response in some detail. After
December 20th, a dramatic fall in Argentine asset prices significantly affected the solvency ratios
of several wholesale banks with relatively large government bond portfolios or other financial
market exposures. At the same time, because these institutions had only a small amount of sight
deposits, they had little in the way of liquidity reserves at the central bank. Several such
institutions experienced a significant loss of deposits and hence a sharp liquidity crunch.
Cooperative and some provincial banks also fared particularly badly reflecting their low-quality
loan portfolios. Nevertheless, while the financial system lost deposits in January and February,
this period could not be described as a systemic panic; larger retail banks and large public banks
gained deposits, and deposits denominated in dollars overall also rose (see BCRA 1995 and
D'Amato, Grubisic and Powell 1997 for more details). This phase of the shock was largely a
flight to quality.

       The Central Bank responded to these events in a number of ways. Within the Central
Bank there was an interesting debate as to whether the problem being faced was a run on the
currency, which might require a tightening of monetary conditions (i.e. a raising of reserve
requirements), or alternatively a liquidity problem, which would require the opposite policy. In
the wake of the monetary contraction and a deteriorating macroeconomic environment, it was
soon realized that the greater problem was a potential banking sector liquidity crisis, rather than
a run on the peso. Hence reserve requirements were lowered.

        The distribution of liquidity within the system was as significant a problem as its
aggregate amount. Large retail banks had large reserves in the Central Bank and gained deposits
while wholesale banks had low reserves in the Central Bank and were losing deposits. A private
liquidity sharing system was negotiated for the banking system. However, the amount of
liquidity actually circulated via that mechanism was very restricted. Thus the authorities also set
up an obligatory system through an extra (2%) reserve requirement on certain banks, which was
then distributed through the publicly owned Banco Nación. Finally the Central Bank extended
repos and rediscounts to other affected institutions according to the rules laid down in the Central
Bank's 1992 charter.

        The end of February 1995 was a critical moment. The Central Bank was finding that the
rules on how it could provide rediscounts were very restrictive (being limited to 30 days and to
never exceed the regulatory capital of the borrowing bank) and on February 27th Congress
approved a set of changes. These modifications included being able to extend rediscounts for
longer periods and, under exceptional circumstances, for an amount exceeding the regulatory
capital of the bank. Some interpreted these changes as a weakening of Convertibility itself.

        By February Argentina's fiscal position had deteriorated markedly and there was no
agreement yet in place with the IMF. Argentina had missed an IMF fiscal target at the end of
1994 and the authorities had not agreed to a new program. Finally, the May14th Presidential
election was looming and it had been agreed that this election would be fought subject to new


                                               8
electoral rules (a ballotage system) which created new uncertainty. Opinion polls at the time put
Carlos Menem in the lead but without enough votes to win comfortably in the first round,
prompting speculation of potential second-round coalitions. The opposition parties at the time
were not perceived as being strong supporters of the currency board system, nor the very deep
liberalization measures that had been pursued.

        In this uncertain economic and political climate rumors abounded. These centered on the
state of the banking system and individual banks and the state of the fiscal accounts. A persistent
rumor was that the Government was considering, as a way out of the crisis, “freezing” bank
deposits as had been done in 1989. The deposit runs that had affected mostly individual banks
spread throughout the system and in the first two weeks of March virtually all banks lost
deposits. Indeed, in this two week period roughly half of the total $8bn that left the system, fled
the country.

        This more systemic run was halted in the middle of March with the signing of a new
agreement with the IMF and an international support package with money from the IMF, the
World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. A private bond was also launched
(known as the Patriotic Bond with internal and external tranches – an early explicit example of
“bailing in”). Part of these funds financed two fiduciary funds for the banking system; one to
assist provinces in the privatization of provincial banks and one to assist in the restructuring of
the private banking system. Deposits fell slightly from the day after this agreement was signed
until May 14th (the Presidential election date). On Carlos Menem's victory in that election, and
with much uncertainty thus resolved, deposits started to grow again, and the financial system
recovered very quickly.

        Despite the fact that the systemic run of March 1995 affected all the banks, depositors
fled some banks more than others. Schumacher (1997), Dabos and Sosa (1999), and Anastasi,
Burdiso, Grubisic, and Lencioni (1998) all conclude that banks that failed or were forced to
merge over this period were much weaker institutions. Each of these papers adopts a logit/probit
methodology to explain bank “failures” as a function of banks’ ex ante observable
characteristics. Although each study is slightly different in the samples of banks used and the
precise specification of the model, the main results are consistent across all the studies. Each
study reports that in over 90% of the cases the model correctly predicts failure or survival. Thus,
although both Type 1 and Type 2 errors are found, they are very small in number.

        Anastasi et al. (1998) provides more extensive analysis of market discipline of banks
using a larger sample of banks, a longer time series and a more complete set of models than the
other papers. In that paper logit estimates are presented and as well as results for a survival
analysis, where the predicted variable is the number of months a bank is expected to survive
(after December 1994). This is estimated using data as of the end of 1994 and predictions are
updated on a quarterly basis. A rather small subset of bank fundamentals are found to be
significant explanatory variables, and these variables correctly predict over 90% of banks'
survival experience even when the set of predictors is constrained to the predicting variables as




                                                9
of December 1994. Little is added to predictive power when explanatory variables are updated
quarterly3.

        D'Amato, Grubisic and Powell (1997) develop a slightly different approach. Here the
authors examine whether the amount of deposits lost during the crisis, on a bank by bank basis,
could be explained by bank fundamentals, macroeconomic factors or “contagion”. Contagion is
defined here as serially correlated losses across banks that could not be explained either by
macroeconomic influences or by changes in individual bank characteristics. This interpretation
of significant panel time effects (indicating significant residual correlation) as potential
“contagion” may overstate true contagion, since it could also be accounted for by time-varying
coefficients or omitted variables. Nevertheless, what is striking in this study is that even this
potentially overstated measure of contagion was not the most important influence on deposit
loss. When explicit “contagion” terms were added (e.g. the loss of deposits of other banks in the
previous time period) it was found that additional time effects in the panel analysis became
insignificant, indicating the importance of serial correlation of risk for the banking sector as a
whole. However, fundamental macroeconomic factors remained significant in generating
aggregate risk, and the majority of the explained variation in deposits was accounted for by bank
fundamentals, indicating the importance of bank soundness in depositors' decisions.

        Table 4 summarizes the effect of the tequila period on the financial system. It should be
noted that between December and May, the system lost $8bn or 18% of deposits and the Central
Bank lost some $5bn or 30% of international reserves. Over this single year some 51 institutions
were closed (12 liquidated and 39 merged) and 2 institutions were suspended and subsequently
merged in 1996. The total deposits in liquidated institutions in 1995 amounted to $958m and of
this depositors received roughly 50% of their investments, losing an estimated $477m. In
addition other creditors (mainly bond holders), lost an estimated $249m. This is a record of
market discipline (i.e. actual depositor loss) that few countries have matched in recent decades.
(Interestingly, Estonia in the early 1990s – a country also constrained by its commitment to a
currency board – is the other example of significant depositor loss of which we are aware.)




3
  As a caveat it is worth noting that if this model is re-estimated over different sample periods, although similar
prediction success can be obtained, other bank fundamentals are preferred. This indicates some potential instability
in model specification or an alternative explanation might be a very flat likelihood function with respect to the
different model specifications. The Superintendency is now employing the results of this analysis in its off-site
work.


                                                      10
                           Table 4.          The "Tequila" Crisis
                 Number of institutions (Dec 94)                         205

                 Institutions liquidated                                   12
                 Number of mergers                                         39
                 New institutions                                           4

                 Number of institutions (Dec 95)                         158

                 Institutions suspended and then                            2
                 merged


                 Total deposits in liquidated                            958
                 institutions (¹)
                 Estimated total loss of deposits                        477
                 (¹)
                 Estimated total loss of other                           249
                 liabilities (¹)


                 (¹) In millions of pesos.




Challenges and Reforms after the Tequila Crisis

         Argentina had abolished deposit insurance in the early 1990s, and managed to weather
the tequila storm without it. Nevertheless, there was a perception among some that the complete
absence of deposit insurance was too extreme and that its absence may have contributed to the
flight from the banking system. A limited deposit insurance scheme was introduced in May 1995
covering deposits of up to $20,000 and funded though premia on banks calculated using a risk-
based pricing formula. This insurance scheme was implemented through a government-
sponsored enterprise – SEDESA S.A. – which is separate from the Central Bank. The scheme
has since been extended to cover deposits up to $30,000.

        Originally, SEDESA was originally seen as a body that would simply pay out to
depositors in the case of a bank liquidation. However, over time SEDESA's role and powers
have been extended. SEDESA is now formally charged with a minimum cost resolution
objective. Additionally, the charter of the Central Bank has been altered to allow the Central
Bank to separate the assets and liabilities of a failing bank. In effect this allows the Central Bank
to create a “good” bank that can then be sold and a “residual bank” that can be wound-up, thus
avoiding the liquidation of the whole bank. The residual bank rests in a type of “trust” backed
by bonds. Consistent with the minimum cost resolution guidelines, SEDESA's funds, and also



                                                11
funds of the Central Bank, have been used to finance this process through purchases of the bonds
issued by the residual bank trust.

        To some observers this process has appeared to be an efficient way of dealing with
problem institutions involving very little public money; to others, it has reduced market
discipline and potentially placed the Central Bank at risk of losing some of its investment, which
seems to be at odds with the intent of the Convertibility Law (see, for example, World Bank
1998). That criticism reflects the view that some mergers are unsustainable combinations of
weak institutions. The World Bank (1998) recommended requiring that acquiring banks have A
or better credit ratings, in light of that risk. In the event, however, little adverse consequences
have resulted from Central Bank involvement because merged banks have tended to improve
over time. For example, banks rated BB have shown a greater probability of being upgraded
rather than downgraded. That positive tendency is also reflected in the transition probability
matrix of CAMEL ratings (see BCRA 1999). It is also worth noting that – despite the possible
advantages from following the World Bank’s recommendation to require a minimum quality
standard for acquirers – the Central Bank currently lacks the legal tools to implement such a
policy without leaving itself open to legal dispute.

        Immediately after the tequila shock, beginning in August 1995, there was a very
significant reform of the reserve requirement system. During the crisis it was found that sight
deposits were more stable than time deposits and that banks with more time deposits had lost a
greater fraction of their deposits and (because of the relatively low reserve requirement on time
deposits) had less liquidity available to them in the Central Bank. It was decided to replace
reserve requirements with a "liquidity requirement" acknowledging explicitly that these reserves
were intended for “systemic liquidity protection”. These new liquidity requirements were
specified on virtually all liabilities (reserve requirements had been placed only on deposits) at
rates which declined depending on the residual maturity of each liability and were required
irrespective of the type of liability (sight deposit, time deposit, bond, etc). Finally the liquidity
requirements introduced were remunerated at rates approximately equal to short-term dollar
interest rates, thus alleviating a substantial tax that had been placed on the financial system.

        In recent years, the liquidity requirement has been further amended to permit the holding
of balances in qualifying foreign banks to count toward as much as 80% of the requirement, and
to permit the use of standbys from foreign banks as a substitute for deposits held abroad. These
rules reflect the intent of the liquidity requirement – a means to insulate the banking system
against the flight of deposits – and the recognition that for that purpose hard currency balances
held abroad may be as good or better than deposits held at the Central Bank. Furthermore, the
flexibility afforded by the use of standbys provides a market reward to low-risk banks, since
those banks are able to obtain standbys at low cost from foreign banks.

        Another lesson from the tequila crisis had been the importance of market risk as
wholesale banks had maintained little regulatory capital against relatively large government bond
positions. In 1996, Argentina became one of the first countries to implement an adapted version
of the Basel market risk capital requirement Amendment to the 1988 Accord. The approach
employed was to use the 'standardized' approach, (with simplified rules for offsetting positions
reflecting the more limited Argentine bond market), but with higher risk weights calculated via a
“value at risk” formula. The Central Bank publishes the volatilities used to calculate these risk


                                               12
weights on a monthly basis. Capital requirements were further augmented in March 1999 with a
requirement to cover interest rate risk on the banking book.

         The tequila experience underlined certain structural problems with respect to banking
oversight, which encouraged new thinking about the benefits of involving markets in the
regulatory process. First, although in large part standard statistics monitored by the
Superintendency do a fairly good job in predicting bank failure, some failures came as a surprise
to the authorities. Among the reasons why banks failed but were not identified in advance as
problem institutions is that there is a limit to what reported balance sheet and other statistics tell
about a bank. Unsound practices and fraud are an important cause of bank failure, and one that
is not likely to show itself in reported financial ratios. For example, off-balance sheet contracts
(types of derivative operations) and even undeclared off-shore banks were uncovered in the
analysis of some institutions that failed during the tequila crisis. That observation (along with
the evidence that market deposit interest rates had been useful in forecasting bank failures during
the crisis) led policy makers to consider the potential advantages of relying on market
assessments as part of the regulatory process. In an emerging country context, in particular,
where supervisory technology and resources are relatively constrained, in some cases the
“market” knows more about the existence of derivatives and offshore transactions than the
Superintendency.

        Furthermore, there can also be differences between the powers and incentives of
regulators and those of markets to discipline banks. An important issue in some emerging market
countries is the legal powers and the legal protection offered to supervisors who attempt to
discipline banks. In Argentina, for example, legal protection of supervisors is weak (a point
made in World Bank 1998), and the legal tradition does not give much scope for early
Supervisory intervention if an institution is still formally complying with regulations. There is a
possibility, therefore, that Supervisors cannot close an institution or force remedial action even if
they know that an institution is facing serious problems. In that case, the market – if it has the
correct information – may be more willing and able to discipline weak institutions than their
supervisors4.

The B.A.S.I.C. Approach to Bank Regulation

         These kinds of considerations led the regulatory authorities in Argentina to develop what
has become known in that country as B.A.S.I.C. banking oversight (see Powell 1997 and World
Bank 1998 for further details). B.A.S.I.C. is an acronym that stands for Bonds, Auditing,
Supervision, Information and Credit Rating. The main idea behind B.A.S.I.C. is that both
market and regulatory discipline are imperfect and that there are complementarities between the
two. As we have argued, the Superintendency and the “market” may have different information
sets, incentives, and legal powers, and hence the quality of monitoring can be improved if both
are employed actively to monitor banks. Despite the appeal of the B.A.S.I.C. acronym, the more
logical order to discuss the operation of the system is: Information, Auditing, Supervision, Bonds
and Credit Rating. Table 5 gives a schematic representation of the main policies under each
heading.


4
    See Powell (1997) on this point.


                                                13
        Measures are taken to ensure that the entire database cannot be downloaded. For
example, if hundreds of searches are detected from the same source, then further access is
denied, essentially in an attempt to protect the identity of banks' good creditors from other banks
(to ensure that banks can internalize the benefits of their own screening and monitoring
investments). However, no measures are taken to protect the identity of individual borrowers.
Moreover, the database, except credits of less than $200,000 in categories 1 and 2 (i.e.
performing), is sold at very low cost to all interested parties. The main objectives of this policy
are not only to promote transparency with respect to the borrowers of the Argentine financial
system, but also to enhance the 'willingness to pay' debts, given what is perceived as a weak legal
system.6The database maintained by the Superintendency has recently been expanded to include
many more variables (e.g., basic financial ratios of borrowers and other information that would
be relevant to determining the quality of the loan), and these data are also available for limited
private use, although comprehensive current data are only available for unlimited private use for
non-performing borrowers.

        The usefulness of information depends not only on its quantity and availability, but also
on its quality. The auditing process is a vital component to ensure the validity of the information
published. In Argentina in previous decades auditing firms have been subject to harsh criticism.
The Central Bank in response has set up a list of qualified bank auditors who must post a
financial bond. In the event of a dispute, this bond may be forfeited and the auditor may be
struck from the authorized list. Additionally, the Central Bank lays down strict guidelines on
minimum auditing requirements and supervises the auditing process.

         “Supervision” in B.A.S.I.C. actually refers to both supervision and regulation (and these
activities are separated within the internal structure of the Central Bank). The Superintendency
has now adopted a version of the U.S. CAMELS system of bank rating. The banks’ CAMELS
ratings are then used in several regulations. In particular the CAMELS score affects capital
requirements such that banks with poor CAMELS ratings face a higher requirement7.

         “Bonds” refers to the requirement that banks in Argentina must issue a subordinated
liability for some 2% of their deposits each year8. The idea behind this kind of regulation (as
proposed by Calomiris 1997, 1999) is threefold. First, if banks are forced to attract institutional
investors and to go to market to issue debt, that process reveals information about the bank to
those debt-holders and to supervisors. Supervisors may be able to use that information to
6
  The database also has great potential to analyze, for example, whether provisioning and capital requirements are
adequate. Falkenheim and Powell (1999) use the database and a simple portfolio model of credit risk in this vein
and conclude that in general provisioning and capital requirements are more than adequate in Argentina given loss
probabilities (estimated on data for 1998 and 1999).
7
  Argentine capital requirements can be expressed as: CR=11.5*w*X*K+MR+IR where CR is the Capital
Requirement as a % of assets at risk, w is the average bank Basle risk weight for counterparty risk, X is the average
interest rate factor (as described in the text, the interest rate on each loan is used as an indicator of counterparty risk),
K is the CAMELS factor, MR is the market risk capital requirement and IR is the interest rate risk (banking book)
capital requirement.
8
  In this paper we refer to the “subordinated debt requirement”. In fact, there are several ways to comply including
issuing a bond or by holding a deposit/obtaining a loan from certain investors. These investors must be from outside
Argentina (and subject to a minimum credit rating) or be local and have already satisfied the requirement. In the
case of the bond issue, the bond is not necessarily subordinated to other bonds outstanding although it is always
subordinate to deposits. Meeting the stronger requirement allows subordinated debt to be considered as Tier 2
capital.


                                                          16
discipline the bank. Second, sophisticated investors that hold a subordinated liability then have
incentives to monitor the bank, and are likely to be a constituency for conservatism within the
bank because (like the deposit insurer) their claims are senior to equity. In contrast, equity
holders in an insured bank that faces large losses may have incentive to increase risk to take
advantage of the put option inherent in deposit insurance. Thus when equity capital is severely
depleted it is not a constituency for conservatism. 9 Third, if debts are traded publicly, then the
secondary market prices reveal further information about the default risk of the bank over time.
In the case of Argentina, where corporate debt markets are extremely thin, it was thought that the
first two objectives would be more important.

        The subordinated debt regulation has not performed as well as its advocates had hoped.
The regulation was adopted in late 1996, to become effective January 1998. However, over this
period the Asian crisis struck global capital markets, and Argentina was also affected
(specifically, after the speculative attack on Hong Kong in October 1997). Subsequently,
Argentina’s securities markets suffered further minor shocks as different countries in Asia were
affected, then suffered considerably in August 1998 as the result of the Russian debt moratorium,
and then was again shaken by the January 1999 Brazil devaluation. To summarize, from roughly
October 1997 to mid-1999, the international financial crisis made debt or equity issues (foreign
or local) from any issuer (sovereign or corporate) difficult. The Central Bank reacted to this by
putting back the compliance date for subordinated debt on several occasions, by extending
somewhat the range of liabilities that banks could issue in satisfaction of the requirement, and by
revising the penalties banks faced for non-compliance.

        Currently the regulation remains in force, and banks have a wide range of liabilities that
qualify as subordinated debt. Banks that fail to comply face higher capital and liquidity
requirements. Banks with foreign parents may comply through their parent.

        To investigate how the subordinated debt regulation has been working in practice, we
analyze the characteristics of banks according to how they have reacted to this regulation. In
particular, in Table 6 we divide banks into two groups according to whether they have complied
with the regulation and how they have complied. In a first group we place banks either that do
not have to comply (an exception is made for foreign owned banks subject to a minimum credit
rating) or that have complied by issuing a bond or obtaining a 2 year deposit from a foreign
bank. We call this the “high-compliance” group. In a second group we place banks that either
have complied “weakly” by obtaining a 2 year deposit from a local institution (a category that
includes some banks that subsequently failed), or banks that have not complied at all. We
designate these “low-compliance” banks.

       The identities of the banks in each of these categories are not a matter of public
information. Some critics have argued that the failure to disclose that information weakens the
power of subordinated debt to provide signals to the marketplace (i.e. if banks choosing not to
comply are weaker, then revealing that information could facilitate market discipline of those
banks). The decision not to reveal information about banks’ compliance reflected concerns on
9
  Bond holders can be depended upon to discipline banks so as to limit their risk taking so long as either (1) equity
remains in the bank, or alternatively, so long as (2) an upper limit is placed on the yield on any subordinated debt
that counts toward the regulatory requirement (which it is not the case in Argentina, and which Calomiris 1997
argues is a weakness of the current law). For more details, see Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee (2000).


                                                        17
the part of supervisors about creating false impressions about the relative health of banks during
the turbulent period of 1998-1999. In particular, banks that had issued required subordinated debt
early (e.g. before the Asian crisis) did not face the same market challenges as those that had
waited to issue debt, and regulators did not think that relative compliance always reflected
relative strength. Nevertheless, that lack of confidence in the market’s ability to draw proper
inferences is somewhat at odds with the motivations for the law in the first place.

        Table 6 compares various characteristics of these two groups to see if the banks that
comply at a high level are the strongest banks (since one would expect that banks with lower
default risk would have lower costs of meeting the rigors of market discipline). We report
variables that capture elements of asset risk and liquidity, as well as market perceptions of the
default risk on debt, and the capital ratio.

       Default risk on debt is captured alternatively by the average interest cost on debt for the
bank (which reflects a market risk premium) and by the growth rate of deposits. When banks’
deposits are perceived as riskier, they have a harder time attracting deposits (for theory and
empirical evidence on depositors’ aversion to risky deposits, see Gorton and Pennacchi 1990,
Calomiris and Kahn 1991, Calomiris and Mason 1997, and Calomiris and Wilson 1998).




                                               18
                                    Table 6. Subordinated Debt

                                                                    1993.2-1994        1995        1996-1999
Deposit Interest Rate                High Compliance Average            6.16%          8.47%          6.96%
(US dollars deposits)                                    St. Dev.       2.28%          5.33%          3.45%
                                     Low Compliance      Average        6.99%          9.98%          7.93%
                                                         St. Dev.       3.18%          7.16%          2.76%


Loan Interest Rate                   High Compliance Average            15.40%         16.69%        15.12%
(US dollars loans)                                       St. Dev.       5.63%          6.21%          9.29%
                                     Low Compliance      Average        19.02%         20.70%        17.41%
                                                         St. Dev.       10.94%         11.80%         9.70%


Change in Deposits                   High Compliance Average            2.43%          0.44%          5.30%
                                                         St. Dev.       36.8%          31.8%          30.8%
                                     Low Compliance      Average        3.58%          -1.42%         4.49%
                                                         St. Dev.       14.6%          61.2%         27.47%


Capital Ratio                        High Compliance Average            15.97%         17.85%        15.70%
(capital integration)                                    St. Dev.       10.85%         13.98%        12.14%
                                     Low Compliance      Average        20.20%         17.37%        18.31%
                                                         St. Dev.       14.55%         24.75%        16.38%


Non-Performing Loans                 High Compliance Average            13.29%         16.24%        14.16%
                                                         St. Dev.       16.04%         16.50%        12.91%
                                     Low Compliance      Average        23.10%         30.00%        25.44%
                                                         St. Dev.       19.25%         22.37%        17.35%


Loans/Liquid Assets                  High Compliance Average             6.37           6.92           4.16
                                                         St. Dev.        7.52           6.36           4.06
                                     Low Compliance      Average         7.14           9.25           5.39
                                                         St. Dev.        7.93          10.14           8.42


Number of Observations               High Compliance                     177            237            922
                                     Low Compliance                       76             97            412


(*) Low Compliance means either the bank did not comply or the bank complied through a local subordinated
insurance



        Asset risk and liquidity differences are captured by (1) the ratio of loans-to-assets (which,
ceteris paribus, indicates higher risk and lower liquidity), (2) the average interest rate on loans
(which we view as an indicator of the riskiness of loans), and (3) the ratio of non-performing
loans to total loans (another indicator of the riskiness of loans). This way of defining elements of



                                                    19
asset risk isolates three perspectives on asset risk: the proportion of risky assets (loans), the ex
ante riskiness of loans, and the riskiness of loans based on actual performance.

        Bank default risk reflects a combination of asset risk and leverage. The inverse of
leverage (the capital ratio) is measured here using book values (the only available measure, since
virtually none of the banks has publicly traded stock). For the various measures of asset risk,
default risk, and leverage, Table 6 reports data retrospectively for various dates – that is,
compliance is measured in 1998 and 1999, and data are reported for previous periods for the
groups defined by their recent compliance.

        The simple comparisons presented in Table 6 indicate that banks that achieved the
highest degree of compliance with the rule are relatively strong, as indicated by deposit growth
and deposit interest rate differences (the exception is the lack of a difference in deposit growth
rates in the pre-tequila period, which predates the subordinated debt regulation by several years).
Those differences are also reflected in differences in asset risk, as measured by loan interest
rates, non-performing loans, and loan-to-asset ratios. Capital ratios are higher for the banks that
comply least with the law, which reflects a combination of their asset weakness (i.e. that risk-
based capital standards being enforced) as well as the penalty of a higher capital requirement
imposed on banks that fail to comply with the rule.

        Despite the fact that not all banks have complied fully with the subordinated debt rule,
and that there is substantial room for improving the requirement (i.e. disclosing compliance, and
limiting more what qualifies as subordinated debt), we think the rule can be regarded as a partial
success for three reasons: First, compliance patterns with the rule demonstrate the usefulness of
market discipline. The fact that weak banks find it difficult to issue subordinated debt, but that
strong banks find it easy, is encouraging to advocates of the rule who see it as a way to reward
banks for gaining the confidence of the marketplace.

         Second, banks that fail to comply outright are penalized in ways that reduce the gains that
banks might otherwise obtain from failing to comply, and that protect against the dangerous
moral-hazard problem of risk taking (so-called “asset substitution”) in distress states. By being
forced to increase capital and liquidity, non-complying banks are not encouraged to increase
asset risk easily in the face of weakening in their loan quality, which protects the deposit insurer
and the taxpayer from the risks of extreme loss attendant to the pursuit of “resurrection”
strategies.

         Third, the law makes it clear to all parties that supervisors are aware of the failure to
comply with subordinated debt, and this has the benefit of enhancing discipline over supervisors.
When a weak bank with a long record of failing to comply with the subordinated debt rule fails,
supervisors cannot claim to have been unaware of the bank’s weakness, since the market was
providing a clear signal of its lack of confidence in the bank. While market yields on debt issues
are one form of signal, the failure to issue subordinated debt is arguably an even stronger one,
since it indicates that banks would have a very difficult time attracting uninsured long-term debt.
The presence of the subordinated debt rule thus eliminates ex post “plausible deniability” for
supervisors – they cannot claim to have been ignorant about bank weakness if that weakness is
known in the marketplace.



                                                20
        Finally, the C in B.A.S.I.C. refers to the Credit Rating requirement. The idea of this
requirement is also to improve information regarding financial institutions. While the
subordinated debt requirement looks to institutional investors to provide discipline and
information, the idea of a credit rating is to ensure that public information is available to less-
sophisticated investors. As in the case of the subordinated debt rule, however, this regulatory
requirement has not proved to be problem-free.

         The Central Bank first required banks to obtain credit ratings and permitted the ratings to
be produced by any of a set of authorized agencies, which included local and internationally
active agencies (8 in all). However, the perception was that this regime was expensive and that
the ratings were of varying quality. In other words, there was a perception that some agencies
were giving higher ratings than others. Arguably this reflected the fact that local capital markets
are still not highly developed; Argentina currently may lack a set of institutional investors
capable of providing incentives for rating agencies to be conservative.

        The Central Bank initially responded to the problem of questionable ratings quality by
issuing standardized guidelines for rating agencies to follow. This did not appear to solve the
problem. Finally, the Central Bank asked banks to have only one rating (reducing the cost of the
regime) but also restricted the authorized agencies to only internationally active ones. Currently
there are four authorized rating agencies.10 We show in Table 7 an estimated transition
probability matrix of ratings over the history of this regulation. The table illustrates the
distribution of current and past ratings, and the probability of obtaining a particular current rating
given a particular previous rating. Table 7 shows that most banks enjoy fairly high private
ratings. The vast majority of banks rated (89 out of 103) currently enjoy investment grade
ratings (BBB or higher), and 45 banks are rated AA or AAA. There have been significant
changes in ratings for individual banks in both directions during 1998, three of which placed
banks that had been rated BB, BBB, and A into the F category. The evidence of such dramatic,
negative changes in ratings suggests that the ratings are a meaningful signal of quality.




10
  These agencies are, in alphabetical order, Duff and Phelps, Fitch-IBCA, Standard and Poor's and Thompson
Bankwatch.


                                                    21
                                                                       Table 7. Credit Rating Regulation
                                                                                      Transition Matrix

                                                                                                Evaluations in December 98

                      Evaluations       AAA          AA            A          BBB          BB       B       CCC,        F      Not        Orderly     Revoked,    Total

                                                                                                           CC, C, D          Available   Retirement   Suspended

                  AAA                    23           1                                                                                      1                     25
                  AA                     2            14                                                                                                           16
 Evaluations      A                                   2           28            2                                       1       2                        1         36
       in         BBB                                              1           13          2                            1       1            1           3         22
December 97 BB                                                                             5                            1       2                                  8
      and         B                                                                                 3                           1                                  4
   March 98       CCC, CC, C, D                                                                                                                                    0
                  F                                   1                                                                                                  1         2
                  Not Available          2                                                                              1       4            8                     15
                  Total                  27           18          29           15          7        3         0         4       10          10           5        128
(*) In the cases that the entity presented two evaluations, the worse one was considered
Banking System Structure and Performance

        There have also been extremely important structural changes in the Argentine
financial system since the tequila crisis, which have been facilitated by the policies of
permitting free entry and encouraging the privatization of public banks. First, the
consolidation process begun in the early 1990s, and accelerated by the tequila crisis, has
continued, as shown in Tables 3 and 4. As mentioned above, some of these mergers were
assisted through the use of the Fiduciary Fund set up during 1995 with funds from
multilateral institutions and some through the use of funds from SEDESA (the deposit
insurance agency). Moreover, there was also a strong tendency towards privatization in
the banking sector, visible in Table 8. Some 17 of the 24 provincial banks that have been
privatized were assisted through a Fiduciary Fund set with the assistance of the
multilaterals (see Appendix Table A1).11 Privatizations have occurred via a mixture of
types of sales, and have largely been to existing domestic banks or domestic investment
groups. Two very large public banks remain in Argentina – Banco Nación, owned by the
Federal Government, and Banco de la Provincia de Buenos Aires (the largest Argentine
province in terms of GDP) – and efforts to privatize them have met significant political
resistance. As of July 1999, these two banks represent some 27% of banking system
deposits. Although former President Carlos Menem expressed his desire to privatize
Banco Nación in his second term, this was not approved by Congress. The ex-Governor
of the Province of Buenos Aires (Mr. Duhalde) and his successor (Mr. Ruckhauf) have
not come out in favor of privatizing this important provincial bank at the time of this
writing.



                     Table 8. Bank Privatization in Argentina

                       Number of      Assets (¹)                          Deposits (¹)
                       Institutions      before            after       before          after


1992 -                        3         1,128              321          562            498
1994
1995 -                       11         3,093         1,993          1,706          1,316
1996
1997 -                        4         1,442         1,078          1,004             793
1999

Total                        18         5,663         3,392          3,273          2,606
(¹) Assets and deposits after and before privatization, in millions of pesos.




11
     There have also been a number of privatizations of municipal banks which we do not report here.


                                                      24
         The other very significant structural change in the banking system has been the
entry of foreign capital. During 1996 through 1998, several significant transactions took
place which resulted in the purchase of domestic banks by Spain's Banco Santander and
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, the UK's HSBC and Canada's Bank of Nova Scotia (Scotia
International) to name a few. Table 9 provides figures on specific transactions.
Furthermore, Banco Itau from Brazil entered as a start-up, and subsequently also
purchased a local bank. These entrants added to several existing foreign banks, including
Citibank and Bank of Boston, ABM Amro and Lloyds. Deposits in banks with a foreign
controlling share now account for some 60% of private sector deposits and some 40% of
total deposits. Foreign banks have heightened competition, and this is most visible in
their strong advertising campaigns and, in some products, their willingness to wage price
wars.12 Foreign competition has also allowed the introduction of new technology,
probably more rapidly than otherwise, and has assisted in creating a much more stable
deposit base.




12
  There has also been a tendency among some banks to offer bank accounts combined with lotteries, free
computers and other domestic appliances and even airline tickets. These marketing campaigns may of
course reflect an immature market rather than reflecting real competition. Still, we note that relative to
international standards, banking services in Argentina tend to be expensive, bank administration costs tend
to be high, non-performing loans tend to be high and bank profitability is low.


                                                    25
                                     Table 9. Entry of Foreign Capital

                    Local bank                     Purchasing Institution                   Origin           Share
                                                                                                           purchased


1-Sep-96     Tornquist                       O'Higgins - Central Hispano                   Chile - Spain     100%
1-Dec-96     Francés del Río de la Plata     Banco Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV)                    Spain              30%
 1-Apr-97    Liniers Sudamericano            BT LA Holdings LLC.                           U.S.A.             51%
  1-Jul-97   Trasandino                      Abinsa                                        Chile              51%
  1-Jul-97   Crédito de Cuyo                 Abinsa                                        Chile              67%
  1-Jul-97   Banco Río de la Plata           Banco Santander de España                     Spain              50%
1-Aug-97     Banco Roberts                   Hong Kong Shangai Banking Corp.               U.K.              100%
1-Aug-97     Banco de Crdito Argentino       Banco Francés del Río de la Plata (BBV)       Spain              28%
1-Nov-97     Los Tilos                       Caja de Ahorros Prov. San Fernando            Spain              40%
1-Dec-97     Finvercon                       Norwest - Finvercon                           U.S.A.            100%
1-Dec-97     Quilmes                         Scotia International                          Canada             70%
1-Jan-98     B.I. Creditanstalt              Bank Austria                                  Austria            49%
  1-Jul-98   Compañía Financiera Argentina   AIG Consumer Finance Group                    U.S.A.             91%
1-Nov-98     Del Buen Ayre                   Banco Itaú                                    Brazil            100%
1-Jan-99     Bisel                           Caisse Nationale De Credit Agricole           France             36%
1-May-99     Entre Ríos                      Bisel (Caisse Nationale de Credit Agricole)   France             82%




                                                       26
        To a large extent, this entry of foreign capital in the banking sector is simply a
reflection of what has happened in the Argentine economy more generally. In fact the
puzzle is really why this did not happen earlier given that the sector was liberalized in
1992. As noted before, one hypothesis is that foreign investors were waiting to see that
the new policy regime was “fully tested” before making significant investments. It is
worth noting that investors in the financial system were unusually late in entering
compared to investors in telephones, electricity, gas, water, railways, mining and
petrochemicals. That difference in timing suggests that potential bank investors had
specific policy concerns that did not affect other sectors. In particular, they may have
wished to see proof that the government respected the independence of the Central Bank
as a regulator and a monetary agency, and that the government would not appropriate
resources from the banking sector during a period of stress – e.g. by freezing deposits as
had been done in 1990. According to that interpretation, after the tequila “test”, these
investors were more willing to come in.

        Despite the dynamism in Argentine banking, bank profitability remains very low
by international standards, which is partly a result of regulations that create incentives for
banks to limit their risk, and partly reflects the high operating costs of banks in
Argentina. Table 10 gives a breakdown of the profitability of the Argentine banking
system in the last three years for public banks, private banks and the top 10 private banks.
Even in the top 10 private banks, it can be seen that costs remain high (almost 6% of
assets), and although service income is relatively high, loan-loss charges are also high (at
around 2% of assets this year) reducing profits to less than 1% of assets. Other private
banks are less profitable (0.5% of assets) with higher operating costs (6.4% of assets) and
public banks show lower interest margin (3.5% of assets as opposed to 4.5% for top 10
private banks). Public bank profitability also remains low at 0.4% of assets.




                                             27
                                    Table 10. Breakdown of Banks Profitability
                                     Annualized, in percentage of net assets


                             Public Banks                Private Banks                Top Ten Private
                            1997      1998    1999 (¹)   1997     1998     1999 (¹)   1997     1998     1999 (¹)

  Interest margin            3.9       3.9       3.5      3.9       4.7         4.6     4.0      4.5       4.5
  Service income margin      2.8       2.8       2.5      3.6       3.3         3.1     3.4      3.1       2.9
  Gains on securities        0.4       0.6       0.6      1.3       0.8         1.0     1.4      0.6       0.9
  Operating costs           -5.5      -5.5      -4.9     -6.8      -6.6        -6.4    -6.3     -6.0      -5.8
  Loan-loss charges         -2.8      -1.2      -1.3     -1.9      -1.8        -2.1    -1.8     -1.5      -2.1
  Tax charges               -0.3      -0.3      -0.3     -0.5      -0.4        -0.4    -0.5     -0.4      -0.4
  Income tax                -0.1      -0.1      -0.1     -0.4      -0.4        -0.4    -0.4     -0.3      -0.5
  Other                      2.6       0.3       0.4      1.5       1.0         1.2     1.7      1.0       1.2

  Total profits              1.1      0.6        0.4      0.8      0.5         0.5      1.5      0.9       0.8

(¹) Up to September 1999.
        The combination of low earnings and high recent acquisition prices is interesting.
Projecting current levels of profits into the future would appear not to justify the prices
paid for recent acquisitions. Thus, in order to explain these prices, one would have to
assume a high forecasted growth rate for the financial system. If those growth forecasts
do not materialize it is possibile that some foreign entrants may reassess their decisions to
enter the Argentine market in the years to come (we note in passing the decision of
Deutshe Bank to sell its Argentine retail business to Bank of Boston as an example of
foreign exit). On the other hand, if high growth rates resume, the foreign acquisitions of
the 1990s could prove quite successful.

        What are the prospects for further improvement in the structure and performance
of the Argentine banking industry, and what are the risks posed to the system from
delaying those improvements? The World Bank (1998) report suggests that the problems
of the remaining weak private institutions and the remaining public institutions are quite
distinct, and that neither is a systemic threat or a cause for urgent concern. The World
Bank (1988) suggests that the weaker private institutions – because of their small relative
size – pose no threat to the stability of the financial system more generally. The
remaining public banks, it was argued, also present no threat to the system (because of
their separateness from the private sector) but might well present significant fiscal cost if
they were to be privatized today (presumably the authors had in mind a significant clean-
up of the public banks’ balance sheets).

        In the eyes of investors the reforms in the financial system in the late 1990s
appear to have produced a very clear positive result. From 1996 to 1998, the financial
system grew very strongly with deposits growing at a roughly 30% annualized rate. In
the second half of 1998, however, and through 1999, Argentina fell into a recession (due
to the combination of external factors (high international lending spreads for emerging
economies, sharp falls in commodity prices, a high value of the dollar, and a recession in
Brazil) and internal factors (political uncertainty leading up to the October 1999
Presidential election). That recession has taken its toll on the banking system. While
deposits have kept growing (at just over 10% for the year), credit to the private sector has
grown very little over the last 18 months and interest rates have generally risen,
depending on the sub-period analyzed. Non-performing loans have also risen quite
significantly, and thus profitability has suffered.

        Although the past year has been a very difficult time in some sectors of the real
economy, the banking sector has been very stable. Indeed, the fact that credit supply has
tightened in the face of a recession and high loan losses is precisely what one would
expect from a banking system subject to market discipline. In that sense, tight credit
supply is a sign of the financial system’s strength (Calomiris and Wilson 1998).13 There
13
  Some observers argue that market discipline is undesirable because it reduces the supply of credit during
downturns and thus exacerbates recessions. We see that effect as unavoidable, and attempts to mitigate
market discipline with regulatory “forbearance” as counter-productive. When regulators forbear – in order
to permit banks to undertake greater risk than the market would permit – some (especially insolvent) banks
will abuse forbearance by undertaking enormous risk as part of a resurrection strategy. These bets (e.g. in


                                                    27
has been no capital flight from the banking system whatsoever and no capital flight from
the country (reserves in fact have risen). Thus, the financial system, which had always
been an Achilles' heel for Argentina, recently has contributed to the long-run credibility
of fiscal, monetary, and regulatory policy, and thus despite the tightness of credit, has
contributed to macroeconomic stability.



                         Table 11. Comparison of Two Crises

                                                            Tequila       Oct-97 to
                                                                            Feb-99
                 Deposits growth                             -18%             19%
                 Reserves growth                             -30%             14%
                 Max. rise in interest                       12.1             7.9
                 rates (¹)
               (¹) Percentage points increase.




        As Table 11 shows, the reaction by Argentine bank depositors to the recent period
of emerging market upheaval (as measured by deposit growth) is strikingly different from
the tequila period, despite the fact that the recent upheaval (in Brazil) has had larger
fundamental consequences for the Argentine economy than did the collapse of the
Mexican peso in 1994-1995. Not only have deposit growth and international reserves
growth remained strong, interest rises have not risen by nearly as much as they did during
the tequila period.



III. Is Market Discipline Real? Microeconomic Evidence

        In this section we take a more formal look at the evidence that market discipline
operates on Argentine banks. We define market discipline as reactions of private debt
holders to bank actions such that the bank is penalized for increasing the default risk on
its debt, either by a higher risk premium on debt, or by the withdrawal of debt.

       There is now a large empirical literature summarizing evidence on the existence
of market discipline in banking in a variety of contexts. In the U.S., that literature
focuses on the usefulness of certificate of deposit yields for predicting bank problems
(Baer and Brewer 1986, Berger, Davies, and Flannery 1998, Flannery, 1998, Jagtiani,
Kaufman, and Lemieux 1999, Morgan and Stiroh 1999), while in developing countries,

foreign exchange markets) often have large negative expected returns and produce enormous losses to
taxpayers. Indeed, the credit contraction attendant to a banking collapse, and the fiscal costs of financing
those bailouts – both of which are apparent in Mexico recently – can produce a much worse cyclical drag
on the economy than market discipline on banks. For further discussion of these macroeconomic costs, see
Caprio and Klingabiel (1996).


                                                     28
the empirical focus is on the predictability of deposit interest rates and the contraction of
deposits (Peria and Schmukler 1999). Calomiris and Mason (1997) and Calomiris and
Wilson (1998) show that during the interwar period in the United States, weak banks
(measured either by their probability of failure or by their implied risk of default on debt
from an asset-pricing model) were forced to pay higher interest and suffered larger
deposit outflows than other banks.

        As we discussed above, several studies of the recent Argentine experience have
linked ex ante bank risk with ex ante interest charges and deposit outflows, and ex post
bank failure (Schumacher 1997, Dabos and Sosa 1999, Anastasi, Burdisso, Grubisic, and
Lencioni 1998, and D'Amato, Grubisic and Powell 1997). Banks with high deposit
interest rates and high observable asset risk were more likely to fail during the tequila
crisis and afterward, and lost a greater proportion of deposits than other banks. Thus there
is already substantial evidence of the operation of market discipline within the Argentine
banking system.

        Our approach to measuring market discipline focuses on links between observable
characteristics of banks (related to asset risk and leverage), on the one hand, and market
reactions to those characteristics as captured in market pricing of deposit risk and
contractions in the volume of deposits. A banking system in which market discipline is
an important constraining force on bank risk taking should display three characteristics.
First, market measures of, and reactions to, deposit default risk should vary across banks.
A banking system in which depositors do not distinguish among banks is one in which
market discipline is unlikely to exist. Second, differences in deposit interest rates and
deposit growth across banks should reflect differences in bank asset risk and leverage
which, according to economic theory, should be the sources of deposit default risk.

        Third, depositor discipline should constrain default risk on deposits. Recent
models of banking that emphasize either the liquidity services of bank deposits (as in
Gorton and Pennacchi 1990) or “delegated monitoring” of bank borrowers (as in
Calomiris and Kahn 1991) emphasize that depositors do not simply price default risk, but
also act to limit it. That is, bank depositors are not only risk-averse, but also “risk-
intolerant” (Calomiris and Wilson 1998). As the level of default risk on deposits
increases, deposits become less liquid, and the agency problems inherent in delegated
monitoring become magnified. Both of these problems lead to a type of quantity
rationing where depositors withdraw their deposits from risky banks, which acts as a
source of discipline over bank risk taking. These arguments imply that increases in
default risk caused by adverse shocks to bank asset risk and capital should be mean-
reverting. Banks that suffer those shocks face a strong incentive to reduce asset risk or
increase capital to avoid disciplinary withdrawals of funds by depositors.

         Our discussion of microeconomic evidence has three parts. First, we begin by
summarizing the evidence on the extent of cross-sectional heterogeneity in the banking
system, with special attention to the heterogeneity in deposit interest rates and flows (our
measures of market discipline) during different sub-periods. Second, we test a model that
relates these two market discipline measures to bank leverage and asset risk measures.
That is, according to finance theory (e.g. the Black-Scholes model) default risk should be


                                              29
an increasing function both of asset risk and leverage. In light of that theory, we test to
see whether our panel data set displays observable links that confirm the presence of
market discipline in bank debt markets. Third, if depositors are “risk-intolerant,” then
increases in deposit interest rates in response to increased risk should be reversed over
time, as banks are forced to reduce asset risk and leverage to meet depositors’ preferences
for low risk. As a first step to testing that theory, we provide some simple tests of mean
reversion in deposit interest rates.

Market Discipline and Bank Heterogeneity

         Tables 12-15 provide summary statistics for our measures of asset risk, default
risk, leverage, and deposit growth. These are provided for separate sub-periods, and for
different sets of financial institutions. Interest rates on loans and deposits are measured
in these tables as premia over the rates of a benchmark, low-interest rate group of foreign
retail banks, to facilitate a comparison of spreads across sub-periods. Our measure of
deposit interest rates converts interest rates on peso-denominated deposits into dollar
equivalent yields using the interest rate parity condition for riskless assets (proxied by
Citibank’s interest rate spread) to construct dollar-equivalent yields for peso-denominated
deposits.

         The main usefulness of these tables is to (1) indicate the extent of heterogeneity in
the reactions of markets to banks (deposit growth and deposit interest rates), (2) describe
the average changes over time in measures of asset risk, leverage, deposit growth, and
deposit risk premia, and (3) explore links over time between average bank asset risk and
leverage, on the one hand, and average deposit growth and default risk premia on debt, on
the other hand. A perusal of these tables clearly indicates the pronounced heterogeneity
in deposit interest rates and deposit growth, the variation in average performance over
time (reflecting the tumult of the 1990s), and the correspondence among measures of
asset risk, leverage, deposit interest rates, and deposit growth.We return to those
connections among asset risk, leverage, and market discipline in our regression analysis
below.

        These tables also provide some evidence on how links among asset risk, leverage,
and market discipline differ across types of institutions. For example, to the extent that
public banks are protected from the risk of insolvency by their sponsoring governments,
depositors in those public banks may not penalize asset risk and leverage as much. If that
were true, then public bank weakness would not be as evident in deposit interest rate
premia or in lower deposit growth. The tables lend some support for that view. Note, for
example, that during the tequila crisis (Table 13), non-performing loan ratios for public
banks were very high, but deposit interest rates remained very low.




                                             30
                                               Table 12. Pre-Tequila Banking System Heterogeneity 1994.2-1994.4

                            All Institutions                Private Domestic                   Private Domestic                         Foreign Retail                 Foreign Wholesale
                                                                  Retail                          Wholesale
  Variables        Avg.          Med.          Std.     Avg.      Med.       Std.          Avg.      Med.       Std.          Avg.          Med.         Std.       Avg.     Med.      Std.

 Id - avg.Idf*       2.21         2.39          2.77     2.42        2.52       1.73        1.51         1.57       2.02            -            -              -    3.02      1.4         4.89

 Il - avg. Ilf*      5.15         4.38          7.21     4.54         4.6       3.65         2.3         1.21       5.32           -             -              -    0.51     -0.5         6.57

  Npl/loans        14.22          9.96         13.74    11.43        9.89       6.71        5.68         4.61       7.95        8.08         8.24           4       11.36     5.92    14.05

Loans/Assets       69.37         72.74         28.69    70.78       72.78      11.08      43.15         42.56     21.19       70.41         72.51        10.29      46.34    49.58    26.47

Capital/Assets     16.98         13.47         12.09    14.06       12.39       6.45      16.65         10.73     21.98       13.43         12.28         4.18      24.97    24.31    13.99

Dep.Growth
  1994.2-            3.69         3.34         17.24     4.18        3.39       9.58        5.29         3.41     20.04         2.46         5.68        16.14       4.15     1.67    40.88
  1994.4
Number Obs.          497                                 124                                  44                                  36                                  36



                         Provincial Public                     National Public               Finance Companies                          Cooperative
                  Avg.         Med.        Std.         Avg.        Med.       Std.        Avg.    Med.      Std.             Avg.        Med.           Std.
  Variables

 Id - avg.Idf       0.57          0.41          2.76     0.08       -0.16       0.51       3.22          3.74       2.84        3.5           3.3         2.27
 Il - avg. Ilf      4.82             3         10.41     8.28        6.39       8.42      10.28          9.92       9.36       6.54          6.78         3.77
  Npl/loans        34.06         29.21         21.27    17.93       13.94       9.58      10.96          9.34       6.99      12.35         10.49         6.49
Loans/Assets         90.33         78.12        54.62    76.33       79.04       12.49      71.63        78.26      20.88       74.31         74.96        7.66
Capital/Assets       13.46         12.37        11.69     11.1       10.35        1.64      23.45        19.73      13.57       17.08         15.09        7.93
 Dep.Growth
  1994.2-              2.08         0.96        10.36     -0.11        0.53       5.46         3.3        3.06      23.25         4.53          4.37        7.1
   1994.4
Number Obs.               75                                    9                               70                                103

* Id is deposit interest rate. Idf is deposit interest rate for foreign retail banks. Il is loan interest rate. Ilf is loan interest rate for
foreign retail banks. Interest rates are expressed in dollar-equivalent units.




                                                                                                   31
Table 13 - Tequila Crisis Banking System Heterogeneity - 1995.1-1995.4 period

                       All Institutions                           Private Domestic                              Private Domestic                              Foreign Retail                            Foreign Wholesale
                                                                  Retail                                           Wholesale
                          Avg.           Med.            Std.        Avg.       Med.                  Std.         Avg.       Med.                 Std.         Avg.           Med.            Std.          Avg.              Med.     Std.
   Varibles

 Id - avg.Idf*              2.8              2           6.38           3.91          3.01           6.26           2.88             2.4          5.04               -              -              -          2.78             -0.35   12.29

 Il - avg. Ilf*             3.9            2.6           7.69           3.77          3.14           4.27           4.23             2.5          7.03               -              -              -           1.7             -0.54    9.34

  Npl/loans              20.61          16.18          17.75          18.95          16.58          13.58          11.21           7.04          11.33           9.41           8.84           4.57           9.05             2.86     1.34

Loans/Assets             69.21              73         30.95            71.7         74.84          15.24          47.48          46.88          24.98         71.15            71.8           8.33         43.84          40.78       27.04

Capital/Assets           18.54          14.78          17.12          16.03          13.47           9.61          24.95          19.42          18.54         13.71          12.31             4.8         27.59          22.86         18

Number Obs.                 536                                         152                                           61                                           47                                           58

      Dep.Growth
1994.4-1995.4    -2.25                    0.34         26.65          -1.46           1.07          21.11            -3.8           -2.2         38.71           2.24           4.48         15.66            5.25             4.97    44.39

Number Obs.                 593                                         160                                           70                                           56                                           65


                      Provincial Public                             National Public                           Finance Companies                                Cooperative

                          Avg.           Med.            Std.          Avg.          Med.             Std.          Avg.          Med.             Std.         Avg.           Med.            Std.
  Variables

 Id - avg.Idf              0.02          -0.32           3.85         -0.08          -0.05           2.57           5.88           4.78           6.76           4.02           3.64               3

  Il - avg. Ilf            3.48            0.5           13.7           3.65          2.52           6.39           6.43           6.31             6.3          5.07           5.46           3.89

  Npl/loans              43.63          40.37          22.62          23.37          17.96           9.16          22.01          18.17          12.05         19.27          17.87            8.93

Loans/Assets             89.86          83.48            54.5         73.18          74.71           9.75          69.16          75.57          24.83         76.75          77.51            8.42

Capital/Assets             9.66         10.49          24.51          17.89           9.67          23.27           25.5           22.8          18.69         20.14          18.65             9.6

Number Obs.                  84                                           18                                          53                                           63

      Dep.Growth
1994.4-1995.4              -4.1          -2.58         13.07             0.1          1.99           8.15         -12.96            -7.4          30.4          -1.52           0.07           18.7

Number Obs.                 108                                           17                                          61                                           56

* Id is deposit interest rate. Idf is deposit interest rate for foreign retail banks. Il is loan interest rate. Ilf is loan interest rate for foreign retail banks. Interest rates are expressed in dollar-equivalent units.

                                                                                                                       32
Table 14 - Inmediate Post-Tequila Banking System Heterogeneity 1996.1-1997.2
                      All Institutions                     Private Domestic                       Private Domestic                         Foreign Retail                      Foreign Wholesale
                                                           Retail                                    Wholesale
                         Avg.        Med.          Std.       Avg.      Med.              Std.       Avg.      Med.              Std.        Avg.         Med.         Std.        Avg.         Med.            Std.
   Variables

 Id - avg.Idf*           1.82         1.65         5.13         1.92         1.98         4.04        2.76         2.58         2.84             -            -            -        0.79         0.86           6.73

  Il - avg. Ilf*         4.67         3.29         7.09         4.87         3.51         7.25        4.73         3.41         6.78             -            -            -        2.52         0.49           7.76

   Npl/loans            20.54        16.57        17.43       22.15        18.53        16.25        16.33        11.38        16.62        10.24         9.71         6.45       11.51          5.28         14.74

 Loans/Assets           60.10        62.55       20.73        59.74        60.82        18.04        55.61        59.23        18.25        58.22        62.77        16.66       44.10        41.73          26.27

Capital/Assets          17.11        12.89        15.41       12.54        11.43        11.64        18.35        15.06        13.57        12.42        11.47         4.56       28.26        18.96          20.71

 Number Obs.              649                                   181                                     52                                    115                                     72

 Dep.Growth              7.05         5.94       22.62          6.75         6.40       16.44        11.95         8.51        24.47         7.51         6.02         9.97         9.73         6.06         36.45
1995.4-1997.2

 Number Obs.              854                                   286                                     89                                     77                                   100


                     Provincial Public                      National Public                      Finance Companies                          Cooperative

                         Avg.        Med.          Std.        Avg.         Med.          Std.        Avg.        Med.           Std.        Avg.         Med.         Std.
   Variables

  Id - avg.Idf           0.28         0.84         5.17         0.03         0.04         0.54        4.04         4.60         7.92         2.66         2.74         1.56

  Il - avg. Ilf          3.21         1.39         8.36         5.95         7.41         3.93        8.60         8.06         7.53         6.34         6.39         3.01

   Npl/loans            45.13        44.55        22.58       20.10        20.11          2.31       19.80        15.73        11.25        22.48        21.50         8.86

 Loans/Assets           69.79        62.83       27.06        63.11        62.69          6.35       68.22        69.00        18.25        62.21        63.18         6.99

Capital/Assets          11.87         8.77        20.25         9.22         7.97         2.78       26.47        20.73        16.43        17.91        14.63         9.15

 Number Obs.               72                                     16                                   103                                     38

 Dep.Growth              2.48         4.06       28.69          4.68         3.44       10.34         5.74         6.02        23.33         8.57         7.51         8.86
1995.4-1997.2

 Number Obs.              114                                     23                                   116                                     49

* Id is deposit interest rate. Idf is deposit interest rate for foreign retail banks. Il is loan interest rate. Ilf is loan interest rate for foreign retail banks. Interest rates are expressed in dollar-equivalent
units.
                                                                                                          33
Table 15 - Post-Asian Crisis Banking System Heterogeneity 1997.3-1999.1

                         All Institutions                          Private Domestic                            Private Domestic                             Foreign Retail                           Foreign Wholesale
                                                                   Retail                                         Wholesale
                            Avg.          Med.            Std.        Avg.      Med.                 Std.         Avg.      Med.                 Std.         Avg.          Med.            Std.          Avg.          Med.     Std.
   Variables

  Id - avg.Idf*             1.47           0.97          3.48           1.14          1.08           2.01          2.18           1.98          2.00               -              -             -         1.55          -0.05    6.41

  Il - avg. Ilf*            4.09           2.26          7.02           4.77          3.44           6.44          2.70           1.90          5.99               -              -             -         1.33           0.01    5.36

   Npl/loans                17.5         13.85          15.48           9.00         14.31         10.20          19.39           9.57         10.26           9.69          8.68           6.76          7.99           3.54   12.24

 Loans/Assets              55.53         58.11          21.17         54.25          57.44         14.80          61.33         60.54          14.73         51.89          54.85         15.42          36.47         29.32    26.77

 Capital/Assets            16.86         12.10          13.84         12.98          11.23           7.16         18.27         17.64           7.14         11.14          10.16           4.67         25.27         12.74    24.27

 Number Obs.                 811                                         227                                          61                                        161                                          94

 Dep.Growth                 2.46           1.82         17.73           1.78          1.10         12.45           0.16          -0.71         19.36           4.68          4.15         12.35           4.75           3.90   30.16
1997.3-1999.1

 Number Obs.                 772                                         201                                          59                                        159                                          90


                        Provincial Public                           National Public                          Finance Companies                               Cooperative

                            Avg.          Med.            Std.         Avg.          Med.            Std.          Avg.          Med.            Std.         Avg.          Med.            Std.
   Variables

  Id - avg.Idf              0.77           0.72          2.65          -0.94         -0.39           1.22          3.65           3.35          4.63           1.71          1.81           1.61

   Il - avg. Ilf            2.29           1.45          6.56           5.68          0.55           9.64            8.2          7.64          9.19           3.39          3.67           3.45

   Npl/loans               41.97         43.38          21.42         21.45          21.18           2.88         20.47         16.96          12.83         23.64          23.04           8.11

 Loans/Assets              55.24         55.34          17.89         58.87          59.29         10.55          71.15         67.05          17.79         59.11          61.12           5.35

 Capital/Assets            10.34           9.49         11.38           8.00          7.98           1.51         26.62         23.92          14.40         18.15          14.35            8.4

 Number Obs.                   68                                         21                                        140                                          39

 Dep.Growth                 0.69           1.12         10.50           3.74          3.64           4.48          1.42           0.70         22.44           1.02          2.45           7.75
1997.3-1999.1

 Number Obs.                   68                                         21                                        146                                          28

* Id is deposit interest rate. Idf is deposit interest rate for foreign retail banks. Il is loan interest rate. Ilf is loan interest rate for foreign retail banks. Interest rates are expressed in dollar-equivalent units.


                                                                                                                       34
Fundamental Determinants of Market Assessments of Bank Liability Risk

         Next, we turn to a regression analysis of market discipline as a reaction to deposit
risk, as measured either by the interest rate on deposits or by the outflow of deposits. The
basic model regresses either of these two dependent variables on our three measures of
asset risk (loans/other assets, non-performing loans/loans, and the loan interest rate), a
measure of the liquidity of non-loan assets (cash/government bonds), and the (book)
capital ratio. We used lagged capital ratios to avoid correlation by construction between
deposit growth and the capital ratio. Other independent variables are taken as exogenous
within the quarter in which deposit growth or deposit interest rates are set.

        We report a variety of regression specifications, including OLS, fixed firm and
time effects, and random effects. We ran the regressions for different time periods and
for different samples (sometimes including all banks, sometimes confining the sample to
private commercial banks). Our results were generally robust to alternative
specifications, although results were stronger when we restricted our sample to private
commercial banks. The restrictions imposed by random effects (the orthogonality of
regressors with firm and time effects) passed Hausman’s test in some cases, and in those
cases, random-effects estimation is more efficient. In Tables 16 and 17 we report a subset
of our results for the deposit growth and deposit interest rate regressions. Specifically, we
report OLS, fixed effects, and random effects specifications for the “restricted sample” of
private commercial banks, for the entire period.




                                             35
                                      Table 16


    Panel Regression Analysis of Bank Deposit Growth Rates
        Sample Restricted to Private Commercial Banks
            Quarterly Observations, 1993:3-1999:1
                            (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                     OLS                   Fixed             Random
                                                          Firm/Time          Effects
                                                           Effects

                                      (1)                      (2)             (3)
Variables

Constant                             0.018                  0.018             0.042
                                    (0.019)                (0.031)           (0.027)

Lagged Capital Ratio                 0.296                  0.326             0.277
                                    (0.064)                (0.087)           (0.074)

Loan Interest Rate                  -0.418                -0.190             -0.254
                                    (0.106)               (0.153)            (0.121)

Loans/Other Assets                  -0.0047               -0.0028            -0.0032
                                    (0.0006)              (0.0008)           (0.0007)

Cash/Government Bonds                0.0000                 0.0000          -0.0000
                                    (0.0002)               (0.0002)         (0.0002)

Non-Performing Loans/ Loans         -0.059                  0.025           -0.060
                                    (0.051)                (0.079)          (0.060)


Adjusted R-Squared                   0.082                 0.325

P-Value for Hausman Test                                                    0.309*

Number of Observations               1,138                 1,138            1,138

*
 The restrictions of the random-effects model are not rejected, implying that the random-
effects estimator is preferred.



                                             36
                                       Table 17

    Panel Regression Analysis of Bank Deposit Interest Rates
        Sample Restricted to Private Commercial Banks
            Quarterly Observations, 1993:3-1999:1
                             (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                                      OLS                   Fixed             Random
                                                           Firm/Time          Effects
                                                           Effects

                                      (1)                       (2)              (3)

Variables

Constant                              0.036                  0.060             0.058
                                     (0.002)                (0.003)           (0.004)

Lagged Capital Ratio                  0.035                  0.009             0.019
                                     (0.008)                (0.009)           (0.008)

Loan Interest Rate                    0.142                  0.086             0.101
                                     (0.013)                (0.015)           (0.014)

Loans/Other Assets                    0.00085                0.00034           0.00046
                                     (0.00007)              (0.00008)         (0.00007)

Cash/Government Bonds               -0.00002                 0.00000          -0.00000
                                    (0.00003)               (0.00002)         (0.00002)

Non-Performing Loans/ Loans           0.038                -0.0205            -0.007
                                     (0.006)               (0.0079)           (0.007)


Adjusted R-Squared                    0.269                 0.638

P-Value for Hausman Test                                                       0.000*

Number of Observations                1,138                 1,138             1,138
*
 The restrictions of the random-effects model are rejected, implying that the fixed-effects
estimator is preferred.




                                              37
         Both deposit growth and deposit interest rates reflect fundamental cross-sectional
differences in our measures of asset risk. Higher asset risk and leverage are associated
with depositor discipline in the form of greater deposit withdrawals, and high asset risk
also is reflected in higher interest rates on deposits.

        Not all the measures of asset risk have the predicted impacts on interest rates and
deposit growth in the regressions. The loan interest rate and loan ratio enter significantly
and with the right sign in all regressions, while non-performing loans and the ratio of
cash to government bonds are either insignificant, or (in the case of the non-performing
loans) switch signs across specifications.

         Interestingly, the effect of the capital ratio is of the expected sign for deposit
growth (positive), but contrary to our expectation, is also positive (sometimes
insignificantly) for the deposit interest rate. One way to explain the differences in the
capital ratio effect between Tables 16 and 17 is to recall that capital ratios are an
endogenous variable chosen by the bank. Even though the capital ratio is lagged (to
mitigate the endogeneity problem) it is possible that banks anticipate interest rate changes
in their deposits one quarter ahead and alter capital ratios to compensate for anticipated
increases in default risk.

Does Market Discipline Encourage Prudent Risk Management?

        The regressions reported in Tables 16 and 17 do not describe the dynamic
responses of banks’ to market discipline. For example, the regressions do not examine
whether increases in default risk on debt produce reductions in loan-to-asset ratios, or
loan risk, or increases in the ratio of cash to bonds. To accomplish this result, one would
have to specify a dynamic system of equations (possibly, a panel VAR model), which
requires strong assumptions about the relative endogeneity, and the adjustment
frequencies, of our various measures of asset risk, deposit risk, deposit growth, and
capital accumulation. We have already argued that this is treacherous ground; for
example, our initial assumption about the exogeneity of capital ratios to interest rate
changes is suspect (especially given our findings of a positive partial correlation between
deposit interest rates and capital ratios in Table 17).

        While we think a panel VAR approach to this problem may be promising in future
research, here we pursue a simpler approach. We examine whether there is a tendency
for individual banks’ deposit interest rates to revert to their mean, and whether the speed
of mean reversion has changed over time. If depositor discipline forces banks to react to
increases in their debt default risk, then high levels of default risk should prompt
reductions in interest rates in the future. We test that proposition using a simple model of
the time series properties of individual banks’ interest rates, and we report our results in
Table 18.




                                             38
                                       Table 18

                     Fixed-Effects Regressions*
                Deposit Interest Rate Mean Reversion
          Dependent Variable: Change in Deposit Interest Rate
                      All Financial Institutions
                Quarterly Observations, 1993:3-1999:1
                             (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                     (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)

               1993:3-1994:4       1995:1-1996:2      1996:3-1997:4       1997:4-1999:1


ri, t-1            -1.04                -1.06              -1.04              -1.29
                   (0.04)               (0.04)             (0.03)             (0.04)


Adjusted
R-Squared          0.475                 0.450             0.545              0.577


Number of
Observations         989                   791               762                688




*
  All regressions include fixed firm and time effects, which are not reported here.
ri, t-1 is defined as the lagged deposit interest rate for each bank.




                                               39
         The “fixed-effects” approach to examining mean reversion holds firm and time
effects constant and constrains all banks to react similarly to a change in their deposit
interest rate. Alternatively, we also estimated the relationship using a “random-
coefficients” approach, which takes advantage of the opportunity to see whether banks
differ in the extent to which their deposit interest rates revert to the mean. As the results
for these two models were quite similar, we only report the “fixed effects” results in
Table 18.
         As we discussed at length above, regulatory and supervisory monitoring and
discipline has improved markedly in Argentina over the period 1992-1999. In Table 18,
we investigate whether the speed of mean reversion has increased over time.
Specifically, we report results for several sub-periods (1993 Q3 to 1994 Q4, 1995 Q1 to
1996 Q2, 1996 Q3 to 1997 Q4, and 1997 Q4 to 1999 Q1).
         The regression we run for each sub-period is:
         ∆rit = c + α rit-1 + bi + ft + εit             .
        ∆r is the change in the liability interest rate, b and f are fixed firm and time
effects, and ε is an error term. The i and t subscripts refer to individual banks and time.
α , which we expect to be negative, measures the speed at which the interest rate “mean
reverts.” If interest rates revert by 100% in just one quarter then we expect the α
coefficient to be -1 whereas if there is no reversion at all, then we expect the α coefficient
to be zero. We then compare the distribution of the α coefficients (across banks) for the
sub-periods.14
        We find that mean reversion is rapid. Within-firm mean reversion occurs within
one quarter (α is –1 or smaller) in all sub-periods. The most recent period, which has
witnessed the implementation of the B.A.S.I.C. plan, shows a significantly higher rate of
mean reversion (a coefficient value of -1.29), which is consistent with the view that banks
face stronger incentives to resolve problems of high default risk in the more recent
period. It is difficult to interpret a coefficient size less than –1 (which seems to imply
greater than mean reversion of interest rates). In specifications without fixed time
effects, coefficient sizes tended to be smaller (typically in the range of –0.6 to –0.8).
Thus we suspect that correlation between average time effects and individual banks’
sensitivities to aggregate shocks may explain the apparent over-adjustment of rates.

        To summarize our empirical results, we find significant cross-sectional
differences in market reactions to bank default risk (as measured by deposit interest rates
and deposit growth), and our regressions indicate links between those measures and
fundamental characteristics of banks related to asset risk and leverage. Furthermore,
deposit interest rates mean revert very quickly (holding fixed effects and time effects
constant), and the rate of mean reversion has increased during the period in which the
B.A.S.I.C. framework was implemented. Overall, these results suggest that market

14
  We also ran regressions excluding fixed firm effects, which constrains all firms to target the same long-
run average level of interest rates. Fixed effects have a great deal of explanatory power (raising the adjusted
R-squared substantially in all sub-periods), and so we only report fixed-effects results in Table 18. In
specifications without fixed effects, coefficients on the lagged interest rate were smaller, but the same
pattern of increasing coefficient size over time appeared, and was even large in magnitude than the
differences reported in Table 18.


                                                      40
discipline is present in measuring bank risk, punishing it, and successfully encouraging
banks to pursue risk-management policies that reduce risk after they suffer risk-
increasing shocks.


IV. Conclusion

         In this chapter, we reviewed the Argentine experience in the 1990s with bank
regulatory reform, which has been one of the most determined efforts, among emerging
market countries, to inject credible market discipline into the relationship between banks
and depositors, and into the regulatory and supervisory process. We have argued that
Argentina successfully implemented a system of bank regulation that achieved credible
market discipline over banks. Markets, as well as regulators, punish or reward banks
depending on the perceived risk of bank failure, and market perceptions of risk (as
indicated in deposit interest rates and deposit flows) are correlated both with ex ante
measures of fundamental asset risk and with ex post incidence of bank failure. Market
discipline encourages rapid, risk-reducing adjustments by banks to shocks that raise their
risk of failure.

        Despite these favorable findings, clearly there is room for improvement in
Argentina’s bank regulation regime. First, the privatization of public banks remains
unfinished, most notably in the cases of the two largest public banks, which account for
more than a quarter of banking system deposits. Second, the least-cost resolution
mandate that has been given SEDESA thus far has not proved very costly, but it could
become a slippery slope – a means to pay for implicit bank bailouts, and thus undermine
the hard-won gains of market confidence and market discipline. Limits to the
subsidization of acquisitions that prevent least-cost resolution from becoming an implicit
bailout mechanism are, therefore, a potentially important area for reform. Finally, the
subordinated debt law also could be improved. Disclosing banks’ compliance with the
law seems a desirable first step. Placing greater limits on what qualifies as compliance
(in particular, excluding domestic interbank deposits from the definition of qualifying
subordinated debt and ensuring that subordinated debt is held at arms length) and limiting
the yield of qualifying subordinated debt are two additional steps the government should
consider.

        Does the Argentine regulatory system provide a model that other countries should
adopt? We think the capital requirements, liquidity requirements, and B.A.S.I.C. system
offer an excellent set of blueprints for any country to consider if is serious about fostering
market discipline in banking. At the same time, experience in developing and developed
economies alike has shown that a regulatory system is only as effective as the political
will that underlies its enforcement. In many countries – notably Chile in 1982, the
United States in 1984, and Venezuela in 1991 – de facto deposit insurance was provided
despite its de jure absence.

       During the tequila crisis of 1995 in Argentina (as during the liberalization of
Estonia’s banks in 1991) the government chose to force insolvent banks to close and
permitted depositors in insolvent banks to lose a significant proportion of their deposits.


                                             41
The political commitment to low inflation and to reform of the banking system in
Argentina in the wake of the inflation and banking disasters of the earlier era set
constraints on government policy toward banks in the 1990s, limiting the possibility of
large bailout expenditures or other interventions into the banking system. The ability to
apply the Argentine approach successfully to other countries likely depends on the
existence of a similar political will backing real reform and limiting bailouts. Thus the
challenges for reformers in emerging market countries include not only the technical
problem of how to design an effective regulatory system, but the more difficult problem
of how to create the political conditions that make such a system credible.




                                            42
                                     References
Anastasi, A., T. Burdiso, E. Grubisic and S. Lencioni. 1998. “Es posible anticipar
problemas en una entidad financiera ? Argentina 1994-1997”, Documento de Trabajo
Nro. 7, Octubre.1998, available on www.bcra.gov.ar

Baer, Herbert L., Jr. and Elijah Brewer III. 1986. “Uninsured Deposits as a Source of
Market Discipline: Some New Evidence,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic
Perspectives, September/October, 23-31.

Banco Central de la Republica Argentina (BCRA). 1995. Bulletin of Monetary and
Financial Affairs, 1st edition, May. Available on www.bcra.gov.ar

Banco Central de la Republica Argentina (BCRA). 1999. “Informe al Congreso de la
Nación (Report to Congress),” November, available on www.bcra.gov.ar

Berger, Allen N., Sally M. Davies, and Mark J. Flannery. 1998. “Comparing Market and
Regulatory Assessments of Bank Performance: Who Knows What When?” Federal
Reserve Board Working Paper, March.

Calomiris, Charles W. 1997. The Postmodern Bank Safety Net. Washington, D.C.,
American Enterprise Institute.

Calomiris, Charles W. 1999. “Building an Incentive-Compatible Safety Net,” Journal of
Banking and Finance 23, October, 1499-1519.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Charles M. Kahn. 1991. “The Role of Demandable Debt in
Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review 81, June, 497-
513.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason. 1997. “Contagion and Bank Failures
During the Great Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic,” American
Economic Review, 87, December, 863-883.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson. 1998. “Bank Capital and Portfolio
Management: The 1930s ‘Capital Crunch’ and Scramble to Shed Risk,” NBER Working
Paper No. 6649, July.

Caprio, Gerard, Jr. and Daniela Klingebiel. 1996. “Bank Insolvency: Cross-Country
Experience. World Bank Policy Research Paper 1620. Washington, D.C., The World
Bank.

D’Amato, L., E. Grubisic and A. Powell. 1997. “Contagion, bank fundamentals or
macroeconomic shock? An empirical analysis of the Argentine 1995 banking problems”,
Working Paper No 2, July,Central Bank of Argentina and available on www.bcra.gov.ar


                                          43
Dabos, M. and W. Sosa. 1999. “Predicción y explicación del momento de caída de
bancos en Argentina, usando modelos de duración.” Working Paper, Universidad de San
Andrés.

Falkenheim, M., and A. Powell. 1999. “The use of credit bureau information in the
estimation of appropriate capital and provisioning requirements”, mimeo. Central Bank
of Argentina 1999

Flannery, Mark. 1998. “Using Market Information in Prudential Bank Supervision: A
Review of the U.S. Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 30,
August, Part I, 273-305.

Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi. 1990. “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
Creation,” Journal of Finance 45, March, 49-71.

Jagtiani, Julapa, George G. Kaufman, and Catharine Lemieux. 1999. “Do Markets
Discipline Banks and Bank Holding Companies? Evidence from Debt Pricing,” Working
Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May.

Morgan, Donald P. and Kevin J. Stiroh. 1999. “Can Bond Holders Discipline Banks?”
Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August.

Peria, Maria S.M. and Sergio L. Schmukler. 1999. “Do Depositors Punish Banks for
‘Bad’ Behavior? Examining Market Discipline in Argentina, Chile, and Mexico.” World
Bank Working Paper, February.

Powell, Andrew. 1997 “Using the market as regulator : developing BASIC banking
oversight in Argentina,” Working Paper, Central Bank of Argentina.

Schumacher, Liliana. 1995. “Bubble or market discipline? A study of failures and
mergers over the Argentine panic” mimeo. Central Bank of Argentina, December 1995.

Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee. 2000. Reforming Bank Capital Regulation.
Washington, D.C., American Enterprise Institute.

World Bank (1998) “Argentine Financial Sector Review”, Sept. (Report No. 17864-AR)
World Bank, Washington DC.




                                          44
                                                                 Appendix

Table A1 The Timing of Privatizations
Bank                 Date in wich         Date of         Date of bid         Date of first            Date of     Percentage of    Total
                       law was             Loan                              disbursement           transference      capital      Loan in
                       enacted           agreement                                                                  privatized     millions
Corrientes *            11/91                -                 NA                    -                   5/93          60%           NA
La Rioja *                NA                   -               NA                    -                   7/94          70%           NA
Chaco **                  5/93              8/95               7/94               11/95                 11/94          60%           78
Entre Ríos **             8/93              8/95               8/94               10/95                  1/95          60%           78
Formosa                   2/95              4/95               3/95                7/95                 12/95          60%           80
Misiones                 11/94              4/95              11/94                7/95                  1/96       92.5% ***        78
Río Negro                 3/95              4/95               8/95                7/95                  3/96          85%           80
Salta                     7/94              4/95               8/95                7/95                  3/96          70%           50
Tucumán                   3/95              6/95               7/95                7/95                  7/96          75%           80
San Luis                 12/89              4/95               4/96               10/95                  8/96         100%           50
Santiago del
                          1/95              4/95               3/96                7/95                  9/96          95%           50
Estero
San Juan                  7/95              4/95              11/95                8/95                 11/96          75%           80
Previsión
Social de                 3/95              4/95              11/95                5/95                 11/96          90%           100
Mendoza
Mendoza                   3/95              4/95              11/95                5/95                 11/96          90%           160
Jujuy                     6/95              6/95               8/97               12/95                  1/98          80%           50
Santa Fe                  7/96              12/96              9/97                5/97                  6/98         100%           160
Santa Cruz               10/95              3/98               3/98                4/98                 10/98          56%           80
Municipal de
                         12/93              12/96              2/97                6/97                  7/98         100%           25
Tucumán
Catamarca                 NA                9/98                 -                 4/98                    -           70%           50
Caja Nacional
de Ahorro y               NA                   -               NA                    -                   5/96         100%           NA
Seguro *

Source: Subsecretaría de Programación Regional – Trust Fund for Provincial Development
Note: The Banco Municipal de Paraná was assisted by the TFPD by an amount of 20 million dollars for closure.
* Privatizations not supported by the TFPD.
** The Banco del Chaco and the Banco de Entre Ríos were privatized previous TFPD creation.
*** Corresponds to the privatization of 100% of the bank’s capital, since the rest was in private hands.




                                                                       45
