                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EVALUATING SCHOOL-TO-WORK
                              PROGRAMS USING TIlE NEW NLSY


                                            David Neumark
                                             Mary Joyce


                                         Working Paper 7719
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w77 19



                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2000




This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy,
although the views expressed are solely the authors'. Daiji Kawaguchi provided outstanding research
assistance. We thank Robert DeJong for helpful discussions. This paper was prepared for the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and Joint Center for Poverty Research conference "Early Results from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 Cohort," Washington, DC, November 18 and 19, 1999.

   2000 by David Neumark and Mary Joyce. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.
Evaluating School-To-Work Programs Using the New NLSY
David Neumark and Mary Joyce
NBER Working Paper No. 7719
May 2000
JELNo. 12, J15, J24, J22

                                            ABSTRACT

       A critical impediment to research on school-to-work programs has been the absence of large
representative data sets with information on such programs. In contrast, the new NLSY (NLSY97)
offers researchers opportunities to analyze direct evidence on school-to-work programs. In the
NLSY97, individuals are asked a set of survey questions about "programs schools offer to help
students prepare for the world of work," and an accompanying survey includes information on
school-to-workprograms offeredby schools attendedbythe interviewees. These data, coupled with
observations on multiple individuals in the same schools, potentially allow researchers to estimate
the effects of school-to-work programs on individuals while accounting for possible bias from
selection into these programs, although apparent data problems pose some limitations. Because
Round One of the NLSY97 covers workers only up to age 17, this paper focuses on the
consequences of school-to-work programs for youth employment and schooling decisions while in
high school, and students' subjective assessments of the likelihood of future schooling and work
behavior.
        Overall, the evidence does not point to a causal effect of school-to-work program
participation on behavior likely associated with future college attendance. On the other hand,
school-to-work program participation does appear to have positive effects on educational attainment
in terms of respondents' subjective probabilities of obtaining a high-school diploma. More in
accordance with the traditional view of school-to-work programs, the data indicate that participation
in these programs increases the perceived likelihood of future labor market activity, both for the year
following the survey and at age 30. However, school-to-work programs do not appear to boost the
probability of current employment.


David Neumark                                                  Mary Joyce
Department of Economics                                        Bureau of Labor Statistics
Michigan State University                                      Suite 4945
East Lansing, MI 48824                                         2 Massachusetts Ave., NE
and NBER                                                       Washington, DC 20212
neumarkd@pilot.msu.edu
I. Introduction

        Early labor market experiences of youths in the U.S. are often characterized as "churning" or "milling

about" in the form of initial periods ofjoblessness or a series of "dead-end" jobs (U.S. General Accounting

Office, 1990), or as "floundering" from one job to another, representing a "waste of human resources" (Stern,

et al., 1994). This characterization of U.S. labor markets has motivated policy initiatives to address the

school-to-work transition by helping to transform the youth labor market from the current "chaotic" system in

the U.S. to a more "orderly" system, like that of the German apprenticeship system or the informal contracts

between Japanese schools and employers, in which youths leave school for ftrther career training or stable

employment (Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce, 1990; Hamilton, 1990; Lerman and

Pouncy, 1990; Glazer, 1993; and other work reviewed in Heckman, 1993). This perspective on. youth labor

markets in the U.S. probably provided much of the impetus for the 1.994 School-to-Work Opportunities Act

(STWOA), which sought to create an integrated system of youth education, job training, and labor market

information, to provide a faster and more successful transition from school to stable employment.

        The need for school-to-work programs or other means of increasing early job market stability is

predicated on the view that the chaotic nature of youth labor markets in the U.S. is costly. However, there is a

counter-argument to this negative view of the turbulent nature of youth labor markets in the U.S. Specifically,

there is evidence that workers receive positive returns to job shopping (e.g., Topel and Ward, 1992),

presumably as workers (and employers) learn about their skills, aptitudes, and interests by trying different

jobs, leading to increasingly better matches as young workers move through a series ofjobs. Thus, it remains

an open question whether school-to-work programs or other means of increasing early job market stability

would result in greater ultimate labor market success, as compared with the current functioning of youth labor

markets in the U.S.

        Answering this question is extremely difficult, probably requiring carefully designed experiments. A

compendium of research by Stem, et al. (1994) suggests that researchers are a long way from a definitive

answer to this question. An alternative, indirect approach that has been taken to address the need for school-



                                                        1
to-work programs is to explore the effects of early labor market stability—which school-to-work programs are

supposed to encourage—on adult labor market outcomes (Gardecki and Néumark, 1998; Neumark, 1998).

        A critical impediment to research on school-to-work programs has been the absence of large

representative data sets with information on such programs, in part, no doubt, because such programs were

less prevalent and of less interest to policy makers in the past. hi contrast, the new NLSY (NLSY97)

potentially offers researchers opportunities to analyze direct evidence on school-to-work programs. In the

NLSY97, individuals are asked a set of survey questions about "programs schools offer to help students

prepare for the world of work." For the most part, these questions cover the types of programs in which

individuals participated, including things such as job shadowing, inentoring, cooperative education, and

intemships or apprenticeships. In addition to the survey questions administered to individuals, a survey of

schools also includes information on school-to-work programs offered by schools. As explained later in the

paper, these data, coupled with observations on multiple individuals in the same schools, potentially allow

researchers to estimate the effects of school-to-work programs on individuals, while accounting for possible

bias from selection into these programs, a well-known and potentially serious problem in program evaluation.

        The long-term goal of this research agenda is to follow members of the NLSY97 through their early

years leaving school and entering the labor market, to evaluate the fUll set of effects of school-to-work

programs. Over time, the consequences of school-to-work programs for adult wages and employment will be

examined. However, because Round One of the NLSY97 covers workers only up to age 17, and in the spirit

of an "Early Results" conference, attention at this point is limited to consequences of school-to-work programs

for youth employment and schooling decisions while in high school, and students' subjective assessments of

the likelihood of future schooling and work behavior. Thus, this paper uses the NLSY97 to begin to assemble

evidence on some of the consequences of school-to-work programs, and to aft empt to lay the groundwork for

future analyses.




                                                       2
Ii. Existing Research

Research on School-to-Work Programs

         The existing research basis for the conclusion that school-to-work programs would improve labor

market outcomes is weak. A 1994 report of the National Center for Research in Vocational Education

(NCRVE) provides a thorough compendium of research on school-to-work programs (Stem, et al., 1994).

Based on this compendium, in. our view it is safe to say that there is as yet relatively little persuasive evidence

of positive impacts of these programs on adult labor market outcomes. First, few studies have focused on

labor market outcomes more than a year or two afler completion. of the programs. But there is limited evidence

that over a period of a few years any beneficial effects of some types of school-to-work programs dissipate, as

comparison group members find good jobs on their own. Second, many of these studies do not construct a

reasonable comparison group, let alone consider the problem of selection into the program on the basis of

unobserved characteristics that might also be correlated with outcomes. Third, even those studies that attempt

to construct a good comparison group fmd no beneficial short-term labor market effects, with the possible

exception of those students who remained with the employer with whom they "apprenticed" during the

program. Finally, some of the evidence suggests that school-to-work programs may discourage post-

secondary education. In general, though, based on the existing evidence we regard any defmitive conclusions

about school-to-work programs as premature, awaiting better evaluation studies.

        The recent Mathematica evaluation of the STWOA does not even attempt to provide a true program

evaluation, arguing that school-to-work implementation "generally involves broad and diverse initiatives that

in varied ways touch most or all students, so it is impossible to distinguish between participants and an

unaffected comparison group" (Hershey, et al., 1999, p. xviii). This study does present some evidence that is

intended to speak to the effects of school-to-work programs. For example, the study reports that students in

paid positions arranged as part of school-to-work programs are employed in a wider array of industries and

receive more training than other students in paid positions, and concludes that "Schools develop positions in a

wide range of industries, increasing the chances that students can work in a setting relevant to their career



                                                        3
interests" (Hershey, et al., 1999, p. 89). However, nothing in the evidence implies that students who found

these jobs as part of school-to-work programs would not have found the same types ofjobs absent such

programs; students most likely to do so may simply have sorted into school-to-work programs. As will

become clear later, we think that research attempting a program evaluation based on treatment and control

groups is important and possible, although not simple to execute, and prone to problems identified in the

literature on the evaluation of other types of social programs (e.g., Heckman, et al., I 999).l Our claim is not

that the Mathematica study fails to provide valuable information. Clearly policy makers need information on

problems encountered in implementation, descriptions of populations served, etc. But we do contend that

attempts to estimate the causal effects of school-to-work programs are also critical, and in this paper we

consider how the NLSY97 might be used to do so.2

Research on the Consequences of Early Labor Market "Instability"

         A different but related goal that has been addressed in earlier research without the benefit of data on

school-to-work programs is whether youths who appear to have more unstable or "chaotic" early labor market

experiences suffer adverse labor market consequences as adults. it seems that, minimally, a case for

attempting to replace current methods ofjob shopping with programs that induce earlier job or labor market

stability requires evidence that those youths who experience "floundering about" in their early years in the

labor market suffer longer-term consequences.

         Earlier research considered evidence on the relationship between early job market stability and adult

wages by exploring the correlations between a wide range of individuals' youth labor market experiences and

their labor market outcomes as more mature adults, in a multivariate framework that controlled for other adult




           'Given that the Mathematica study documents variation across school districts and states in the incidence of
school-to-work partnerships supported by grants under the ST WOA, there seems to be a natural way to construct
treatment and control groups. Instead, the study focuses on eight states all of which have a high percentage of school
districts covered by such partnerships.

          2A recent paper by Bassi and Ludwig (2000) provides some descriptive information on costs and benefits to
firms of a select handful of school-to-work programs. However, there is no way to know how these compare to other
strategies firms would have chosen had they not implemented school-to-work. Moreover, as the authors note, the
sample is not representative, so we cannot draw inferences about costs and benefits to the population of firms.

                                                            4
characteristics (Gardecki and Neurnark, 1998, hereafter GN). GN report estimates of wage regressions for

individuals in their late-20s to mid-30s, controlling for the usual ingredients ofwage regressions—schooling,

experience, etc.—at the time the wage was measured, but adding in measures of youth labor market experiences

over the first five years in the labor market, including number ofjobs, longest job held, industry and

occupation changes, etc. The results suggest that adult wages are for the most part unrelated to the stability of

early labor market experiences, especially for men, although as many studies have found, training bestowed

longer-term benefits. ON also look at other adult labor market outcomes, including health and pension

benefits and full-time employment, and conclude similarly that early job market stability is largely unrelated to

these outcomes. Such fmdings suggest (but by no means demonstrate) that school-to-work programs, to the

extent that their purpose is to encourage more stable early labor market experiences, may not help to achieve

the goals pursued by their proponents.3

         However, because unobservables related to match quality and patterns of search and job shopping in

the early years in the labor market may be related to measures of early job market stability, this evidencemay

not reveal the causal effect of early job market stability per se on adult labor market outcomes. Consideration

of models of on-the-job search reveals that the bias in the OLS estimates can go in. either direction. To remedy

this problem, Neumark (1998) uses instrumental variables methods to eliminate endogeneity or heterogeneity

bias in the estimated relationship between early job market stability and adult wages. Specifically, time-series

and geographical variation in labor market conditions facing workers entering the labor market is used to

generate instrumental variables for the job stability experienced by workers as youths. This empirical

approach, in principle, yields estimates that measure the potential effects of policies that would increase early

job stability. Its findings indicate that once account is taken of the endogenous determination of early job



           'We should not necessarily view school-to-work programs as narrowing career choices. In a Mathematica
Policy Research, Inc. study funded by the U.S. Department of Education to evaluate the 1994 STWOA, Hershey, et al.
note that school-to-work programs are sometimes perceived this way. They argue, however, that these programs may
instead "broaden the career options students we aware of and ... encourage them to prepare for a direction of their own
choice" (1999, p. 136). They suggest that qualitative evidence on implementation "approaches and priorities" for
school-to-work programs is more consistent with the latter interpretation, while acknowledging that they do not have
statistical evidence to support this view.

                                                            5
stability and adult wages, the evidence points to positive effects of early job stability on adult wages,

suggesting that policies that exogenously increase early job stability might have net beneficial effects.

         However, there is a compelling need for evidence on the effects of school-to-work programs, both to

address this question more directly, and to obtain more insight about the effects of school-to-workprograms,

aside from those acting through the channel of early job market stability. The latter issue is particularly

important because school-to-work programs are not necessarily geared exclusively toward placement of young

workers in more permanent jobs, but also aim toward increasing information about labor markets andyoung

workers' own skills, in order to enhance their career decision making.

ifi. Data on School-to-Work Progiarns and Outcomes in the NLSY97

School-to- Work Programs

         In the NLSY97 individuals arc surveyed about "programs schools offer to hel.p students prepare for

the world of work." The questions are asked of those with a highest grade attended of nine through twelve.

For the most part, these questions cover the types of programs in which individuals participated (at all and

most recently).4 The school-to-work programs covered include:

(fljob shadowing
(2) mentoring (matching students to an individual in an occupation)
(3) cooperative education (combining academic and vocational studies)
(4) work in a school-sponsored enterprise
(5) tech prep (a planned program of study with a defined career focus)
(6) internships or apprenticeships
(7) other school-to-work programs.5

For the analysis reported in this paper, we focus for the most part simply on whether the individual

participated in any school-to-work program, although we devote some attention to more-detailed information

on school-to-work program participation.

         In addition to the survey questions administered to individuals, the survey of schools also includes



        4There is also information on duration and intensity of programs, and whether a participant received pay.

          5The NLSY97 also includes information on "career major" programs, which are a sequence of courses based
on an occupational goal. However, information on these programs is elicited in a different manner from the questions
used for other school-to-work programs, and hence is not analyzed here. (In the school survey, in contrast, information
on all types of school-to-work programs comes from a similar set of questions.)

                                                           6
information on each of these types of school-to-work programs offered by schools. As explained below, an

attempt is made to use the school survey information to address statistical issues in inferring the causal effects

of school-to-work programs.

Dependent Variables

        As already noted, the range of outcomes of school-to-work programs that can be studied at this time

with the NLSY97 is limited by the youth of the sample. However, there are a number of questions that relate

to current enrollment and employment, and both shorter-term and longer-term expectations regarding school

and work. These include:

(1) current school enrollment
(2) current employment and hours of work
(3) current wage if working
(4) usual hours per week if working
(5) whether respondent took the SAT or ACT exam
(6) whether respondent took an Advanced Placement exam
(7) subjective probability that respondent will be in regular school one year later
(8) subjective probability that respondent will work more than 20 hours per week one year later if in school
then
(9) subjective probability that respondent will work more than 20 hours per week one year later if not in
school then
(10) subjective probability of obtaining high school diploma by age 20
(11) subjective probability of obtaining four-year college degree by age 30
(12) subjective probability of working more than 20 hours per week at age 30.

        School-to-work programs have been advocated as a means of encouraging better matches of workers

to jobs, via a two-way flow of information, including general information about the workplace and information

about particular employers flowing to students, and perhaps also information about students flowing to

employers. As the above list indicates, the NLSY97 at this point offers little data with which to address the

hypotheses that school-to-work programs have these effects. Thus, our analysis is more eclectic, dictated in

large part by data availability.

        One possible exception is the current wage if working (and perhaps also hours), which we might

expect to be higher if a student, through a school-to-work program, has found a better match. However, this is

not a strong prediction, as a better match may also entail, more human capital investment and hence lower

current wages. At the same time, we doubt that the central, hypotheses regarding school-to-work programs


                                                        7
concern jobs held by youths in high school. Rather, they concern jobs held after completing school, in which

case information on current wage effects is not very informative from a policy perspective. Related dependent

variables are the subjective probability that the respondent will work more than 20 hoursper week one year

later, if in school and if not in school, and that the respondent will work more than 20 hoursper week at age

30. Again, these variables do not relate directly to the quality ofjob matches, but perhaps reflect a

commitment to the workforce that school-to-work programs may nurture.

         Many of the possible dependent variables concern plans regarding education. These include the

subjective probabilities of being in regular school one year later, getting a high school diploma by age 20, and

earning a four-year college degree by age 30; in addition, there is a measure of cuntnt enrollment, indicating

whether a student has dropped out already. An alternative but possibly complementary perspective on school-

to-work programs is that by teaching students about the workplace, students learn the value of education in the

labor market. Thus, we might expect school-to-work programs to have some positive effects on students'

plans to stay in school and obtain degrees.6 There is also some objective information on whether students

have taken tests required for admission (SAT or ACT) or credit (Advanced Placement) in college, either of

which should indicate a higher likelihood of college attendance.7

         Thus, the NLSY97 data permit examination of some hypotheses pertinent to evaluating school-to-

work programs, while not encompassing all of the outcomes central to the school-to-work debate, and at this

point relying more on expectations regarding the future than on realized behavior. The next section describes

our empirical methods, and the following section reports the results.




        'The STWOA calls for, among other things, "effective linkages between secondary and post-secondary
education."

          'One potential problem is that many of the students are in younger high school grades at which these tests are
less likely to have been taken. Nonetheless, there are some students at all high school grades who have taken these tests,
and a higher incidence of test taking, controlling for grade, is probably still indicative of a higher likelihood of college
attendance.

                                                         8
IV. Methods

Generic Approach and the Selection Problem

          The analysis of the effects of school-to-work programs will beginwith individual-level data,

examining the multivariate relationships between participation in school-to-work programs and therange of

dependent variables described above. Generically, let Y denote outcome Y for individual i in school j, let

STW1J be a dummy variable for whether the individual reports participating in any school-to-work program, let

X be a vector of characteristics describing the individual, let; denote a vector of characteristics describing

the individual's school,8 and let c represent a random error term. We then estimate equations of the form:

(I)
In all cases of dichotomous dependent variables we estimate linear probability models, which can easily handle

instrumental variable estimation, random and fixed effects estimation, etc.

         We are interested in estimates of, of course, which we will denote 1,. The obvious problem from a

program evaluation perspective is that there is no compelling reason to believe that we can treat individuals as

if they are randomly assigned to school-to-work programs. In particular, it is plausible that individuals choose

to participate in such programs, and the participation decision may well be driven by some of the unobservable

variables (such as aptitudes, interests, resources, etc.) that also influence the dependent variablesY.           To
provide a specific example, an individual who believes he is unlikely to continue on to college might view a

school-to-work program (such as an apprenticeship or internship) as a way to begin building human capital of

value for the job that will be taken after high school. In this case, we might find spurious evidence that

school-to-work programs cause individuals to forego college. In this example, andmany others one can easily

imagine, STW is correlated with c, so that b is a biased estimate of the causal effect of school-to-work

programs. There may also be unobserved school characteristics that bias the estimated relationship between

our outcome variables and participation in school-to-work programs. For example, schools with a student



         RSome of these may vary across individuals because of differences by school level or school program, or
reporting errors, whereas others (e.g., student-teacher ratio) are school characteristics taken from other data sources, and
hence are constant across individuals.

                                                             9
population that tends not to go to college maybe more likely to offer school-to-work programs and hence elicit

higher participation, but this does not imply a causal effect of school-to-work participation on schooling and

work outcomes.

Proxy Variables

         There are three types of solutions to this problem available in the NLSY97. The first, and perhaps

preferable one, is to use as fill a set as possible of proxy variables for the individual-level and school-level

unobservables in      that are potentially correlated with STW1J. This has two purposes. First, the

specifications with the most detailed set of proxy variables give us the best estimates we can obtain of the

causal effects of school-to-work programs without resorting to other methods (based on other assumptions) of

correcting for selection into either participating in these programs (from the perspective of the individual) or

offering these programs (from the perspective of schools). Second, comparing the estimates of 3 using a

narrow set of control variables and a detailed set of proxy variables can help us to gauge the extent to which

biases from remaining unobservables are likely.9 Specifically, if the inclusion of the detailed proxy variables

has little or no impact on the estimates of 3, it is arguably less plausible (more so the more complete we think

the set of proxy variables) that remaining unobservables generate a correlation between c and STWJ,

conditional on the included variables.

         To implement this approach we estimate specifications for each of our dependent variables beginning

only with demographic controls. We then add controls for student achievement (grades), family background,

and parents' education,'° and a set of school characteristics to account for the possibility that certain types of

schools or school programs tend to offer school-to-work programs or attract students interested in such

programs, while their students tend to follow particular career paths, such as a lower likelihood of college




           'The distinction between proxy and other control variables is semantic. What researchers typically identi' as
"proxy" variables are those that capture the important—perhaps idiosyncratic—factors thought to influence a particular
empirical relationship under study, aside from a narrower set of demographic and other controls available in standard
data sets.

       °ldeally, we would also like to use the ASVAB scores from the tests administered to NLSY97 respondents.
However, these scores have not yet been made available to researchers.

                                                            10
attendance. Across the set of dependent variables we study, the estimates were generally robust to the

inclusion of the wider set of controls. Moreover, the estimated effects did not uniformly move closer to zero

when the full set of controls was included. However, there are some cases with sharper differences, which are

noted below. While comparing the estimated coefficients of the school-to-work program participation dummy

variable across alternative sets of controls is somewhat informative about the role of selection, and the

robustness of the results suggests that this may not be too serious an issue, we also consider other potentially

more precise ways of addressing this problem.

School Fixed Effects

         The NLSY97 is a stratified random sample of primary sampling units, which are metropolitan areas or

counties. All schools in the sampling units were identified and assigned a unique code. As a consequence, we

can exploit the repeated observations on. different individuals within the same school to control for all

unobservable characteristics of schools (including individual and family characteristics that are common

within schools) that might affect both participation in school-to-work programs and our dependent variables.

For this estimator to provide causal effects of school-to-work programs, we have to assume that equation (I)

can be written as:

(2)      Yif=a+PSTW1j+Xuy+Zijo+lj+vjj,
where is the part of that is correlated with STWJ, and varies only across schools but not individuals

within schools, while       varies within schools, but is uncorrelated (conditionally) with STW]J, X, and Z.

         Under these assumptions, we can form the within-school deviations (equivalent to including dummy

variables for each school), and obtain consistent estimates of the causal effects of school-to-work programs

from:

(3)      (Y — Y) = l3(STW — STWJ) + (X             —
                                                       X)y + (v   —




where the '.j' subscript indicates the mean across individuals in the same school j1



         Note that while Z is a vector of school characteristics some of which are reported by individuals, we have
assumed in equation (3) that the school characteristics drop out of the fixed effects specification. In fact, some of these
vary across individuals within schools, in which case the within-group means appear in the version of equation (3) that
we estimate.

                                                             11
Instrumental Variable Estimates

         The ability to use within-school estimates in the NLSY97 is potentially powerful. Nonetheless, the

method requires the assumption that the part of the error term that is correlated with STWJJ varies only at

the school level (i.e., that in equation (3), (v — v.) is uncorrelated with (STWIJ — STW.J) and (IX -               This
                                                                                                           X.3)).

would be violated if there are individual-level unobservables that influence both participation in school-to-

work programs and our dependent variables. Although we have argued (and will discuss the evidence below)

that the proxy variable approach suggests a relatively unimportant role for such unobservables, they cannot be

ruled out, and could still influence the estimates if their effects are not totally captured by the proxy variables

available to us.

         What is needed in this case is an instrumental variable for STWJ, a variable that predicts participation

in school-to-work programs, but is uncorrelated with the error term. A natural candidate, it seems to us, is

whether the school offers a school-to-work program (denoted OSTW).'2 While this could vary across types of

schools (e.g., vocational versus private) in ways that are correlated with student characteristics, it would seem

that conditional on. school type (and other school characteristics), this is relatively unlikely to be the case, and

therefore that OSTWJ may be a valid instrument for STWJ. Of course, since OSTWJ has no within-school

variation, we can only consider the instrumental variables estimation for the equation in. levels, rather than

within-school deviations (i.e., with school fixed effects).

         To preview some of the results, however, we fmd that whether a school offers a school-to-work

program is of essentially no value in predicting whether an individual participates in a school-to-work

program, despite the fact that there is a large fraction of schools that report offering such programs, and a large

fraction that apparently do not.tS Thus, while this instrument may satisf, the requirement of being

uncorrelated with the error term, it apparently fails to be an informative instrument. We therefore also



          '2The school survey does ask about number of participants, but this information is missing very frequently
even when schools respond regarding offerings of school-to-work programs. In addition, we would not want to use such
information to construct an instrumental variable, since it is more likely to be correlated with the unobservables that
affect individual participation.

         '31f all schools offered them, then of course this variable would have no predictive power.

                                                            12
consider an alternative—admittedly less satisfactory on a priori grounds—instrumental variable approach to this

problem, as explained below.

V. Results

Samples

          Different sets of the variables we use are available for different numbers of observations, because of

eligibility for or applicability of particular questions.'4 Because this gets a bit complicated, Table I describes

the sampJes used and in so doing lays out the samples we analyze. Row (1) of the table reports the overall

sample size of 8984, in the first column. A number of our dependent variables are subjective expectations

regarding future work and schooling. However, these are only asked of respondents born in 1980 and 1981.

As the second column reports, this would appear to greatly restrict the sample available for analysis of these

outcomes. However, as reported in row (2), eligibility for the school-to-work questions is also rather sharply

limited, asked only of those whose highest grade attended is nine or higher, just about one-half of the sample,

76 percent of whom are eligible for the expectations questions.

         As reported in rows (3)-(7), we lose relatively few observations because of invalid school-to-work

data. Similarly, rows (8) and (9) indicate that we have data on respondents' demographic characteristics and

achievement (grades) for most of the observations. However, once we require information on family

background and school characteristics, the sample is sharply reduced. A substantial part of the reduction,

shown in row (10), stems from the unavailability of a parent interview, generally because of refusal, or

inability of the interviewer to obtain an interview. As shown in row (11), there are also many observations

missing data on household income, according to the codebook largely because of invalid skips, "don't knows,"

or refusals, although most observations with a parent interview have valid data on parents' education (row

(12)). Finally, row (13) indicates some loss of observations with missing information on schools. This is due

mainly to "don't knows"; non-enrolled respondents are asked about their most recent schools.



          14There is also item non-response, but conditional on a particular set of questions being asked of or applicable
to a subsample, we generally choose samples with all data available for the analysis of particular specifications, to
enhance comparability of estimates.

                                                             13
         As indicated in the next four rows, fewer than half of the respondents report some work experience,

and of course oniy this subsample is available for the analysis of wages, although we estimate some

unconditional models for hours of work including those with zero hours. Row (17) reports the sample size

with complete information on school-to-work, all of the explanatory variables, and all of the outcome

variables, without conditioning on work. Finally, rows (1 8)-(2 1) report the numbers of observations with

multiple observations available for the same school, for some of the samples we analyze. These figures

indicate that for most individuals in the samples we analyze there are observations on other individuals in the

same school.

Descriptive Statistics

         Tables 2-4 report descriptive statistics for both control variables and outcomes, broken down by

participation in a school-to-work program. Table 2 reports descriptive statistics on demographic

characteristics and family background.'5"6 Overall, these data indicate that school-to-work participants are

very similar to non-participants, although there are some minor demographic differences. In particular,

school-to-work participants are slightly less likely to be male, white, and Hispanic.'7 On the other hand, the

average family background characteristics appear nearly identical across the two groups.

         Table 3 reports descriptive statistics on schools. School program, type, and level are reported by

respondents, whereas size and student-teacher ratio are taken from the Quality Educational Database, a

proprietary database of all primary and secondary educational institutions in the U.S. School-to-work program

participation is largely unrelated to most of these school characteristics, including size, student-teacher ratio,

type, and level. Not surprisingly, though, school program is related to school-to-work participation. School-

to-work participants are overrepresented by a factor of 1.9 to 2.8 among students in vocational technical or



         "For parents' education, we report a more aggregated version of the variable than we use in the regressions.

       '6For a good deal more descriptive information on participation in school-to-work programs, see Joyce and
Neumark (1999).

          '7The sex and race differences in school-to-work program participation mirror findings reported in Hershey, et
al. (1999, Table C.!), based on the most recent survey (1998) of 12th graders, who probably overlap with the cohorts
covered by the NLSY97.

                                                            14
business and career programs, or with combined academic and vocational programs. They are

underrepresented among students in general programs, although not college preparatoiy, academic, or

specialized academic programs.

          Table 4 reports the raw differentials in these outcomes associated with school-to-work program

participation. The first panel indicates that participants are slightly more likely to be currently enrolled. Of

course this may simply reflect the fact that those currently enrolled are at greater risk of "exposure" to a

school-to-work program. The second panel indicates that school-to-work program participants are more likely

to be employed, and to work more hours on average, when zero values are included for non-workers. The next

panel considers those with some work experience, indicating that program participants, conditional on

working, earn slightly higher hourly wages (about 15 cents) and work a shade less (about .3 hours), both small

differences relative to the standard errors of the means. The third panel looks at the incidence of taking SAT

or ACT examinations, or Advanced Placement examinations, which are precursors to applying to college and

therefore likely to predict college attendance. Here we fmd rather sizable differentials, especially for taking

SAT or ACT examinations, as school-to-work program participants are 34 percent more likely to do so.

          Finally, the last panel looks at the subjective expectations, with probabilities expressed as percentage

chances, as elicited by the survey. There is little difference between participants and non-participants in the

probability of enrollment one year later, but school-to-work participants do hold higher expectations of the

likelihood of getting a high school diploma (by age 20) or a four-year college degree (by age 30). In addition,

for all three variables regarding expectations of working 20 or more hours per week, school-to-work

participants report higher subjective expectations, most notably for expectations regarding work while still in

school.

Regression Estimates

          Contemuoraneous outcomes

          We next report the multivariate analyses. Table 5 looks at the "contemporaneous" outcomes. The

first set of regression estimates in the table (going across the columns) is simply OLS estimates with the



                                                        15
limited set of demographic controls, followed by the estimates with the full set of control variables included;

standard errors robust against heteroscedasticity and sample clustering (by school) are reported.'8 In both

cases, the OLS estimates at the top of Table 5 indicate that school-to-work program participation is positively

associated with current enrollment as well as current employment, although. only the latter is strongly

significant (p < .05). The employment differential is also reflected in the estimates of the unconditional hours

equation (p < .05). However, conditional on working, there is no statistically significant differential, in hours

between participants and non-participants, or in wages. Because respondents who participated in school-to-

work programs may have different human capital investment profiles, though, we cannot necessarily draw any

inferences about productivity or match quality. Also, as noted earlier, because the enrollment effect may

simply reflect exposure, we regard the principal fmding to be the higher likelihood of current employment for

school-to-work program participants.

           Below the OLS estimates, we report random effects estimates, which are more efficient.'9 Instead of

using the conventional random effects estimator, we quasi-difference the data using the formula in Hausman

(1978), and then use OLS on the quasi-differenced data with the same robust standard errors as we used for

the conventional OLS estimates. This allows for the possibility that the individual-level idiosyncratic error is

heteroscedastic, and that there are still covariances among observations for the same school because the

conventional random effects estimator assumes that for each school the covariance in the error terms within

schools is the same. However, we also know that random effects estimates are weighted averages of the within

and between estimates, and therefore tend to move in the direction of the fixed effects estimates (as the

variance of the school-specific error goes up relative to the variance of the idiosyncratic error). In general, the

evidence of higher enrollment, employment, and (unconditional) hours is a bit weaker using the random effects

specifications, although the signs of the estimates are unchanged, the magnitudes fall only slightly, and the




           "Most of these control variables were covered in Tables 2 and 3, and the footnote to the table gives more
details.

         9'f he fact that the standard errors of the conventional OLS estimates are robust to sample clustering explains
why the standard errors do not necessarily go up in the random effects estimations.

                                                             16
estimated differentials for employment and unconditional hours remain statistically significant at the five- or

ten-percent level.

          Next, the table reports the estimates with fixed school effects. In these estimates, any evidence of

positive effects of school-to-work program participation on enrollment, employment, or (unconditional) hours

evaporates completely, and for all five outcomes there are no statistically significant effects of school-to-work

programs. The final panel of the table reports Hausman tests of the null hypothesis that the school-specific

error terms and the school-to-work participation dummy variable are uncorrelated, based on the difference

between the random effects and fixed effects estimates. We use a version of the test that is robust to

inefficiency of the random effects estimator.2° We did this test for just the school-to-work variable, since we

really only care about bias in the coefficient estimate of this variable.2' It turns out that for four of the five

dependent variables examined in this table, the Hausman test leads to rejection of the null at the five-percent

or ten-percent significance level, with strong rejections for the three dependent variables (enrollment,

employment, and unconditional hours) for which the conventional OLS estimates indicated statistically

significant differentials associated with school-to-work program participation. This rejection implies that we

need the fixed school effects, which in turn implies that for the dependent variables studied in this table, there

is no statistical evidence of effects of school-to-work programs. That is, participation in these programs does

not appear to have much impact on current enrollment, employment, hours of work (unconditional or

conditional), or wages.

         Short-term subjective expectations re2ardin school and work

         The next table reports a similar set of analyses for subjective expectations regarding the following

year, in particular the chance that the respondent will be in school, and will work more than 20 hours per week




          20To do this test, we regress the quasi-differenced dependent variable on the quasi-differenced independent
variables as well as the school-specific mean vector of the independent variables. The null of no selection bias implies
that the vector of coefficients on the mean vector is zero, which we test using an F-test that is robust to
heteroscedasticity and clustering.

           210ne argument against this approach is that if other coefficient estimates are biased, we cannot interpret the
test of a single coefficient that rests on the assumption that its estimate is consistent under the null.

                                                              17
if in school and if not in school. The OLS estimates indicate positive differentials for each of these variables

associated with school-to-work program participation, although the evidence is stronger for the work variables

(p < .01 for work if in school, and p <.05 for work if not in school) than for the enrollment variable (for which

the difference is insignificant). The estimates are insensitive to the inclusion of the controls. The estimated

magnitude for work while in school (using the fill set of controls) indicates that participants in school-to-work

programs rate themselves as 5.2 percentage points more likely to work more than 20 hours per week than non-

participants, ceteris paribus. In the random effects estimates, the statistical evidence consistent with school-to-

work boosting the likelihood of working, especially if still in school, persists, although the relationship

between the likelihood of enrollment and school-to-work participation weakens. Finally, in the fixed effects

estimates the evidence of positive effects on the likelihood of working if out of school becomes statistically

insignificant, although the coefficient is larger, while for work if in school the estimated coefficient falls

slightly while remaining statistically significant (p <.05). For the work-related variables, the Hausman tests

indicate that we do not need the school fixed effects. Thus, the evidence suggests that participation in school-

to-work programs increases the subjective probability that respondents will work more than 20 hours a week

in the next year, whether in school or not.

        Colle2e-preparatorv test taking

        Table 7 turns to the question of whether school-to--work program participation increases the likelihood

that students take SAT or ACT examinations, or Advanced Placement (AP) examinations. For both types of

tests, the answer appears to be yes, although the evidence is stronger for SAT or ACT examinations. For

these, the OLS (with limited or fill controls), random effects, and fixed effects estimates all indicate a

probability that is higher by about four or more percentage points. For the AP tests, in the OLS and random

effects estimates the estimated effect is significant at the five-percent level. The fixed effects estimation

results in a higher standard error and therefore an insignificant coefficient estimate, but the Hausman test

indicates that the school fixed effects are not needed for this specification. Thus, it appears that school-to-

work program participation has positive effects on the probability that respondents take tests used for either



                                                         18
admission to or advanced credit at college.

         Lon2-term subjective expectations reardin2 school and work

         Prior to looking at the dependent variables regarding longer-term subjective expectations, including

obtaining a four-year college degree, we consider some evidence on the role of the tests considered in Table 7.

Although we cannot of course observe the relationship between taking these tests and actual college

attendance, we can observe the relationship for the subjective probability of obtaining a four-year degree (by

age 30). As documented in Table 8, taking the SAT or ACT test is positively associated with the subjective

probability of getting a four-year degree, with a differential of about three percentage points. The same is not

true for AP tests, once the full set of controls is included.11

         Table 9 turns to the regressions for subjective probabilities of a high school diploma by age 20, a

four-year college degree by age 30, and working more than 20 hours per week at age 30. The OLS estimates

indicate statistically significant positive relationships between school-to-work program participation and

expected receipt of a high school diploma (p < .05), and the expectation of working more than 20 hours per

week (p < .05). The estimated coefficients for receipt of a four-year degree are positive, but not significant.

These results are little changed in the random effects estimation. The fixed effects estimate of th.e effect of

school-to-work participation on expected receipt of a high school diploma is much smaller and insignificant,

and the p-value from the Hausman test (A 79) suggests that we do not need the school fixed effects; however,

the p-value is sufficiently low that we do not view the evidence of a positive effect on high school graduation

as strong. On the other hand, the estimated effect of school-to-work participation for work at age 30 is slightly

larger, and remains statistically significant (p <.05). Thus, the only strong evidence that emerges from this

table is an apparent positive effect of school-to-work participation on work at age 30.

         One thing that is curious about the findings for a four-year college degree is that Table 7 indicated a

statistically significant effect of school-to-work program participation on taking the SAT or ACT, even in the



        In both specifications in Table 8, as well as one specification in Table 9, note that the random effects and
OLS estimates are identical. This happens because the consistent estimate of the variance of school-specific error
(which can be thought of as the covariance of residuals for observations in the same school) turns out to be negative.

                                                            19
school fixed effects estimation, white Table 8 indicated a positive relationship between taking these tests and

the subjective probability of obtaining a four-year college degree, although not significant in. the fixed effects

estimation. So it seems that school-to-work program participation increases the probability of taking the SAT

or ACT, and taking these tests increases the subjective probability of obtaining a four-year college degree, yet

school-to-work program participation does not have an effect on this tatter probability. It turns out, though,

that the positive relationship between school-to-work program participation and taking SAT or ACT (or AP)

tests is not robust across samples. When we restrict our attention to a common sample for which we can

estimate both the test-taking and college degree equations, the positive effect of school-to-work program

participation on test taking—particularly for the SAT or ACT test—becomes small and insignificant once we

include the school fixed effects, as the Hausman test suggests we probably need to do (the p-value is .133).

Individual School-to-Work Programs and Intensity of Participation

         To this point, we have lumped all school-to-work programs together. We have no prior expectations

that particular types of school-to-work programs will have stronger or weaker effects on the outcomes we

consider. However, it is natural to expect that variation in. the intensity of participation would be positively

associated with variation in the effect. The NLSY97 contains information on hours spent at the work site for

the most recent school-to-work program in which the respondent participated. Some descriptive information

on these hours is reported in Table 10. The table indicates two things. First, looking at the mean hours (in the

second column of figures) reveals that the average number of work-site hours under either apprenticeship or

internship programs or in tech prep is quite high, while hours spent in other types of programs is often quite

low. Second, however, there is a high incidence of individuals reporting zero hours. To some extent, this

could simply be a result of the question focusing on hours at the work site.23 For example, this could explain

low hours for mentoring, which could conceivably consist more of classroom interaction or other meetings.



          The set of questions is actually a bit inconsistent. The respondent is first asked "Altogether, how many weeks
or days did you spend at a work site that was part of this (most recent) program?' The response is then coded as weeks
or days. Following this, respondents who reportedpositive weeks or days are asked "How many hours per (weeklday)
did you spend at a work site or participating in this most recent program?" So even though the hours question, as it is
asked, is not restricted to the work site, the skip pattern imposes this restriction; even if theskip pattern did not do this,
however, using the weeks or days measure to obtain an estimate of total hours would have the same effect.

                                                              20
However, it seems difficult to understand the high incidence of zero hours for apprenticeships or intemships,

for school-based enterprise, or for cooperative education, all of which, would appear to involve substantial

work-site activity. Thus, we suspect that the hours data, and in particular the observations reporting zero

hours, are somewhat unreliable.

        As a result, we take two steps in trying to incorporate information on intensity of school-to-work

programs. First, we do not use individual-level data on hours in the regressions, in large part because we are

skeptical of reports of zero hours. Rather, we simply use the hours information to draw some broad

generalizations regarding the intensity of different types of school-to-work programs. Second, we use the

hours data conditional on reporting positive hours to draw these generalizations. Means for these data are

reported in the last column of the table. They reveal relatively high intensity of apprenticeship or internship

programs or tech prep programs (over 150 hours, on average), moderate intensity of mentoring, cooperative

education, and school-based enterprise (35 to 72 hours, on. average), and low intensity of the remaining types

of programs (fewer than 22 hours, on average).

        In Table 11, we maintain this categorization, breaking out separate effects of school-to-work

programs for these three categories. We do this by adding separate dummy variables corresponding to the type

of program in which the respondent most recently participated. We use the same specifications as reported in

the previous tables where we used a single dummy variable for school-to-work participation, but here report

only the specifications with the flill set of controls, and report either random effects or fixed effects estimates,

based on the Hausman test results. For most of the outcomes we study, there are no noteworthy differences

across these categories of school-to-work programs. However, th.ere are a few exceptions. Low-intensity

school-to-work programs have a positive and statistically significant effect on the subjective probability of

receiving a high school diploma by age 20, whereas the relationship for medium- and high-intensity programs

is weaker and insignilkant. Paralleling this result to some extent are those for the subjective probability of a

four-year college degree by age 30. Here we find a negative effect (significant at the ten-percent level) only for

the high-intensity school-to-work programs. Together, these results might be viewed as suggesting that low-



                                                         21
intensity school-to-work programs if anything encourage education, which would be consistent with playing

largely an "information" role, while high-intensity programs discourage education, perhaps encouraging work

over education (keeping in mind possible biases from selection of the non-college bound into these programs).

Furthermore, it is of interest that these effects of school-to-work participation on education, were either not

apparent or weaker when we did not distinguish school-to-work programs by intensity. Thus, information on

intensity of programs, as well as other characteristics of programs, may prove to be useful. However, at this

point we regard our evidence exploiting information on the intensity of participation in school-to-work

programs as provisional, given some of our data concerns.24

Instrumental Variables?

         Finally, as noted in Section lv, we are interested in exploring data on school-to-work programs

offered by schools as a source of an instrumental variable for individual participation. The data for this

instrumental variable come from a supplemental data collection effort that was part of the NLSY97, the

School Administrator's Survey of 1996. The sample for this survey was all schools with a 12th grade located

within primary sampling units (either metropolitan areas or counties) of the NLSY97. This survey was mailed

to 7,985 schools. Of the 7,390 that were ultimately determined to still exist and offer 12th grade instruction,

responses were received from 5,295, or 71.6 percent of eligible respondents.

         One potentially serious problem with the school survey is that, aside from non-response to the school

survey as a whole, there is substantial non-response to individual items on the "grid" that asks about school-

to-work programs—about 14 to 20 percent per type of program. We treated overall non-respondents as missing

data, as well as a small number of respondents who failed to answer general questions about school-to-work

programs that preceded the detailed questions in the grid. However, for the remaining respondents we treated




         24We also performed an analysis like that in Table 11 keeping each type of school-to-work program separate.
These estimates revealed that both of the low-intensity programs (job shadowing and "other") encourage schooling,
expected work for those anticipating remaining in school, and expected work at age 30. Among the moderate-intensity
programs, cooperative education increases expected work for those who anticipate remaining in school, whereas the
other programs (mentoring and school-based enterprise) do not. Finally, among the high-intensity programs
(apprenticeship or internship, or tech prep), the significant relationships broke down upon disaggregating. Thus, to
some extent the disaggregation may ask too much of the data. These results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                          22
individual missing responses as zero (i.e., not offering the specific program). We think this is a reasonable

thing to do because the pattern of missing data is such that many schools failed to respond to a subset of items

on the grid, rather than a smaller number of schools failing to respond. to most items on the grid. This

suggests to us that something about the survey design often led respondents to leave a particular item missing

when the school did not offer that particular type of school-to-work program.

        There are two requirements of the school-to-work "offering" instrumental variable. The first, which

cannot be tested in the absence of other identif'ing information, is that whether a school offers a school-to-

work program is not correlated with the error term of the equations we estimate. This is a potential problem to

the extent that respondents are able to choose particular schools offering particular types of programs; in such

a case, there is selection on schools based on the programs they offer, so we would be back to the same

problem posed by simply using school-to-work program participation. However, it would seem that by

restricting the sample—for example, to respondents attending public schools—or by conditioning on program or

school type, we can minimize this concern.

        The second requirement is that the instrument be able to predict the endogenous variable. In this case,

our prior belief was that this requirement would be easily satisfied. We fully expected that whether a school

offered a school-to-work program would help predict whether individuals in the school participate in such

programs. We would of course not expect all respondents in schools offering school-to-work programs to

report participation in them, but we would expect respondents not to report participation in schools that do not

offer them. Of course, there is likely to be some measurement or misclassification error, as the respondent and

school administrator responding to the different surveys interpret the questions differently, the administrator

gives incomplete responses, or respondents were previously at different schools. However, it seems to us that

under any conceivable scenario, attendance at a school that reports offering a school-to-work program shoul.d

be a strong predictor of whether the individual reports participation.

        To our surprise, though, this was not the case. As reported in the top panel of Table 12, whether

schools offer any school-to-work programs has scarcely any predictive power for what the individual reports.



                                                       23
Among respondents attending schools that report offering such programs, 37.90 percent report participation,

whereas among those attending schools that do not report offering such programs onl.y slightly fewer, 35.71

percent, report participation. Driving this point home, the Pearson chi-square statistic indicates that the null

hypothesis that the schools' and respondents' reports are independent is not rejected, with a p-value of .241 25

         We considered a number of possible explanations of what could underlie this. First, one category of

program available in both surveys is a generic "other" category, for types of programs not covered by those

listed. It seems likely that respondents to different surveys might be most likely to give non-corresponding

answers for this category. We therefore recomputed this contingency table re-classiing th.e "other" entries as

no school-to-work program. However, this made no difference, as reported in the second panel of the table.

Next, we considered whether the individual and school responses might correspond better for specific types of

school-to-work programs that are less ambiguous, such as "school-based enterprise" or "cooperative

education." If so, we might be able to look at an isolated subset of programs and come up with a good

instrument. As shown in the next six panels, however, things generally look no better by program type. The

difference in the fraction of respondents reporting participation between schools that do and do not report

offering school-to-work programs is generally less than one percentage point, although forjob shadowing and

school-based enterprise the difference is larger and the p-value is below .05. Next, since schools are asked

about programs offered contemporaneously, the correspondence with individual student reports might be

higher using their most recent school-to-work program, rather than any program in which they ever

participated, some of which may no longer be offered. The bottom six contingency tables in Table 12 explore

this.26 One of the p-values for the test of independence is notably lower (for cooperative education), but note


          'We see no obvious reason based on the wording of questions in the survey why this problem should arise. In
the individual survey, prior to being presented with a list of possible school-to-work programs, respondents are queried
as follows: "Here is a list of some of the kinds of programs schools offer to help students prepare for the world of work.
Have you ever participated in any of these programs through your school?" In the school survey, as a lead-in to the grid
on which respondents indicate the types of programs offered, respondents are instructed: "The questions on the
following pages are about work-based and career-oriented activities offered at your school." In the grid that follows, for
columns corresponding to each type of school-to-work program, respondents simply answer yes or no to the question
"Do you offer this activity?'

         26Note that in these panels, the reported incidence of each type of program based on individual responses is
lower, because here respondents can indicate only one (i.e., their most recent) program.

                                                            24
that the test rejects independence in the wrong direction, as the participation rate reported by individuals is

actually higher for those whose schools do not report offering such a program. Thus, it still largely appears

that schools' reported offerings of school-to-work programs have essentially no predictive power for reported

participation by respondents.

         Finally, we explored an. alternative approach to handling the missing data on school-to-work programs

in the school survey (discussed above), treating the missing cases as true missings rather than, negative

responses. This never affects the schools we code as offering a school-to-work program, since all we needed

to code a school this way was an affirmative answer to a question regarding at least one school-to-work

program. On the other hand, this gives us many fewer schools coded as not offering such programs, because

now a school is coded this way only if all of the questions covering each type of school-to-work program are

answered in the negative. If the treatment of the missing data in Table 12 incorrectly codes some schools as

not offering a program when in fact they do, this could explain the lack of correspondence between the

individual and school data in that table. However, this did not turn out to be the case, as the proportions of

students reporting school-to-work program participation among schools coded as not offering programs when

treating the missing data in this alternative way were very similar to those reported in Table 12, as were the

results from the tests of independence!7

         We verified further that information on school-to-work offerings could not serve as an instrument by

estimating the first-stage regression that would be used in instrumental variables estimation. Specifically, we

regress the dummy variable for individual school-to-work participation on a dummy variable for whether the

school offers a program, and all of the other independent variables included in the regressions.28 The F-



         "We also considered the possibility that the school codes had been incorrectly assigned so that our match
between schools and individuals was incorrect. To check this, we examined variables for which there is information in
both surveys. Comparable categories for school size can be constructed from information in both data sets, with the
information in the individual survey coming from the QED rather than respondents. These categorical data matched up
very well between the two surveys. Perhaps more importantly, school type is reported by respondents in each of the two
surveys. Dividing the categories into public and non-public, we found that 93 percent of responses corresponded. Not
only does this indicate that the match is correct, it also indicates that consistent data can be collected from individuals
and schools, implying that the problem may lie with the school-to-work components of the surveys per se.

         This, of course, is for the specifications that do not use the school fixed effects.

                                                             25
statistic for the school offering of a program was below one. We also examined whether particular

combinations of programs reported by schools, including simply the number of programs offered (entered in a

non-restricted fashion as dummy variables), would in some way provide a belier prediction for the individual's

response. Perhaps, for example, if a school reports offering many programs, this would have more predictive

power for whether a student reports any participation. However, despite searching over many specifications,

we were unable to find any predictive relationship, never fmding one with an F-statistic for the instruments

exceeding even one.29

         We are surprised by the lack of correspondence between individuals' reports of school-to-work

participation and school reports of offerings of school-to-work programs. In the spirit of a conference

exploring the uses, quality, etc., of the new NLSY, we think it is important to report this evidence in the hope

of inviting constructive feedback on either alternative uses of these data or survey design issues that could be

improved upon in future waves of the NLSY97, before respondents complete high school and the chance to

collect reliable school-to-work information is lost. In particular, it seems to us that it might be useful to test

the individual and school instruments on a small sample of schools and their students, and, assuming that the

same lack of correspondence that we find surfaces, follow up with interviews of survey respondents and

perhaps school visits to try to find the sources of the discrepancies.

         In the meantime, though, our evidence has two implications. The first, obvious, one is that we cannot

successthlly use this particular instrumental variable approach to help evaluate the effects of school-to-work

program participation. The second, potentially more troubling implication is that the problem does not

necessarily lie exclusively or even predominantly with the school survey. There are reasons to be wary of the

school survey data, in particular the missing data problems described above. On the other hand, this does not

necessarily imply that we want to accept the individual data as "truth." Rather, it is possible that in these

latter data there is some misclassification of school-to-work program participation. In thinking about the

potential implications for these estimates, note that this would tend to bias our estimated effects of school-to-


         290f course even if we could do so, this approach would be prone to data mining—finding an empirical
relationship relating schools' offering to individuals' responses that was a result of chance.

                                                          26
work program participation toward finding no effect. Thus, for those dependent variables for which we found

no effect, the conclusion might be interpreted cautiously. But for those for which we found an effect, the

evidence would presumably only be stronger absent this misclassification error.

        We can at this point say a little about the reliability of the data on school-to-work participation from

the survey of individuals by looking at how the reported incidence of school-to-work participation varies with

characteristics with which participation is known to vary. There are not many such characteristics that come

to mind, in large part because of the paucity of research on this topic. However, school program and school

type seem natural candidates. hi particular, individuals in vocational technical or business and career

programs, or in combined academic and vocational programs, should be more likely to report school-to-work

participation. The same should be true of technical or vocational high schools relative to other schools.

        Table 13 reports differences in the reported incidence of school-to-work participation by individuals

across school program and school types. We observe some correspondence between expected and observed

patterns. For school program, the rate of participation in school-to-work programs is 89 percent higher in

vocational technical or business and career programs than in general programs, and 61 percent higher in

combined academic and vocational programs than in general programs. Similarly, with respect to type of

school, reported school-to-work participation is 32 percent higher in technical or vocational high sch.ools than

in public schools. This evidence is not necessarily decisive, since the school program and type are reported by

the respondent and could reflect the same errors as the school-to-work responses. However, as best we can

tell, it does appear that the respondent reports of school-to-work participation exhibit some reliability, and that

we can therefore learn something about the effects of school-to-work programs from the NLSY97 data on

school-to-work participation. Nonetheless, this does nothing to resuscitate the school reports as instrumental

variables.

         Finally, we consider one other alternative approach to instrumental variables estimation. Although we

have documented our inability to use variation in whether schools offer school-to-work programs—based on

school reports—as an instrumental variable for individual participation, we nonetheless have some potentially



                                                        27
useful information on. what schools offer based on the school-to-work participation of other individuals in the

same school. As noted earlier, this arises because of the school cluster design of the NLSY sample. We first

consider a "jackknife" instrumental variable constructed for each respondent as the mean of school-to-work

participation over all individuals at the same school except the respondent.3° This jackknife mean should be

correlated with the respondent's own school-to-work participation, since it is likely to be affected by what the

school offers, as well as by the type of students that attend the school. Whether this mean is likely to be

uncorrelated with the error term in equation (1) is potentially more problematic. To the extent that its

variation is driven by school decisions that are unrelated to characteristics of students, it is likely to be a valid

instrumental variable (the same conditions under which direct data on school offerings would be a valid

instrumental variable). But to the extent that it is driven by student characteristics, it is unlikely to be

uncorrelated with the error term, since the respondent is likely to share some of the same characteristics. We

also take this approach one step further, using the mean of the residual from the first-stage regression for

school-to-work participation across all individuals in the cluster except the respondent. This assures that the

variation in school-to-work participation is not driven by variation in the control variables describing the other

individuals, their academic program, etc., but rather is driven by variation in their school-to-work participation

independently of these influences.

           The results of this instrumental variable estimation are reported in Table 14. We first report the OLS

results using the lull set of controls; these can differ from the estimates reported previously because the sample

is restricted to clusters of multiple observations within schools. We then report the two alternative IV

estimates, in each case also reporting the Hausman test statistic for endogeneity of the individual's school-to-

work participation. There are some generalities that can he drawn from the many estimates reported in this

table. First, for all specifications, the estimated standard erors of the school-to-work participation variable

rise sharply, by a factor of about eight or more. Second, the alternative IV estimates are very similar, so we do

not need to comment on them separately. Third, many of the estimated coefficients of the school-to-work


           30Clearly, this implies that respondents for which there are not other individuals in the same school are
dropped.

                                                               28
participation variable change markedly, including those for the following outcomes: usual hours worked per

week currently (conditional or unconditional); the subjective probability of working more than 20 hours per

week (in school or out of school); and the subjective probabilities of a high school diploma by age 20, and the

work and schooling outcomes at age 30. However, as the Hausman tests indicate, in most cases there is weak

evidence against the null, with p-values in the .3 and higher range. Nonetheless, there are some exceptions,

with low or relatively low p-values for the hourly wage, remaining in school ("in regular school" in the next

year), and the two variables for working more than 20 hours in the next year (in school or not). However,

some of the sign patterns may be inconsistent with the estimates indicating that school-to-work participation

boosts work expectations of those that remain in school, while perhaps lowering work expectations for those

who do not remain, in school (although these latter estimates are not statistically significant).

         The large standard errors and frequency of failure to reject the null suggests that we use caution in

drawing any conclusions from these instrumental variable estimates. However, there are perhaps some

conclusions that emerge that differ from or reinforce those reached without instrumenting. First, work in the

following year for those who remain in school may be boosted by school-to-work participation. This

reinforces the conclusion from the earlier estimates, with the instrumental variable estimates suggesting a

larger effect; interestingly, taking the instrumental variable estimates at face value, the direction of the

endogeneity bias is not in the direction we would expect if those with the highest work expectations selected

into school-to-work programs. Alternatively, the reader may regard this as reason to be skeptical of the

instrumental variable estimates. On the other hand, the evidence that school-to-work participation boosts

work expectations conditional on leaving school no longer appears in the instrumental variable estimation,

with the estimated effect if anything negative. But our sense is that the most reliable evidence at this point

comes from the fixed or random effects estimates reported in earlier tables, and it is these we summarize in the

conclusion.

VI. Conclusion

         Overall, the evidence does not support the finding that there is a causal effect of school-to-work



                                                         29
program participation on behavior likely associated with future college attendance—either test taking or the

subjective probability of obtaining a four-year college degree. We do find such evidence prior to including

school fixed effects, but it apparently arises because of a correlation between, school-to-work programs and

unobservables positively related to future college attendance; in contrast, once we hilly control for school

characteristics, the relationship is no longer present. On the other hand, school-to-work program participation

does appear to have positive effects on educational attainment in terms of respondents' subjective probabilities

of obtaining a high-school diploma. Although the mean subjective probability is well over 90 percent, the

estimates indicate that school-to-work program participation appears to increase this probability by nearly two

percentage points.

        More in accordance with the traditional view of school-to-work programs, the data indicate that

participation in these programs increases the perceived likelihood of future labor market activity, both for the

year following the survey and at age 30. The former effects are in the three to five percentage-point range, and

the latter estimates around two percentage points. However, school-to-work programs do not appear to boost

the probability of current employment.

        But there are three important qualifications. First, the assumptions under which the estimations with

fixed school effects identify the causal effects of school-to-work programs may be overly strong. We had

hoped to obtain complementary evidence using information on school-to-work programs offered by schools to

construct an instrumental variable for individual participation. To our surprise, though, school offerings had

no predictive power for individual participation. This is disappointing, because school-to-work offerings

seems like a good candidate for an instrumental variable approach. But it is also a curious result that merits

further investigation. As an alternative, we have implemented an instrumental variable estimator based on

school-to-work participation by other survey members in the same school as the respondent; to a large extent,

this estimator did not provide decisive evidence. Second, this lack of correspondence between the information

on school-to-work programs reported by individuals and that reported by schools raises some questions about

the overall quality of the data, including the individual-level data on which we rely in this paper. We have



                                                       30
presented some evidence, however, suggesting that the individual-level data on school-to-work participation

correspond to expected patterns across school types and school programs. Finally, most of our evidence

concerns subjective probabilities of future events. It remains to future research to see how well these results

for subjective expectations accord with actual behavior.




                                                       31
                                                References

Bassi, Laurie J., and Jens Ludwig. 1999. "School-to-Work Programs in. the United States: A Multi-Firm Case
Study of Training, Benefits, and Costs." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 53, No. 2, January, pp.
2 19-39.

Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce. 1990. America's Choice: High Skills or Low Wages
(Rochester, NY: National Center on Education and the Economy).

Gardecki, Rosella, and David Neumark. 1998. "Order from Chaos? The Effects of Early Labor Market
Experiences on Adult Labor Market Outcomes." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 51, No. 2,
January, pp. 299-322.

Glazer, Nathan. 1993. "A Human Capital Policy for the Cities." The Public Interest, No. 112, Summer, pp.
27-49.

Hamilton, Stephen. 1990. Apprenticeshin for Adulthood (New York: The Free Press).

Hausman, Jerry A. 1978. "Specification Tests in Econometrics." Econometrica, Vol.46, No.6, pp. 1251-71.

Heckman, James. 1993. "Assessing Clinton's Program on Job Training, Workfare, and Education in the
Workplace." NBER Working Paper No. 4428, August.

Heckman, James, Robert LaLonde, and Jefftey Smith. 1999. "The Economics and Econometrics of Active
Labor Market Programs." In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics. Volume
3 (Amsterdam: North Holland).

Hershey, Alan M., Marsha K. Silverberg, and Joshua Haimson. 1999. Expandina Options for Students: Report
to Con2ress on the National Evaluation of School-to-Work Implementation, Mathematica Policy Research,
Inc.

Joyce, Mary, and David Neumark. 1999. "School-to-Work Programs: How Prevalent Are They? Who
Participates in Them? What Schools Offer Them?" Mimeograph.

Lerman, Robert I., and Hilliard Pouncy. 1990. "The Compelling Case for Youth Apprenticeship." The Public
Interest, No. 101, Fall, pp.62-77.

Neumark, David. 1998. "Youth Labor Markets in the U.S.: Shopping Around vs. Staying Put." NBER
Working Paper No. 6581.

Stem, David, Neal Finkelstein, James R. Stone, John Latting, and Carolyn Domsife. 1994. "Research on
School-to-Work Transition Programs in the United States." National Center for Research in Vocational
Education, March.

Topel, Robert H., and Michael P. Ward. 1992. "Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men." Ouarterlv
Journal of Economics, Vol. CVII, No. 2, May, pp. 439-80.

United States General Accounting Office. 1990. PrenarinQ Noncollege Youth for Employment in the U.S. and
Foreiw Countries, May.
Table 1: Sample construction
                                                                     Number of      Number of observations
                                                                     observations     with eligibility for
                                                                                     expectation questions
  (1)   Total observations in NLSY97                                    8984                 3565
        Condition on STW information
 (2)    Eligible for STW questions                                      4489                  3392
 (3)    Valid answer for STW participation question                     4471                  3377
 (4)    (3) with valid answer for hours spent on STW question           4454                  3364
 (5)    (3) with valid answer for most recent STW category              4456                  3367
        question
 (6)    Sample with valid answer for hours spent on STW                 4439                  3354
        question and most recent STW category question
 (7)    (6) with valid answer regarding wage payment for STW            4439                  3354
        program
        Condition on explanatory variables
  (8)   (7) with demographic variables                                  4389                  3318
  (9)   (8) with student achievement variables                          4340                  3284
 (10)   (9) with parents' interview conducted                           3798                  2910
 (ii)   (1.0) with household gross income                               3049                  2322
 (12)    (ii) with parents' education                                   3048                  2321
 (13)    (12) with school information                                   2734                  2079
         Condition on outcome variables
 (14)    (13) with valid hours of work including zero hours of          2730                  2076
         work
 (15)    (13) with work experience and data on both hourly rate of      1223                  1055
         compensation and usual hours of work per week
 (16)    (13) with data on tests taken                                  2703                  2054
 (17)    (13) with complete work and schooling expectations data        2036                  2036
         Condition on multiple observations within school
 (18)    (14) with multiple observations within school                  2174                  1655
 (19)    (15) with  multiple observations within  school                 988                   856
 (20)    (16) with multiple observations within school                  2149                  1635
 (21)    (17) with multiple observations within school                  1625                  1625
Notes: The questions about tests are asked only of respondents whose highest grade attended is nine or higher.
The questions about work and schooling expectations were asked only of the respondents who were born in
1980 and 1981 (age on 12/31/96 was 15 or higher). The sample in line (10) also requires valid answers
regarding the relationship with parent or foster care provider.
Table 2: Descriptive statistics for demographic characteristics for Thu analysis sample
Variable name                                                            STW program           STW program
                                                                         non-participant        participant
Male                                                                          0.511                0.477
                                                                             (0.013)              (0.017)
White                                                                         0.772                0.748
                                                                             (0.010)              (0.014)
B. lack                                                                       0.128                0.156
                                                                             (0.008)              (0.011)
Native American                                                               0.004                0.009
                                                                             (0.002)              (0.003)
Asian                                                                         0.020                0.022
                                                                             (0.004)              (0.005)
Other race                                                                    0.075                0.065
                                                                             (0.006)              (0.008)
Hispanic                                                                      0.121                0.096
                                                                             (0.008)              (0.009)
Live with both biological parents at time of interview                        0.537                0.540
                                                                             (0.013)              (0.017)
Gross household income last year                                            53511.28             54302.48
                                                                           (1165.831)           (1423.586)
Household size                                                                4.242                4.258
                                                                             (0.035)              (0.045)
Father's highest grade completed
<=12                                                                          0.342                0.359
                                                                             (0.013)              (0.017)
>12                                                                           0.368                0.366
                                                                             (0.013)              (0.017)
Mother's highest wade completed
<=12                                                                          0.489                0.459
                                                                             (0.013)              (0.017)
>12                                                                           0.429                0.466
                                                                             (0.013)              (0.017)
N                                                                              1723                 1011
Notes: "Full analysis sample" refers to the sample in line (13) of Table 1.   Standard errors of means   are
reported in parentheses. Estimates are weighted.
 Table 3 Descriptive statistics for school information for full anaLysis sample
Variable name                                                 STW program non-             STW program
                                                                   participant              participant
                                                                           Full analysis sample
School size
<100                                                                  0.001                    0.001
                                                                    (0.001)                  (0.001)
100-299                                                               0.041                    0.035
                                                                     (0.005)                  (0.006)
300-499                                                               0.083                    0.097
                                                                    (0.007)                  (0.010)
500-749                                                               0.140                    0.129
                                                                     (0.009)                 (0.011)
750-999                                                               0.108                    0.103
                                                                     (0.008)                  (0.011)
1000+                                                                 0.627                    0.634
                                                                     (0.013)                  (0.017)
Student-teacher ratio
<14                                                                   0.233                    0.247
                                                                     (0.011)                  (0.015)
14-17                                                                 0.362                    0.365
                                                                     (0.013)                  (0.017)
18-2 1                                                                0.234                    0.228
                                                                     (0.011)                  (0.014)
22+                                                                   0.172                    0.160
                                                                     (0.010)                  (0.013)
School program
General                                                               0.59!                    0.501
                                                                     (0.013)                  (0.017)
College preparatory, academic, or specialized academic                0.338                    0.343
                                                                     (0.012)                  (0.01
Vocational technical or business and career                           0.025                    0.071
                                                                     (0.004)                  (0.009)
Combination academic and vocational program                           0.040                    0.077
                                                                     (0.005)                  (0.009)
Special education                                                     0.004                    0.002
                                                                     (0.002)                  (0.002)
Other                                                                 0.003                    0.006
                                                                     (0.001)                  (0.002)
School type
Public                                                                0.965                    0.967
                                                                     (0.005)                  (0.006)
Technical or vocational high school                                   0.007                    0.012
                                                                     (0.002)                  (0.004)
Catholic school                                                       0.0 19                   0.0 16
                                                                     (0.004)                  (0.004)
Private school - other religious affiliation                          0.005                     N/A
                                                                     (0,002)
Private school - no religious affiliation                             0.002                    0.002
                                                                     (0.001)                  (0.002)
School level
Middle school! intermediate school/junior high school                 0.047                    0.037
                                                                     (0.005)                  (0.007)
High school                                                           0.953                    0.963
                                                                     (0.005)                  (0.007)
N                                                                   1723                     1011
 Notes: See   notes to   Table 2.
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for potential outcomes for analysis samples
Variable name                                                            STW program      STW program
                                                                        non-participant    participant
Sample (13)
Enrolled regular school                                                     0.964            0.975
                                                                           (0.005)          (0.005)
N                                                                            1723            1011
Sample with valid hours data (14)

Employed @ositive hours)                                                    0.487            0.5 15
                                                                           (0.013)          (0.017)
Usual hours worked per week (including zeros)                                8.9 15          9.356
                                                                           (0.333)          (0.459)
N                                                                            1722            1008
Sample with working experience (15)
Hourly rate of compensation                                                546.228          561.357
                                                                           (10.497)         (19.479)
Usual hours of work per week                                                18.434            18.167
                                                                            (0.469)          (0.656)
N                                                                             729              494
Sample with test-taking behavior (16)
Take SAT or ACT examination                                                 0.167            0.223
                                                                           (0.010)          (0.014)
Take Advanced Placement test                                                0.054            0.072
                                                                           (0.006)          (0.009)
N                                                                            1702             1001
Sample with complete data on expectation (17)
Subjective probability (1.00% scale) of being in regular school one        94.029           93.863
year later                                                                 (0.619)          (0.877)

Subjective probability of working more than 20 hours per week one          58.658           63.623
year later if respondent is in school                                      (1.021)          (1.291)

Subjective probability of working more than 20 pa week next year           83.090           84.445
if respondent is not in school                                             (0.826)          (1.015)

Subjective probability of obtaining high school diploma by age 20          95.152           96.381
                                                                           (0.462)          (0.547)
Subjective probability of obtaining four-year college degree by age        74.174           74.894
30                                                                         (0.963)          (1.247)

Subjective probability of working more than 20 hours per week at           94.127           95.415
age of 30                                                                  (0.414)          (0.411)
N                                                                            1225             761
Notes: Analysis sample numbers are given in Table 1. See notes to Table 2.
Table 5: Contemporaneous outcomes
Dependent variable            Enrollment       Employment      Usual hours    Usual hours     Log hourly
                               in regular                      worked per      worked per        wage
                                 school                           week           week           (cents)
                                                                              (conditional)
Mean of dependentvariable           0.968          0.459          8.525          18.613         6.188
(levels)
OLS (Demographic controls)
Participation in STW                0.011          0.067          1.176          -0.305        -0.019
                                   (0.007)        (0.02!)        (0.506)        (0.716)        (0.034)
R2                                  0.007          0.048          0.027           0.019         0.009
OLS (Full controls)
Participation in STW                0.010          0.050          0.983          -0.085         -0.011
                                   (0.006)        (0.020)        (0.474)        (0.676)        (0.036)
R2                                  0.062          0.146          0.137           0.129         0.071
Random effects (ULS)
Participation in STW                0.008          0.046          0.922          -0.123        -0.011
                                   (0.007)        (0.020)        (0.471)        (0.676)        (0.036)
Fixed effects (OLS)
Participation in 51W                0.001          0.013          0.139          -1.883         0.067
                                   (0.007)        (0.029)        (0.691)        (1.255)        (0.066)
Robust Hausman tests
Single coefficient, F-statistic        3.36          3.86             3.13          2,13           3.54
P-value for F-statistic              (0.067)        (0.050)          (0.077)       (0.145)        (0.060)
Observations                          2734           2730             2730          1223           1223
Notes: For the OLS estimates, standard errors robust against heteroscedasticity and sample clustering are
reported 'at parentheses. The demographic controls include dummy variables for male, race (white, black,
and Native American/Asian/other), Hispanic ethnicity, and dummy variables for current grade (11 and 12
combined). The region dummy variables are at the level of four Census jegions; an urban dummy variable
is also included. Controls for student achievement includes dummy variables for grades received in eighth
grade. (The availabl.e categories are: mostly below D's; mostly D's; about half C's and half D's; mostly
C's; about halfB's and half C's; mostly B's; about half A's andhalfb's; mostly A's; and A's to C's).
Family background controls include dummy variables for whether the respondent lives with both biological
parents at the time of interview, whether the parent who responds to the survey is born in U.S., whether a
parent speaks a language other than English at home, and both father's and mother's highest grade
completed (using as categories 9-11, 12, some college, college degree, and any postgraduate education), as
well as variables measuring household gross income last year, household size, number of household
members aged less than 18, and number of household members aged less than six. School characteristics
include school size, school type, and level (middle or high school).
Table 6: Subjective expectations for following year
Dependent variable                        In regular     Work more than 20        Work more than 20
                                            school        hour per week if        hours per week if
                                                         remains in school          leaves school
Mean of dependent variable                  93.790             61.086                   82.442
OLS (Demographic controls)
Participation in SIW                         0.787              5.81 7                   2.645
                                            (0.962)            (1.495)                  (1.288)
R2                                           0.009              0.022                    0.013
OLS (Full controls)
Participation in 51W                         1.020              5.205                    2.733
                                            (0.962)            (1.501)                  (1.272)
R2                                           0.074              0.103                    0.050
Random effects (OLS)
Participation in 51W                         0.426              5.048                    2.733
                                            (0.982)            (1.490)                  (1.272)
Fixed effects (OLS)
Participation in STW                         -1.744             4.817                    3.225
                                            (1.520)            (2.451)                 (2.145)
Robust Hausman tests
Single coefficient, F-statistic                8.36           0.07                      0.13
P-value for F-statistic                       (0.004)        (0.788)                   (0.723)
Observations                                   2036           2036                      2036
Notes: Responses are measured as the percentage chance of event. See notes to Table 5 for details
regarding control variables, estimation, etc.
Table 7: College testing
Dependent variable                                    SAT or ACT             AP
Mean of dependent variable                              0.181               0.057
OLS (Demographic controls)
Participation in STW                                      0.067             0.023
                                                         (0.016)           (0.010)
R2                                                        0.013             0.008
 OLS (Full controls)
Participation in STW                                      0.057             0.021
                                                         (0.016)           (0.010)
R2                                                        0.054             0.036

Random effects (GLS)
Participation in STW                                      0.053             0.020
                                                         (0.015)           (0.010)
Fixed effects (OLS)
Participation in STW                                      0.043             0.01.5
                                                         (0.023)          (0.016)
Robust Hausman tests
Single coefficient, F-statistic                            0.36             0.17
P-value for F-statistic                                  (0.549)          (0.676)
Observations                                              2703              2703
Notes: See notes to Table 5 for details regarding control variables, estimation, etc.
 Table 8: College testing and subjective probability of obtaining a four-year college
 degree by age 30
Dependent variable                             Four-year college        Four-year college
                                                     degree by              degree by
                                                      age30                  age30
Mean of dependent variable                            74.043
OLS (Demographic controls)
SAT or ACT                                             4.580
                                                      (1.552)
AP                                                                            7.275
                                                                             (2.460)
ft2                                                    0.043                  0.042
OLS (Full controls)
SAT or ACT                                             2.838
                                                      (1.465)
AP                                                                            2.516
                                                                             (2.475)
R2                                                     0.250                  0.249
Random effects (GLS)
SAT or ACT                                             2.838
                                                      (1.465)
AP                                                                            2.516
                                                                             (2.475)
Fixed effects (OLS)
SAT or ACT                                             2.562
                                                      (2.746)
AP                                                                            0.902
                                                                             (4.069)
Robust Hausman tests
Single coefficient, F-statistic                        0.05                     0.22
P-value for F-statistic                              (0.819)                  (0.640)
Observations                                          2012                     2012
 Notes: See notes to Table 5 for detailsregarding control variables, estimation, etc.
 Table 9: Subjective probabilities regarding schooling and work at ages 20 and 30
Dependent variable                      High school        Four-year      Work more than
                                         diploma by      college degree     20 hours per
                                           age20            byage3O         weekatage3O
Mean of dependent variable                 94919             73831              93.716
OLS (Demographic controls)
Participation in STW                        1.917             1.732              1.753
                                           (0.722)           (1.348)            (0.639)
R'                                          0.027             0.040              0.027
OLS (Full controls)
Participation in STW                        1.545             1.234              1.897
                                           (0.701)           (1.214)            (0.644)
R2                                          0.127             0.248              0.071
Random effects (ULS)
Participation in STW                        1.440             1.234              1.944
                                           (0.722)           (1.214)            (0.647)
Fixed effects (OLS)
Participation in STW                        0.634             0.030              2.149
                                           (1.197)           (2.229)            (1.080)
Robust Hausman tests
Single coefficients, F-statistic             1.81              1.91               0.14
P-value for F-statistic                    (0.179)           (0.167)            (0.7 10)
Observations                                2036              2036                2036
 Notes: See notes to Table 5 for details regarding control variables, estimation, etc.
  Table 10: Hours spent at work site for each category of STW, based on most recent STW participation
       Type of STW               Proportion with hours     Mean hours     N     Mean hours spent at work site   N
                                 spent at work site = 0   spent at work          (conditional on hours> 0)
                                                               site
      Job shadowing                      0.081               16.495       260              17.940               236
                                        (0.017)              (2.996)                      (3.245)

        Mentoring                        0.413              20.657        83              35.216                46
                                        (0.062)             (5.067)                       (7.673)
   Cooperative education                 0.342               47.518       104              72.225                4
                                        (0.052)             (16.771)                      (24.771)

  School-based enterprise                0.388              22.339        172              36.503               104
                                        (0.041)             (6.557)                       (10.439)

         Tech prep                       0.625               61.741       159              164.517              58
                                        (0.043)             (3 1.674)                     (81.970)

Apprenticeship or internship             0.408               111.447      66               188.230              36
                                        (0.069)             (33.681)                      (51.929)
           Other                         0.145               1&987        167             22.198                141
                                        (0.029)             (3.226)                       (3.710)
  Notes: See notes to Table 2.
 Table 11: Effect of STW participation on outcome by hours intensity of STW type
               Enrollment Employment Usual hours                 Usual hours     Log hourly              In regular    Work more than 20
                in regular                    worked per     worked per week       wage                   school        hour per week if
                  school                        week            (conditional)                                          remains in school
                    (1)             (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)               (7)
 Low              -0.007           0.011               0.775            -0.923             0.062          -2.272             7.120
 intensity        (0.014)         (0.039)             (0.665)           (0987)            (0.089)         (2.072)           (2.041)
 Moderate          0.007           0.002               1.310             0.639             0.025          -0.515             4551
 intensity        (0.012)         (0.042)             (0.712)           (1.014)           (0.080)         (2.076)           (2.162)

 High              0.006           0.038               0.570             0.295             0.133          -2.950             1.985
 intensity        (0.021)         (0.054)             (0.850)           (1.160)           (0.117)         (3.167)           (2.427)
 Estimator          FE              FE                 RE                 RE                 FE             FE                RE
 1-lausman         2.83            2.76                1.82              1.26               2.74           3.32              0.86
 (p-value)        (0.037)         (0.041)             (0.142)           (0.288)           (0.004)         (0.019)           (0.463)
 N                 2734            2730                2736              1223              1223            2036              2036

                Work more than         SAT or ACT               Al'        High school             Four-year college   Work more than 20
               20 hours per week                                        diploma by age 20          degree by age 30    hours per week at
                if leaves school                                                                                            age 30
                       (8)                    (9)               (10)              (11)                   (12)                 (13)
 Low                  3,265                  0.043             0.008             2.278                  4.011                2.682
 intensity           (1.673)                (0.021)           (0.013)           (0.777)                 (3.114)             (0.778)
 Moderate             1.416                  0.050             0.028             1.396                  -0.451                1.315
 intensity           (1.880)                (0.023)           (0.016)           (1.052)                 (3.117)              (0.935)

 High                 3.841                  0.076             0.026             -0.092                 -8.547                1.578
 intensity           (2.191)                (0.031)           (0.018)           (1.515)                 (4.542)              (1.215)
 Estimator               RE                    RE              RE                 RE                       FE                      RE
 1-lausman               1.47                  1.08           0.62               1.42                     4.29                     1.46
  (p-value)            (0.222)               (0.358)         (0.600)           (0.234)                   (0.005)                 (0.225)
 N                      2036                  2703            2703               2036                     2036                    2036
Notes: See notes to Table 5 regarding estimation, control variables, sample, etc. Only the specifications with the thIl set of controls are
reported. The row labeled "estimator" indicates whether fixed effects (FE) or random effects (RE) estimates are reported. The Flausman
test statistics reported are for the null hypothesis that random effects is the correct specification. Fixed effect estimates are reported
instead of random effects estimates when the p-value from the Hausman test was less than 0.1. The reported Hausman statistics are
robust against heteroscedasticity. The hours categories are as follows (see Table 10): low intensity (job shadowing and other); moderate
intensity (mentoring, cooperative education, and school-based enterprise); high intensity (tech prep and apprenticeship or internship).
The estimates in columns (l)-(5) correspond to Table 5, those in columns (6)-(8) correspond to Table 6, those in colunms (9)-(l0)
correspond to Table 7, and those in columns (1 1)-( 13) correspond to Table 9.
Table 12: Relationship between respondent reports of participation. in school-to-work programs and
school reports of offering school-to-work programs (missing value in school survey treated as not
offered)
                                                  School offers STW            Pearson chi-square, p-value
                                          No (column %)       Yes (column %)
  Respondeot participation in STW   No        64.29                62.10
                                    Yes       35.71                37.90                 0,241
                                     N         1136               1598

Data based on "ever mrticiruted"
     Excluding "other" category     No        73.40              71.90
                                    Yes       26.60              28.10                   0.386
                                    N         1154                1580

           Job shadowing            No        88.44              84.85
                                    Yes       11.56               15.15                  0.013
                                    N         2041                693

             Mentoring              No        94.93              93.93
                                    Yes       5.07                6.07                   0.393
                                    N         2306                428

        Cooperative education       No        92.58              93.72
                                    Yes       7.42                6.28                   0.263
                                    N         1778                956

       School-based enterprise      No        91.31              87.88
                                    Yes       8.69               12.12                   0.042
                                    N         2404                330

              Tech prep             No        91.69              92.13
                                    Yes        8.3!               7.87                   0.691
                                     N        1806                928

     Apprenticeship or internship   No        95.78              96.03
                                    Yes       4.22                3.97                   0.793
                                    N         2180                554

Data based on "most recent"
participation
             Job shadowijig         No        91.23              88.31
                                    Yes       8.77                11.69                  0.02 4
                                    N         2041                693

             Mentoring              No        97.09              96.26
                                    Yes       2.91                3.74                   0.3 56
                                    N         2306                428

       Cooperative education        No        95.73              97.07
                                    Yes       4.27                2.93                   0.079
                                    N         1778                956

       School-based enterprise      No        94.01              91.52
                                    Yes        5.99               8.48                   0.0 80
                                     N        2404                330

              Tech prep             No        94.35              93.86
                                    Yes       5.65                6.14                   0.60 1
                                    N         1806                928

    Apprenticeship or internship    No        97.61              97.47
                                    Yes        2.39               2.53                   0.846
                                     N        2180                554
Table 13: Descriptive statistics for school inform ation for frill analysis sample
Variable name                                          STW participation rate         N
                                                          (youth response)
School nroram
General                                                         0.332                1581
                                                               (0.0 13)
College preparatory, academic, or                               0.373                859
specialized academic                                           (0.018)
Vocational technical or business and career                     0.628                126
                                                               (0.050)
Combination academic and vocational                             0.534                145
program                                                        (o.o4e
Special education                                               0.250                 9
                                                               (0.153)
Other                                                           0.532                 14
                                                               (0.157)
School type
Public                                                          0.371                2651
                                                               (0.0 10)
Technical or vocational high school                             0.490                 29
                                                               (0.104)
Catholic school                                                 0.331                 41
                                                               (0.07
Private school . other religious affiliation                      0                   8

Private school - no religious affiliation                       0.383                 5
                                                               (0.2 16)
Notes: See notes to Table 2.
Table 14: Effect of STW participation on outcome using "Jackknife" W estimation
                          Enrollment Employment            Usual      Usual hours                    Log               In       Work more than 20
                           in regular                      hours      worked per                    hourly        regular        hour per week if
                              school                      worked           week                     wage          school        remains in school
                                                         per week    (conditional)
OLS (Full controls)
Participation in STW          0.002          0.042         0.827          -0.282                    -0.019        -0.100              6.374
                             (0.009)        (0.022)       (0.526)        (0.741)                    (0.040)       (1.105)            (1.687)
R2                            0.052          0.161         0.146          0.128                      0.081         0.074              0.113
Iv'
Participation hi STW             0.024            0.232           5.449            4235             -0.494         9.294             24.082
                                (0.052)          (0.163)         (4.330)           (6.188)          (0.256)       (7.593)           (12.915)
First-stage F-statistic           19.35           19.47           19.47             11.87            11.87         18.44              18.44
                                (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.001)          (0.000)       (0.000)            (0.000)
T-statistic for                  -0.422           -1.232          -1.138            -0.785           2.182        -1.299             -1.52
exogeneitytest                  (0.673)          (0.218)         (0.256)           (0.433)          (0.030)       (0.194)            (0.128)
fV2
Participation in STW              0.022           0.1%           4.114             2.532            -0.472        10.719             24.527
                                (0.050)          (0.164)         (4.102)           (5.537)          (0.249)       (7.776)           (13.357)
First-stage F-statistic           18.45           18.68           18.68             11.78            11.78          17.00             17.00
                                (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.000)            (0.000)
T-statistic for                 -0.399           -0.984          -0.844            -0.539            2.106         -1.474            -1.514
exogeneitvtest                  (0.690)          (0.326)         (0.399)           (0.590)          (0.036)       (0.151)            (0.131)
N                                 2176            2174            2174              988              988              1625            1625


                               Work more           SAT or ACT             AP        High school          Four-year            Work more than 20
                              than 20 hours                                        diploma by age      college degree        hours per week at age
                                perweekif                                      .            20             byage3o                    30
                               leaves school
OLS (Full controls)
Participation in STW               1.980                0.058         0.024            0.465                  0.676                  1.292
                                  (1.442)              (0.017)       (0.011)          (0.808)                (1.370)                (0.720)
R2                                    0.061             0.061         0.039            0.120                  0.258                  0.082
WI
Participation in STW               -14.145               0.129        0.065           -3.604                  3.627                 -4.307
                                  (10.827)             (0.133)       (0.080)          (5.940)                (9.983)                (5.234)
First-stageF-statistic              18.44                18.75        18.75            18.44                  18.44                  18.44
                                   (0.000)             (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
T-statisticfor                      1.622               -0.544       -0.517            0.707                 -0.301                 1.118
exogeneity test                    (0.105)             (0.587)       (0.605)          (0.480)                (0.764)                (0.264)
IV 2
ParticipationinSTW                -13.711               0.121        0.100            -3.669                  0.031                 -4.539
                                  (11.057)             (0.135)       (0.081)          (6.279)              (10.128)                 (5.336)
First-stage F-statistic               17.00              17.80        17.80            17.00                 17.00                   17.00
                                  (0.000)              (0.000)       (0.000)          (0.000)               (0.000)                 (0.000)
T-statistic for                       1.543             -0.472       -0.961            0682                  0.064                  1149
exogeneity test                   (0.123)              (0.637)       (0.337)          (0.496)               (0.949)                 (0.251)
N                                 1625             2149           2149            1625                  1625                   1625
Notes: See notes to Table 5 regarding estimation, control variables, sample. etc. The t-stati stics for testing exogeneity are from
the Hausman test of the null hypothesis that school-to-work participation is exogenous. All standard errors (and therefore also
the Hausman test) are robust against heteroscedasticity and clustering "IV 1" is the "jackknife" mean of school-to-work
participation within school, defined as
          ivi = 1/(N          —
                                  1) STWkJ.
where i indexes   individuals and j indexes schools. "IV 2" is calculated similarly, but for the residual      of the first-stage
regression, which removes    the influence of other characteristics on school-to-work participation, or
         IV21 = 1/(N1 — 1) 2k,j'
                                       k#i
where     is residual of the first-stage regression.
