                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             INSTITUTIONS, RESTRUCTURING,
                          AN]) MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE


                                        Ricardo J. Caballero
                                       Mohamad L. T-Tammour



                                         Working Paper 7720
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7720



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2000




Invited lecture, XII World Congress of the International Economic Association, 25 August, 1999, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research..

   2000 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Mohamad L. Hammour. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
Institutions, Restructuring, and Macroeconomic Performance
Ricardo J. Caballero and Mohamad L. T-Tammour
NBER Working Paper No. 7720
May 2000
JEL No. E00, G34, J3, J4, 03

                                            ABSTRACT

       A growing body of new research has emphasized the macroeconomic consequences of
transactional impediments in factor markets, and their role in the recurrent restructuring requirements
of modem economies. We first review the function institutional arrangements play in facilitating
transactions and explore the macroeconomic consequences of poor institutions. As an application,
we discuss the lessons that can be learnt from observed changes in the nature of unemployment in
Europe. We then analyze the effect the institutional environment can have on macroeconomic
restructuring. In light of this framework we revisit the question of the relationship between
recessions and restructuring activity, and review the recent evidence of reduced restructuring
following recessions. We also discuss corroborating evidence from "merger waves" in the
restructuring of corporate assets.


Ricardo J. Caballero                                           Mohamad L. T-Tammour
Department of Economics                                        DELTA
MIT                                                            48, Boulevard Jourdan
E52-252g                                                       75014 Paris
50 Memorial Drive                                              FRANCE
Cambridge, MA 02139                                            and CEPR
and NBER                                                       hammour@delta.ens.fr
caball@mit.edu
 "The American economy, clearly more than most, is in the grip of what... Joseph
Schuinpeter many years ago called "creative destruction," the continuous process by
which emerging technologies push out the old... It presupposes a continuous churning of
an economy as the new displaces the old... How is this remarkable economic machine to
be maintained? ... [TJechnological advances alone will not buttress the democratic
institutions, supported by a rule of law, which are so essential to our dynamic and
vigorous American economy... Institutions are needed that give free play to the inventive
capacities of people and effectively promote the translation of conceptual innovations
into increased output of goods and services that are the 4feblood of material progress."
—Alan Greenspan (1999)




                                                                                       2
1. INTRODUCTION: TOWARD A "STRUCTURAL" MACROECONOMICS


1.1. Institutions and Restructuring

The core mechanism that drives economic growth in modern market economies is the

massive ongoing restructuring and factor reallocation by which new technologies replace

the old. This process of Schumpeterian "creative destruction" permeates major aspects of

macroeconomic performance — not only long-run growth, but also economic fluctuations

and the functioning of factor markets. At the microeconomic level, restructuring demands

innumerable decisions to create or destroy production units. The efficiency of those

decisions hinges on the existence of sound institutions that provide a proper transactional

framework. Failure along this dimension can have dire macroeconomic consequences. By

limiting the economy's ability to tap new technological opportunities and adapt to a

changing environment, institutional failure can result in dysfunctional factor markets,

economic stagnation, and exposure to deep crises.

       A growing body of new macroeconomic research, which is the subject of this

chapter, has emphasized the macroeconomic consequences of transactional impediments

in factor markets, and their role in the recurrent restructuring requirements of modern

economies. This literature has added a body of analysis and evidence to the
macroeconomist's toolkit that proved central in addressing many of the major
macroeconomic developments of the last decade — which raised issues of little relation to

the profession's continuing internal debates on nominal rigidities and the role of

technology shocks. Many post-communist Eastern European economies have seen their

great potential for restructuring and growth catch-up stifled by an under-developed legal

and institutional environment. In Western Europe, the weight of labour-market regulation


                                                                                         3
has caused persistently high unemployment, and deprived significant segments of the

labour force from the fruits of economic growth. The recent emerging markets crisis

exposed the fragility of economic systems that suffer from a lack of transparency and lax

corporate governance standards. The prolonged U.S. expansion of the 1990s reflects the

powerful potential that technological progress and unshackled creative destruction can

reach under an effective institutional environment.

        For a prolonged period of time, post-war macroeconomics, driven by Keynesian

ideas, had built a dichotomy between the analysis of long-run growth and short-run

fluctuations. Long-run outcomes were essentially determined by a rather efficient supply

side, and short-run outcomes by a highly problematic demand side. Supply-side notions

of restructuring and creative destruction were considered essentially relevant to growth

theory (as exemplified by the vintage models of Johansen, 1959, and Solow, 1960), while
institutions — mostly price-setting institutions — were relevant for business cycles.

       This dichotomy placed severe limitations on the role restructuring and institutions

could play in macroeconomic analysis. Those themes had been at the core of much pre-

Keynesian thinking about aggregate economic phenomena, as exhibited in Schumpeter's

work on creative destruction, and have retained their centrality in international and

development economics. However, only recently did they regain strong theoretical and

empirical footholds in mainstream macroeconomics. The literature on persistently high

unemployment in Europe, for example, has made it clear that institutional obstacles are as

relevant for long-run equilibrium as they are for the short run. To take another example,

the literature that constructs and analyses high-frequency time series of gross job flows




                                                                                        4
(Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh, 1996) is essentially motivated by the importance of

restructuring at high frequencies.



1.2. A Common Thread: Specificity

There is a surprising degree of unity in the logic underlying analyses of institutions and

restructuring. Essentially, our macroeconomic models need to be made more "structural"

in a precise sense. The first modelling instinct is to assume that decisions are fully

flexible, but much of what happens in reality involves a degree of irreversibility. What

we need to introduce is the notion of speciciIy. Specificity means that factors of

production are not fungible. More precisely, we say that a factor is specific with respect

to a production arrangement — its current production relationship with other factors using

a given technology — when it would lose part of its value if used outside this arrangement.

Specificity introduces structure into the collection of production arrangements in the

economy.

        Figure 1 depicts the context within which specificity of different types arises in

factor markets. Starting with the upper box, consider an entrepreneur who needs to find

external financing for a project. Given the entrepreneur's informational advantage,

special expertise, and effective control over the project, external capital becomes partly

specific with respect to the entrepreneur once conunitted to the project. External
financiers would lose some of their investment's value if they part with the entrepreneur.

This gives rise to specificity in the financing relationship.




                                                                                         5
                                                                           1
                                                                      —I




                                       Outside Capital




                              Inside Capital I Management
                        II                                             II
                                                                       I




                                           Labour




                                                      Restructuring



                                        Technology


                               Figure 1 Specificity relations




   Moving down the figure, the entrepreneur next needs to hire labour. The resources he

invests in searching for workers, training them, and building organizational capital are
embodied in labour — both individually and as a group. Regulations may increase the

specificity of capital with respect to labour. The right to strike or legal protection against

dismissal, for example, effectively reduce the value of using capital outside its current

labour relationships. This collection of factors gives rise to specificity in the employment

relationship.




                                                                                            6
    Finally, moving to the bottom of the figure, the entrepreneur dedicates the project's

resources to producing a certain range of goods using a certain process, and therefore

builds specificity with respect to a certain technology — understood in its broadest sense.

    The project, therefore, gives rise to two types of specificity: "relationship specificity"

that characterizes financial or labour market relationships; and "technological

specificity," that characterizes production choices. Relationship specificity forms the

underpinning of what institutional arrangements are about; technological specificity

forms the underpinning of what restructuring is about. Most of the time, both are present

simultaneously and interact in important ways.

    It should be emphasized that the shift toward a more structural model has affected

empirical as well as theoretical macroeconomics. We have already referred to what is

perhaps the most notable empirical example of this shift: the extraordinary effort that has

gone into reconstructing labour-market aggregates so as to distinguish between the gross

job creation and destruction components of uet employment change. This effort would be

pointless if labour were fully fungible.



1.3. Outline

In this chapter, we attempt to describe the general principles at work in this structural

type of macroeconomics, derive some of the lessons we have learned, and illustrate the

usefulness of this approach with a number of applications. We do not attempt to provide a

survey of the vast existing literature.

        In section 2, we explore the function institutional arrangements play in facilitating

transactions and give an overview of the macroeconomic consequences of poor



                                                                                              7
institutions. As an application, we discuss the underpinnings of the European

unemployment problem and the lessons that can be drawn from the phases of its
evolution.

       hi section 3, we turn to the effect that the institutional environment can have on

macroeconomi.c restructuring. hi light of our framework, we revisit the question of the

relationship between recessions and restructuring activity, and review the surprising

evidence of reduced restructuring following recessions. We also discuss corroborating

evidence from "merger waves" in the restructuring of corporate assets.

       Section 4 summarizes the main points of the chapter.



2. INSTITUTIONS AND MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

2.1. Why Institutions?

Before we can explore the relation between institutions and macroeconomic outcomes,

we must take a step back to discuss the role institutions play in economic transactions.

   Institutional arrangements are mechanisms that help address the problems that arise

from the need to cooperate. Consider two factors of production that can either produce

independently in an autarkic mode, or cooperate in a joint-production mode. This is

illustrated in figure 2. hi the context of the financing relationship, our two factors are

outside capital on one hand, and inside capital or management on the other. In the context

of the employment relationship, our two factors are labour and capital. Autarky for labour

may correspond to producing in an informal sector where there is little need for capital,

retiring from the labour force, or joining the unemployment pool. Autarky for capital may

mean investment abroad, or consumption rather than saving.




                                                                                           S
                                     Factors 1 and2

                                    Joint Production




                                                           Factor 2

                                                           Autarky


                           Figure 2 Autarky and cooperation




   The main problem with cooperation is that it involves some irreversibility, some

degree of specificity of one factor with respect to the other. This gives rise to specific

quasi-rents. A generic account of the way such quasi-rents arise is the standard "hold-

up" problem (Klein, Crawford and Aichian, 1978). While the terms of trade between the

two factors may be competitive before they commit to joint production, they will find

themselves in a bilateral monopoly situation ex post. The specific quasi-rents thus created

become appropriable, and will have to be divided.2

   Ideally, each factor should pre-comnñt to getting a share of the quasi-rents
commensurate with its ex-ante terms of trade. This arrangement would preserve the cx-

ante competitive terms of trade and guarantee transactional efficiency. But such pre-

commitment is often problematic. The factor may have or acquire an informational

advantage that would be tempting to exploit; its commitment may not be enforceable in

court; or the contingencies that the contract in question would need to address may be



                                                                                         9
hopelessly complex. The rules that govern the process by which specific rents are created.

and divided typically reflect, in their limitations, the problematic nature of pre-
commitment, and result in less-than-efficient outcomes. We refer to those rules, be they

the result of a private or a social contract, as "institutional" arrangements.

    Examples of the institutions that govern transactions in financial markets are

corporate governance arrangements, financial accounting and auditing rules, debt

covenants, or bankruptcy procedures. Examples of labour-market institutions are the

tenure profile of wages, dismissal rules and procedures, or the regulations that govern

collective action.

    Institutions play two distinct functions: efficiency and redistribution. It is naïve to

think that markets can generally function properly without an adequate institutional

framework. In their efficiency role, the basic principle that determines institutions is that

each factor ought to get out the social value of what they put in — i.e., absent any

externalities, their ex-ante terms of trade. It is equally naive to think that such institutions,

being partly determined in the political arena, will not also be used as an instrument in

the politics of redistribution. A poor institutional framework is the result of a combination

of under-development in the realm of contracting and regulations and of overly powerful

political interest groups who have tilted the institutional balance excessively in their
favour.



2.2. Macroeconomic Symptoms of Poor Institutions

A highly developed institutional framework that is relatively insulated from political

tinkering can bring the economy close to its first-best efficient outcome. But what



                                                                                              10
happens when institutions are poor? At this level of generality, it may seem that not much

can be said. However, because the basic problem is common, one of unprotected

specificity, a set of robust generic conclusions arises. When the hold-up problem is not

resolved at the microeconomic level, it gives rise to a highly inefficient macroeconomic

"solution" that is characterized by a number of symptoms (see Caballero and Hammour,

1998 a).

    At the level of individual interactions, a poor institutional environment discourages

cooperation between factors of production. k equilibrium, this results in under-

employment, market-segmentation and technological exclusion of the "appropriating"

factor. We explore those consequences in the context of the simple framework outlined in

figure 2, and illustrate the.m with the example of institutional failure in the labour market.

More specifically, we assume that, starting from an efficient outcome, heavy regulation is

introduced that gives an excessively strong advantage to labour in the employment

relationship. In terms of figure 2, we consider that autarky for labour corresponds to

unemployment and autarky for capital corresponds to investment in the international

financial marketplace.

   The macroeconomic symptoms of poor institutions are multi-faceted:

i) Reduced cooperation. The partial-equilibrium effect of poor institutions, by
   definition, is that one of the factors no longer gets its ex-ante terms of trade at the

   margin. We refer to this factor as the "appropriated" factor, and to the other one as the

   "appropriating" factor. The appropriated factor will be reluctant to enter into

   cooperative relationships. In our labour-market example, the introduction of heavy

   regulation shifts the ex-post terms of trade from capital to labour. At the margin,




                                                                                           11
   capital no longer gets a return commensurate with what is obtainable in international

   capital markets, and becomes reluctant to invest in new job creation.

ii) Under-employment. Naturally, in equilibrium, a factor will not accept to enter a new

   relationship knowing that its ex-post terms of trade will, fall short of its ex-ante

   position. The free-entry condition of the appropriated factor will determine the new

   equilibrium, where fewer relationships are formed in the joint-production sector. The

   result is a misallocation of resources characterized by under-employment in joint

   production of the appropriating factor. In the labour-market example, job creation

   will be insufficient and labour will be forced into an increasingly crowded

   unemployment pool. This weakens the outside option of labour in the employment

   relationship, and causes a terms-of-trade shift that helps restore equilibrium by raising

   the return on capital back to the level required by international markets. In this

   context, unemp].oyment is an endogenous equilibrium response through which the

   economic system takes back from labour some of the advantage it had acquired

   through regulation.

iii) The role of supply elasticities. The two factors' elasticities of supply into joint

   production are central determinants of the new equilibrium. This is easiest to see in a

   small-open-economy version of our labour-market example, where the supply
   elasticity of financial capital is infinite. In that case, the poor-institutions equilibrium

   exhibits the same return on investment as an efficient equilibrium — equal to the world

   interest rate. As far as new jobs are concerned, capital is not appropriable in

   equilibrium and unemployment will have to be high enough to reduce labour
   compensation to a level compatible with this outcome. The regulatory burden



                                                                                            12
   backfires, and its inefficiency cost is entirely born by labour. In contrast, suppose that

   the appropriated factor in our example is not financial capital but land. The supply of

   land is fully inelastic. Land has nowhere else to run, and will have to accept the lower

   returns induced by regulation. In that case,, the regulatory push will be much more

   successful, and will have much milder unemployment consequences. Generally

   speaking, the appropriated factor will be less appropriable in equilibrium the higher

   its supply elasticity is. This idea will play an important rol,e in our discussion of the

   changing face of unemployment in Europe.

iv) Market segmentation. We saw that, in partial equilibrium, poor institutions cause the

   appropriated factor to get less than its ex-ante terms of trade. As a counterpart, the

   other factor — the "appropriating" factor — can capture quasi-rents above its ex-ante

   terms of trade. This creates a rush out of autarky, but the catch is that too few units of

   the appropriated factor are willing to join in production. Indeed, as we saw
   previously, it is the free-entry condition of the appropriated factor that determines the

   general-equilibrium level of joint-production activity. As a result, the limited number

   of joint-production opportunities for the appropriating factor will be rationed. The

   market for the appropriating factor will be segmented, with those who are successful

   in accessing joint-production opportunities earning rents above what they can get in

   autarky; and the market for the appropriated' factor will clear. This rationing
   phenomenon is the direct result of the lack of contractual pre-commitment ability,

   which is the very root of institutional failure. In the labour-market example, the

   implication is that unemployment is involuntary. Concretely, the persistence of

   market segmentation is due to labour's inability to pre-commit not to exploit its



                                                                                          13
    regulatory advantage — e.g., its inability to wave its legal protection against dismissal,

    its right to collective action, or its right to receive a minimum wage.

v) Technological exclusion. Institutions also affect the direction of technological

    development. Suppose there is a choice of joint-production technology, with different

    factor proportions. Which factor determines the technology to be used? It is

    effectively the appropriated factor that does so, because the other factor, being

    rationed, is in no position to impose its terms. The appropriated factor will choose a

    technology that reduces its degree of specificity with respect to the other without

    being excessively inefficient. In the labour-market example, this will typically impl.y

    a partial exclusion of labour from joint production and will translate into capital

    deepening. Technology choice is an escape route for capital that provides an
    alternative to investment abroad, and weakens the position of labour further through

    increased unemployment and reduced labour compensation. It also implies that

    under-employment in joint production is not necessarily accompanied by under-
   investment.



2.3. Application: European Unemployment

As an application of the ideas presented above, we now turn to the European
unemployment problem, which represents many of the macroeconomic symptoms of

poor institutions. More particularly, we will concentrate on the representative case of

France. The analysis in this sub-section is based on Caballero and Hammour (l998b).

       Figure 3 summarizes three decades of French macroeconomic experience.3 Panel

(a) shows the well-known build-up of unemployment over the 1970s and l980s.



                                                                                          14
Although unemployment was rising for most of this period, its underlying nature had

been changing. One can distinguish between two distinct phases. In the first phase, which

lasted until the early eighties, the increase in unemployment was accompanied by brisk

wage increases (panel b), a rise in the labour-share of value added (panel c), and a fall in

the profit rate (panel d). Observers at - the time saw a clear case of "Classical

unemployment." In the second phase, the rise in unemployment was, to the contrary,

accompanied by a slowdown in wage growth and a fall in the labour share. As a

consequence, the interpretation of unemployment became Keynesian. Observers started

describing the situation as a "European depression." The problem is that the notion of a

Keynesian depression did not fit well with the brisk recovery in the profit rate. Labour

and capital had clearly parted company.

   A highly parsimonious account of the French experience can be constructed based on

the effect of an institutional push in favour of labour in face of a supply elasticity of

capital that differs in the short and in the long run. The institutional push is well

documented. There are indications that, until the late 1960s, labour had not shared evenly

in the fruits of post-war prosperity. This caused tensions to build up, which exploded with

the labour revolts of May 68. The resulting Grenelle accords started a process through

which labour gained significanfly i.n terms of union representation, wages, and the

workweek. Similar events took place elsewhere in Europe, most notably in Italy during

the Hot Autumn of 69.




                                                                                        15
          (a): Unemoloyment                       (d): Pro9t Rote




      (b): Log. ol Product Wages             (e): Capital/Output Ratio




           (a): Labor share                  (f): Real Interest Rates
                                       0

N
C


aJ

0

0
b

0
(a
at!            79   83    87   91   95 at7




                         Figure 3 France: 1967-95




                                                                         16
    The political momentum of the late sixties' labour movement continued into the

seventies. Following the oil shock of 1973, the agenda shifted to the regulatory protection

of existing jobs. In France, the labour movement reached its apex following the 1981

presidential election of François Mitterrand, when the Pro grarnine Commun coalition of

Socialists and Communists came to power. Over the next two years, an array of

regulations were put in place that covered wage increases, hours reduction, restrictions on

temporary work, employee representation, and the creation of public-sector jobs.

    The impact of this regulatory push during the first phase is best understood as

characterizing a situation where capital had few short-run options. Investment was sunk

and embodied a given labour intensity. Labour's gains during this period materialized in

the form of brisk wage growth during the 1970s, despite the two oil shocks. Corporate

profits plunged, and labour's share of value-valued rose. While the rise in unemployment

was to be expected. as a result of the oil shocks, the brisk pace of wage growth in a

recessionary period pointed to a more worrying prognosis.

    Over time, as new investment was needed to replace outdated capital, the picture

started to change. Uncommitted capital is very elastic. New investment must earn the rate

of return available in the, global economy. In the second phase, the reluctance to invest in

jobs under heavy labour regulation led to a further build-up in unemployment, which

induced wage moderation and permitted capital to earn the rates of return required by

markets. The profitability of capital recovered progressively. At the same time, the

technologies selected for new investments tended to economize on labour use, and the

capital-output ratio climbed (see figure 3, panel e). This led to further wage moderation

and higher unemployment. As a result of both wage moderation and higher capital



                                                                                         17
intensity, the labour share fell significantly below its initial level. Because of the high

long-run elasticity of capital, labour's initial regulatory gains backfired and caused that

factor ultimately to bear the bulk of the resulting inefficiency.

   In fact, the relationship between job protection — as one dimension of labour-market

regulation — and capital-labour substitution can be found more generally in the data. This

is shown in figure 4 for the OECD countries over the period i97O-9O.




                         cr, _________________
                         co                                                      -
                                                                    e            -
                 C,,
                                                  e                      e       -
                 =
                 0 CNJ-                                                          -

                 0
                 4-,
                 4-,
                  0
                  C—
                 n_         -             e           e         a
                  '         -                                   e
       -
                                       SS S               S
                         C\J-                             S
                            -                 S
                         C20     40         60                80 100 120 140
                                          K/L—grovvth c%J


                       Figure 4 Capital-labour substitution and job protection



   The ability of the institutional shift to account parsimoniously for the rich joint

dynamics of unemployment, wages, profits, and capital intensity in Europe over the past

three decades strongly supports the notion that institutions are the main culprit behind

persistent unemployment in Europe.




                                                                                        18
3. RESTRUCTURING

3.1. Creative Destruction, Sclerosis, and Unbalanced Restructuring

We now turn to restructuring, and the role of the institutional environment in that process.

The need to restructure arises from the other dimension of specificity in production

arrangements: specificity with respect to technology. Technology — taken in its broadest
sense — is typically embodied in capital, in the experience of the workforce, and in the

organization of production. This implies that a change in technology necessitates that

factor components that are technology-specific be scrapped and replaced.

   In a modern market economy, the productive structure is in a state of permanent

adjustment. It must adapt to technological innovations, to the introduction of new

products, to changes in modes of organization, and to the evolution of international

competitiveness. Production units that incorporate the newest techniques and
requirements must be continuously created, and outdated units must be destroyed. This

process is what Schumpeter (1942) referred to as creative destruction. In this process of

restructuring, production factors must be reallocated away from contracting activities and

into newly expanding ones.

   Recent empirical work allows us to quantify this process of ongoing restructuring.

Traditionally, the construction of economic aggregates has often fallen short of the

measures appropriate from a structural perspective. In terms of employment, flows were

typically measured as net changes in stocks, without distinction between simultaneous

positive and negative flows. Recent work has tried to remedy this state of affairs, and a

rich literature developed that tries to measure gross job flows in the labour market (see

Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh, 1996). Measured gross job flows are surprisingly large,




                                                                                         19
and reflect the extent of creative destruction. About 10 percent of US manufacturing jobs

disappear on average every year, and are replaced by new jobs.

       The ongoing restructuring process requires innumerable transactions to create and

destroy production units. The institutional environment is crucial for the efficiency of

those transactions. Poor institutions are disruptive to the creative destruction process,

giving rise to two additional macroeconomic symptoms: sclerosis and unbalanced

restructuring (see Caballero and Hammour, l998a).

       First, a poor institutional environment results in technological "sclerosis" —     it
permits outdated, low-productivity units to survive longer than they would in an efficient

equilibrium. This causes the creative destruction process to stagnate. Sclerosis is directly

related to the under-employment and, therefore, under-valuation of productive resources.

Underemployment causes the appropriating factor's autarky sector to be over-crowded,

and its "shadow" value of moving to autarky to be lower than in an efficient equilibrium.

The result is weakened cost-pressures on outdated producti.on units to be scrapped, and

therefore technological sclerosis.

       Second, poor institutions cause the restructuring process to be unbalanced.

Although destruction is insufficient compared to an efficient equilibrium, it is,

paradoxically, excessive given the economy's inefficiently sluggish creation rate. This is

easiest to see in our labour-market example in the special case where no social value —

related to leisure or a matching function — is associated with unemployment. From a

social perspective, as long as unemployment is positive, job destruction decisions should

be based on a zero shadow wage. However, from a private worker's point of view, the

shadow value of being unemployed is positive and determined by the opportunity of



                                                                                         20
capturing quasi-rents in a new job. This puts excessively high private cost pressures on

production units along the exit margin. Excessive destruction given the depressed rate of

creation is not limited to the case where unemployment carries zero social value. It is a

general consequence of the fact that capturing rents enters as a component of the
appropriating factor's private but not social shadow values.

           Crises are times when adjustment in factor prices is especially critical, and the

unbalaiced nature of restructuring is magnified. This mechanism is particularly relevant

for an understanding of employment crises during structural adjustment episodes,

characterized by a surge in destruction that is not accompanied by a simultaneous rise in

creation (Caballero and Hammour, 1996a). It is also relevant for the destruction-driven

surge in unemployment observed during recessions, which we examine in the following

section.



3.2. Recessions and Restructuring: A Reverse-Liquidationist View

In addition to measuring the average pace of job reallocation, the new measures of gross

job flows allowed us to get a glimpse at the way the creative destruction process is

affected by the business cycle. Figure 5 presents the gross job creation and destruction

time series constructed by Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) for the US manufacturing

sector. Most notable in those series are the sharp peaks in destruction at the onset of each

recession, while the fall in creation is much more muted. Although this asymmetry

between creation and destruction may not be as strong in other sectors, or when the

economy is subject to shocks of a different nature, this evidence confirmed the long-held

view that liquidations are highly concentrated in recessions.




                                                                                         21
              C
              C
              CD
              Ci
              C
              c1
              C
              C
              C
              CC
              Ci
              C
              cC
              U)

              Ci
              C
              C
              c2          76         00          9z1        80          92
                                          year


              Figure 5 Gross job creation, and destruction rates in US manufacturing



       Concentrated liquidations were considered a central feature of recessions by pre-

Keynesian economists. Unlike the Keynesian school that followed, those economists paid

close attention to the supply-side of the economy at high frequencies. Many of them —

Hayek, Pigou, Robbins, Schumpeter — saw in liquidations the main reason for recessions

(see De Long, 1990). "Liquidationists," as they came to be known, conceived of
recessions as unavoidable times of intense restructuring. Lionel Robbins (1934)
sunmrnrized this view as follows:

   In ...   a boom many bad business commitments are undertaken        ... [Goods] are
   produced ... which it is impossible to sell at a profit. Loans are made which it is
   impossible to recover... [W]hen the boom breaks, these ... commitments are
   revealed ... Nobody wishes .. bankruptcies. Nobody likes liquidation as such...




                                                                                         22
    [But] when the extent of mal-investment and over-indebtedness has passed a
    certain limit, measures which postpone liquidation only make matters worse.

Schumpeter (1934) held a very similar view:

    [Diepressions are not simply evils, which we might attempt to suppress, but
    forms of something which has to be done, namely, adjustment to ... change. (p.
    16)


Liquidationism was very influential in the Hoover administration's initial response to the

Great Depression. President Hoover (1952) bitterly recollects:

   The 'leave-it-alone liquidationists' headed by Secretary of the Treasury Mellon
   felt that government must keep its hands off and let the slump liquidate itself. Mr.
   Mellon had only one formula: 'Liquidate labour, liquidate stocks, liquidate the
   farmers, liquidate real estate' ... He held that even panic was not altogether a bad
   thing. He said: 'It will purge the rottenness out of the system.'


    Although few economists today would take the extreme position of early
liquidationists, many see in increased factor reallocation a silver lining of recessions.

Although recessions per se are undesirable events, they are seen as a time when the

productivity of factors of production is low and, therefore, offers a chance to undertake

much needed restructuring, at a relatively low opportunity cost. Observed liquidations are

seen as a prelude to increased restructuring.5

   The evidence in figure 5 supports the notion that recessions have a "cleansing" effect

on the production structure — in the sense that they are times of intense liquidations that

affect mostly outdated, low-productivity jobs (see Caballero and Hammour, 1994). Does

cleansing constitute a silver lining of recessions? Under the presumption that poor

institutions cause technological sclerosis, increased restructuring can be considered

beneficial. However, there is an important difference between increased restructuring and

increased liquidations. The fact is that lost jobs during recessions typically feed into


                                                                                          23
unemployment, not creation — whibh is not surprising, given the "unbalanced" nature of

restructuring in poor institutional environments. The question is whether, ultimately,

increased liquidations lead to increased restructuring. In order to assess this question, one

needs to examine the cumulative impact of a recessionary shock on creation and

destruction. This is illustfated in figure 6, which shows that an unemployment recession

(bottom panel) that starts with a spike of liquidations may cumulatively result in

increased, unchanged, or decreasedrestructuring.

    We tried to examine this question empirically in Caballero and Hammour (1999).

Unfortunately, the available data are limited to the US manufacturing sector. The

impulse-response function from our simplest regression is reported in figure 76 The

bottom panel reports the cumulative impacts of a recessionary shock on creation and

destruction. Surprisingly, recessions seem to reduce the amount of restructuring in the

economy. This result of "chill" following recessions is significant and robust in several

dimensions, including the introduction of a second, reallocation shock. Given the

limitations of the data, our conclusion can only be tentative. But, if there is any evidence,

it does not support prevailing views that recessions are the occasion for increased

restructuring.




                                                                                          24
                                           (a) Resrrnjc "Hung Inc rLurea




                                                                           D:cdoi,

                                       (hi Res nun nh ng is Unchanged


                                                                           Crnanntnn


                                                                           Destruc ion


                                           a) Resnnnnctnnniug Decreases




                                       I                                   Cinulisu

                             I

                                                                           DesDncninin



                                       (d) (Jun u'pin ynuent Recession




                                                                           Vuens ploy innenne




                      Figure 6 Recessions and cumulative restructuring



   Why would recessions freeze the restructuring process? Our interpretation is that the

underlying factors are financi1d — again, a case of institutional fai].ure. Recessions squeeze

liquidity in financial markets and reduce firms' ability to undertake healthy restructuring.




                                                                                                25
                                           Impulse response: [minus] Employment




                                                           "ar_s

                                      Impulse Rasponse: Job creation and Destruction
-4
p



I'
=

     •lI '
      a




Re
Op

N
0
C
0

C

D                                               3           4           5              5
                                                                                           -
                                                                                                    3                 5

                                                          ers

t                          Impulse Response: cumulative Job creation and Destruction

d
C
0
N
                  ,   'a
Ci
0
              I
          F
       I                    'a
      ,                          'a




     ---
=1
0    I                                                                                                                .


0
Ci
C
                                  -\-  ___—a_       a—
                                                                                               -
                                                                                               — — cuts. Doatnicton


                                 2             5            4           5                          7                  5
                                                          "era




                                       Figure 7 A case of chill




                                                                                                                          26
3.3. Merger Waves and the Stock Market

Fluctuations in the pace of restructuring can be approached from a very different angle,

by moving from job reallocation to the restructuring of corporate assets. Looking at

merger and acquisition ("M&A") activity over time, and at its institutional
underpinnings, we reach a conclusion that also amounts to a rejection of the liquidationist

perspective (see Caballero and Hammour, 2000). Essentially, a liquidationist perspective

in this context would consider fire sales during sharp liquidity contractions as the

occasion for intense restructuring of corporate assets. The evidence points, on the

contrary, to briskly expansionary periods characterized by high stock-market valuations

and abundant liquidity as the occasion for intense M&A activity. Again, financial factors

and their institutional underpinnings seem to be at the core of this restructuring

phenomenon.

            3,000                                —             —-—--—•                ----- 9,300
                                                                                               -
                                                                                                   8,000
            2,500 --
                                                                                                   7,000

            2,000                                                                                  6,000

                                                                                               -
                                                                                                   5,000
       E 1,500 -
       0
       zd

                                                                                        I
                                                                                               -
                                                                                                   4,000

            1,000                                                                              -
                                                                                  A                3,000

                       A
                                        It
                                                     A             ..J                     --
                                                                                                   2,000
             500 --



                0
                           ,'.   . .,,.,-
                                            -
                                                Li
                                                         \ '1
                                                           .i
                                                           I     -'I                       -- 1,000



                tO                 0o 0<                       0 t0 tO', 0'o 0<
               LiITor1_(LettAxis)———Thorp/FTC(L&tAxis)                   Mergerstat(ghtAxk)j


                                 Figure 8 US merger waves: 1885-1998


                                                                                                           27
    Figure 8 presents data on the number of mergers and acquisitions in the US over the

past century. Without going into the data construction issues, it is important to note that

the figure is based on three distinct data sets that are not directly comparable and contain

a natural upward trend (see Golbe and White, 1987). What the figure shows is the
extreme concentration of US M&A activity over time, into essentiallyjbur merger waves.

   The first merger wave took place at the turn of the century. It consisted, to a large

extent, of the simultaneous horizontal consolidation of several enterprises that took

advantage of scale economies and often created a near monopoly in their industry. The

landmark transaction of this era was the Great American Steel Deal led by Andrew

Carnegie, which combined ten companies into U.S. Steel. The second merger wave took

place during the "Roaring Twenties" and affected nearly one-fifth of manufacturing

assets. Dozens of today's major US companies were formed at that time. The frenzy

ended abruptly with the Great Crash of 1929. The third was the conglomerate merger

wave of the late 1960s — the Go-Go Years of the stock market — and consisted mostly of

corporate diversification across industries. Advances in management science were

supposed to allow conglomerates to manage effectively a multitude of businesses that

span a variety of industries. Retrospectively, much of the earnings-per-share growth

demonstrated at the time by leading conglomerates was financially driven. Finally, we are

currently in the middle of another merger wave, which rivals in scale any of the previous

ones. Enterprise restructuring is driven by trends toward globalisation, corporate
refocusing, and consolidation in the new IT nidustries. Overall, mergers have played a

key role in the evolution of industrial structure in response to technological and

organizational revolutions.




                                                                                         28
    The one robust determinant for the aggregate volume of M&A activity                                   —      as

documented in most studies on the subject — is the valuation of the stock market (Golbe

and White, 1987). As an example, the positive correlation between US M&A volume and

the rice/earnings ("PIE") ratio of the S&P 500 index is illustrated in figure 9 for the

period 1963-98.

            9,000       —-—--——-————-_____.._________._____

            8,000 -
                                                                                      .
            7000


            6,000-                                            S
       E
       0
       C,
                                                                     S
       0
       'C
            5,000


                                                                     S   .
            4,000 -                                 S

                                                                    •S
            00-                        .                .           •.
                                       S.
                                             —      S                                S•
            000
                                                                         S
            1,000 -




                    -           5.00        10.00           15.00            20.00    25.00   3000       35.00
                                                               S&P500 PIE


                         Figure 9 M&A volume and the stock market: 1963-1998



   If we concentrate exclusively on the buyer's motives, the correlation between M&A

activity and market valuations is difficult to explain. Why would the buyers of assets

increase their demand when prices rise? Itis true that — along the lines of Kiyotaki and

Moore (1997) —             a   rising market will increase the collateral value of financially

constrained buyers, thus increasing the volume of assets they are able to acquire. But, by

the same token, a declining market also increases transactions volume, as shrinking

                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                              29
collateral values force asset saks. This implies a correlation between M&A transactions

and changes in market valuations — unless we introduce, as we discuss below, transaction

costs on sellers.

    Another piece of evidence that is difficult to interpret from the buyer's viewpoint

concerns the method of payment in M&A, i.e. whether acquisitions are paid for with

cash, with the buyer's stock, or a combination. Figure 10 plots the share of all-cash

transactions in US M&A against the market's PIE ratio over the period 1973-98. it is

clear that the share of all-cash transactions is lower — and the share of stock transactions

is higher —when the market's valuation rises. The question is, why should the volume of

stock transactions, which raises no issue of collateral valuation for external financing, rise

with the stock market? Why does it rise proportionally even more than the volume of

cash transactions?

                 65%    ___________                                               __________



                 60%




                                      .
                 55%
                                          S
                 55%                                      S
             t                        S

             I
             E45v.
                                          S•      •
             40%                                              ••
                                              S
                                                                              •
                 36%



                 25%-                                              •S                 S
                                                                                               S
                 00%




                 15%
                                                  1300                 18MG          2300

                                                          S&P500 PIE




                        Figure 10 Method of payment in M&A: 1973-1998

                                                      -


                                                                                                   30
        The evidence indicates that action is coming from the sellers' side. Our
interpretation of merger waves centers on the "liquidity" of the seller. When market

valuations rise, sellers become more liquid and are more willing to sell control. Generally

speaking, illiquidity arises when afinancially constrained asset-owner faces a transaction

cost. Transaction costs in the market for corporate control are mostly information-based.

Financial constraints are central to the notion of illiquidity, because in the absence of

such constraints the owner would be able to contractually transfer the asset's future cash

flow without incurring the transaction cost. When a seller is illiquid, an increase in the

price of his asset does two things: (i) it increases his willingness to incur the transaction

cost; and (ii) it relaxes his financial constraint. The latter effect enters as a pecuniary

externality that helps explain the highly concentrated nature of merger waves. The fact

that the share of stock transactions rises with market valuations confirms that the sellers'

side is at work, because buyers who pay with their stock are, in fact, also a sort of seller.

       The above interpretation of merger waves highlights another dimension of
aggregate restructuring where institutions — here financial-market institutions — play a

central role. The lesson that we draw from it reinforces the reverse-liquidationist view we

developed based on labour-market evidence. One could conjecture that times of crisis

produce fire sales and increase the pace of corporate asset restructuring. That would

correspond to the liquidationist perspective. But the evidence is otherwise. Great waves

of asset restructuring have, on the contrary, come during good times, and have come
about through waves of liquidity.




                                                                                            31
4. SUMMARY

In this chapter, we outlined the basic ingredients that are needed to explore the
macroeconomic effects of institutions and their impact on the restructuring process. We

illustrated the usefulness of the approach in a few applications.

   Our main propositions can be summarized as follows:

1. The study of the macroeconomic consequences of institutional arrangements and their

   impact on aggregate restructuring requires a "structural" type of analysis, one which

   emphasizes the technological and relationship specificity that characterize the
   production structure.

2. Institutional arrangements determine the rules that govern the process by which

   specific quasi-rents are created and shared. In their efficiency-enhancing role, they

   help each party obtain the social value of what it put in; in their political role, they

   constitute an instrument of redistribution.

3. At the level of individual interactions, a poor institutional environment discourages

   cooperation between factors of production. In equilibrium, this results in under-

   employment, market segmentation and technological exclusion of the "appropriating"

   factor.

4. Application: The European macroeconomic experience over the past three decades

   reflects the impact of shifts in labour relations when, in the short run, capital in place

   has few options, and, in the longer run, the supply of new investment is highly elastic

   and can choose from a range of technologies.




                                                                                          32
5. A poor institutional environment results in "sclerosis" — the inefficient survival of

   low-productivity jobs. Moreover, it causes the restructuring process to be unbalanced:

   given the level of creation, destruction is excessively high.

6. The concentration of liquidations during a recession is associated with productivity

   cleansing, but not necessarily with an overall increase in restructuring. On the

   contrary, the limited evidence we have from US manufacturing job flows contradicts

   the "liquidationist" view.

7. Similarly, the restructuring of corporate assets is not concentrated during times of

   liquidity crunch and fire sales. Merger waves are concentrated at times when stock-

   market valuations are high and sellers are highly "liquid".




                                                                                      33
Notes

'DELTA is a joint research unit, CNRS - ENS - EHESS.
2
    While it makes a world of difference for the contract theorist, for our purposes the

specific rents that arise from the hold-up problem are similar to the informational rents

that arise from asymmetric-information problems, In the latter case, one factor commits a

production opportunity to another factor that has, or will have, an informational
advantage. Specificity arises from the fact that the decision to commit the production

opportunity cannot be reversed based on the outcome. For our purposes, we will treat

specific rents as a single, generic type.

    Data sources: OECD Business Sector Data Base and the IIMF's International Financial

Statistics.
' The index of job protection is the sum of the maximum mandatory severance payments
(in months of wages) and the advance notification period (in months). The source of both

measures is OECD (1993), table 3-8, p. 97. The source of the KIL ratio is the OECD

Business Sector Data Base. This figure was kindly provided to us by David Coe.

    For a survey of this view of recessions as reorganizations, see Aghion and Saint-Paul

(1993).
6
    The regression underlying figure 7 uses manufacturing employment (N1), the flow of

gross job creation (H1), and the flow of gross destruction (Dr) in deviation from their

mean. The data are quarterly for the period 1.972:1-1993:4. We assume that employment

fluctuations are driven by a single aggregate shock. Given the identity AN1 =   fi   D,, a

linear time-series model for the response of job flows to aggregate shocks can generally



                                                                                       34
be written either in terms of creation: H = d'(L)N1 +     or in terms of destruction: D =

9'(L)N + é', where d(L) and Gt(L) are polynomials in the lag operator L. Figure 7

portrays the estimated. impulse-response functions for a 2-standard-deviation recessionary

shock.

 The "Nelson" series can be found in Nelson (1959); the "Thorp/FTC" series can be

found in Thorp (1941) and in U.S. Federal Trade Commission (1981); the "Mergerstat"

series can be found in Houlihan Lockey Howard and Zukin (1.998).




                                                                                       35
References

Aghion, P., and Saint-Paul, G. (1993): 'Uncovering Some Causal Relationships between

   Productivity Growth and the Structure of Economic Fluctuations: A Tentative

   Survey', NBER Working Paper No. W4603.

Davis, S. J., and Haltiwanger, 1. (1992): 'Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction and

   Employment Reallocation', Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 107, pp. 8 19-864.

Davis, S. S., Haltiwanger, J., and Schuh, 5. (1996): Job Creation and Destruction

(Cambridge: MIT Press).

Caballero, R. J., and Hammour, M. L. (1994): 'The Cleansing Effect of Recessions',

   American Econonuc Review, vol. 84, pp. 1350-68.
— (1 996a): 'On the Ills of Adjustment', Journal of Development Economics, vol. 51, pp.

   161-192.

— (1996b): 'On the Timing and Efficiency of Creative Destruction', Quarterly Journal

   of Economics, vol. 111, no.3, pp. 805-852.
— (l998a): 'The Macroeconomics of Specificity', Journal of Political Economy, vol.

   106, no.4, pp. 724-767.
— (1998b): 'Jobless Growth: Appropriability, Factor Substitution, and Unemployment',

   Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 48, pp. 5 1-94.
— (1999): 'The Cost of Recessions Revisited: A Reverse-Liquidationist View', NBER

   Working Paper no. 7355.
— (2000):
          'Technological Revolutions and Merger Waves', typescript.
De Long, S. B. (1990): ' 'Liquidation' Cycles: Old-Fashioned Real Business Cycle

   Theory and the Great Depression', NBER Working Paper no. 3546.
Golbe, D., and White, L. (1987): 'A Time Series Analysis of Mergers and Acquisitions in

   the U.S. Economy', in A. Auerbach, ed., Corporate Takeovers (Chicago: University

   of Chicago Press), pp. 265-305.

Greenspan, A. (1999): 'Maintaining Economic Vitality', Millennium Lecture Series

   sponsored by the Gerald R. Ford Foundation and Grand Valley State University,

   September 8.

Hayek, F. A. von (193 1): 'The 'Paradox' of Saving', Economica, vol. 32, pp. 125-169.

Johansen, L. (1959): 'Substitution versus Fixed Production Coefficients in the Theory of

   Economic Growth: A Synthesis', Econometrica, vol. 27, pp. 157-76.

Kiyotaki, N., and Moore, J. (1997): 'Credit Cycles', Journal of Political Economy, vol.

   lOS, no. 2,pp. 211-248.

Klein, B., Crawford, R. G., and Alchian, A. A. (1978): 'Vertical Integration,
   Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process', Journal of Law and

   Economics, vol. 21, no. 297-326.

Houlihan Lockey Howard and Zukin (1998): Mergerstat Review 1998.

Nelson, R. N. (1959): Merger Movements in American Industry: 1 895-1956 (Princeton:

   Princeton University Press).

OECD (1993): Employment Outlook (Paris: OECD).

Robbins, L. (1934): The Great Depression (London: Macmillan).

Schumpeter, J. A. (1934): 'Depressions', in Douglas Brown et al. (eds.), Economics of

   the Recovery Program (New York: McGraw-Hill).

     (1942): Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. (New York: Harper and Brothers).




                                                                                        38
Thorp, W. (1941): 'The Merger Movement', in The Structure of Industry, Temporary

   National Economic Committee, monograph no. 27, part III, pp. 231-234.

Solow. R. M. (1960): 'Investment and TectmoIogica Progress', in KS. Arrow, S. Karlin

   and P. Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in Social Sciences (Stanford: Stanford

   University Press).

U.S. Federal Trade Commission, Bureau of Economics (1981): Statistical Report on

   Mergers and Acquisitions, 1979 (Washington, D.C.: FTC).

Williamson, 0. (1985): The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets,

   Relational Contracting (New York: Free Press).




                                                                                 39
