NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND:
ITS PRESENT ROLE IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Michael D. Bordo
Harold James
Working Paper 7724
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7724

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2000

Prepared for the U.S. Congressional International Financial Institution Advistory Commission. For valuable
and timely research assistance we thank Debajyoti Chakrabarty. For helpful comments on an earlier draft we
thank Jim Boughton and Anna Schwartz. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research..
© 2000 by Michael D. Bordo and Harold James. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The International Monetary Fund: Its Present Role in Historical Perspective
Michael D. Bordo and Harold James
NBER Working Paper No. 7724
June 2000
ABSTRACT
In this paper we describe what the IMF is and what it does. We consider its origins as the
guardian of the Bretton Woods adjustable peg exchange rate system and financier of temporary
current account deficits for advanced countries, to its present primary roles as development financier
and crisis manager for the emerging world. We consider the externalities or market failures that the
IMF is believed by many to correct and the public goods that the IMF provides. Critics of the IMF
downplay the extent of market failure and the scope of public goods provided. They attach greater
importance to market solutions. We consider their views as well. We conclude with a discussion of
the case for reform in the light of historical experience.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08404
and NBER
bordo@fas-econ.rutgers.edu

Harold James
Department of History
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
hjames@princeton.edu

Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2. What does the IMF do?
3. Origins and Original Aims
4. The IMF’s Role in the Post Bretton Woods Era: Externalities and Public Goods?
5. The IMF in Search of a Mission
6. International Politics and the IMF
7. Conclusion: The Case for Reform in the Light of Past Experience
References
Tables
1. Average Time Spent in IMF Programs by Class of Borrowers
2. Arrears in the IMF
Figures
1. IMF Quotas as a Share of World Imports
2. IMF Charges and Commercial Interest Rates
3. Total Fund Credit Outstanding to Members
4. Low Interest IMF Lending
5. Transactions of the International Monetary Fund, 1955 – 1997

3

•

1. Introduction

After 55 years of existence there are strongly conflicting views on the importance and
role of the IMF for today’s international economy, and on its effectiveness. On the one
hand there are those who see the Fund as having adapted well to the changing world
environment with perhaps the need for some reforms to the International Architecture.1
On the other hand are those who believe that its useful time has passed in the
environment of exchange rate flexibility and open capital markets.2 These radically
conflicting views require the need for a balanced perspective on the role and performance
of the IMF within the context of its historical evolution.
In this paper we describe what the IMF is and what it does. We consider its
origins as the guardian of the Bretton Woods adjustable peg exchange rate system and
financier of temporary current account deficits for advanced countries, to its present
primary roles as development financier and crisis manager for the emerging world. We
consider the externalities or market failures that the IMF is believed by many to correct
and the public goods that the IMF provides. Critics of the IMF downplay the extent of
market failure and the scope of public goods provided. They attach greater importance to
market solutions. We consider their views as well.
The reincarnation of the Fund occurred against the backdrop of a series of major
economic and political shocks: the oil price shocks of the 1970’s, the debt crisis of the
80’s, the collapse of the Soviet empire in the late 1980’s, and the recent emerging market
crises in Mexico and East Asia. These events served as a template for the creation of new
Fund responsibilities, facilities and enhanced resources. As we document, the expansion
of the Fund served different constituencies: the United States, the other advanced
countries, the emerging countries and the very poor LDC’s. Most importantly, the
evolution of the IMF has reflected the geopolitics of the international economy, which we
discuss in Section 6. We conclude by considering the directions that reform might take in

1
2

See e.g. De Gregorio and others (1999).
See e.g. Schwartz (1998).

4

the light of historical developments. A greater role for market discipline supplemented by
a more limited range of IMF policies and advice is a foreseeable outcome.

2. What does the IMF do?
Most people think of the IMF as an institution that provides emergency credits to
countries that have found themselves in difficulties, either as a consequence of poor
economic policies or through external circumstances, such as a sudden drop in
commodity prices, or a financial crisis in a neighboring country. In return the country is
obliged to impose painful austerity policies, usually involving reductions of budget
deficits, through spending cuts or increased revenue (taxation), a rise in interest rates to
reduce inflation, and an alteration of the exchange rate (a devaluation).
This view, while not inaccurate, gives only a partial picture of the reality of the
Fund's operations, or of what it is supposed to do. Its mandate, as laid down in the first
Article of Agreement in 1944 in Bretton Woods, NH, is very general: to promote
international monetary cooperation, facilitate the growth of world trade, promote
exchange rate stability, and to help to create a multilateral system of payments. In order
to achieve these objectives, the Fund was supposed to provide short term balance of
payments support to countries in need of additional international reserves.
It is now an almost universal financial institution, having grown from the 44 states
represented at the 1944 Bretton Woods conference to 182 countries today. Now it
includes almost every economy of the world. (There are only a few exceptions: Cuba,
North Korea, Taiwan.)
Who runs it? The IMF is owned by the governments of its member countries,
represented through a Board of Governors. The Governor for each member country is
usually the Minister of Finance or sometimes the Central Bank Governor (in the case of
the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury). Voting is in accordance with the size of
a country's share-holding in the Fund (or "quota"), and many important decisions require
special majorities (85% of the vote). There is no attempt to give an equal voice to every

5

country, as there is in the United Nations. Periodically, quotas are recalculated to reflect
changing economic size.
The United States, the largest member of the IMF, currently has 17.78% of the
vote, and thus can veto any major decision of the Fund it feels is unacceptable. Under the
terms of its Articles of Agreement, the IMF's headquarters are located in the largest
member country: they have always been in Washington D.C..
Meetings of the full Board of Governors are a rather cumbersome annual event; a
smaller and more manageable body is the so-called "Interim Committee", of 24
Governors, which meets twice a year and is charged with reporting to the Governors (and
in practice making recommendations which stand a good chance of success) on "the
management and functioning of the international monetary system and on proposals to
amend the Articles of Agreement".
Day to day decisions are made by an Executive Board. Countries are grouped
into constituencies to elect 24 Executive Directors as members of the Board, with the
exception that the five largest members of the IMF (the United States, Germany, Japan,
France and the United Kingdom) have their own Executive Directors. The Executive
Board also appoints a Managing Director. The staff of the IMF (currently 2,660) is
recruited internationally, but without any quotas as to nationality (as is the practice in the
United Nations).
How big is it? Fund quotas for member countries are initially determined by a
calculation based on the size of the national economy (GDP, current account transactions
in the balance of payments). They are periodically increased, in response to perceived
needs for the IMF's operations. The Articles of Agreement provide for a general review
of the quotas every five years. There have been a total of 12 such quota reviews, in 4 of
which it was decided that no increase was needed. In the other 8, there was a general
increase, and some redistribution of quotas to reflect changing positions in the world
economy. In the most recent round of increases, the total quota was raised by 45%, from
SDR 146 bn. to 212 bn. (approx. $291 - on September 3, 1999, SDR= $1.37494), with
the U.S. share being set at SDR 37,149.3. The size of the IMF, measured by the total of

6

IMF quotas, measured as a proportion of world trade fell sharply between 1946 and the
mid-1970s; since then this ratio has been stable, and even shown a slight increase.
Figure 1: IMF Quotas as a Share of World Imports
Since borrowing from the Fund (or “drawing” of quotas in IMF parlance) is
related to the size of a country’s initial deposit or quota, the IMF is often seen as
analogous to a credit union rather than a bank, in which there is no such association
between lending and deposits.3
What does it do? The IMF has evolved into a major influence on the development
of the world economy. Its functions today include the following, many of which
correspond directly with the mandate, and others have been added, with the intent of
realizing the original mandate:
1. The IMF still sees its primary purpose in promoting world trade, and in
securing the general well-being of the world economy, through analysis and advice. This
advice is aimed at avoiding inconsistencies between the policies of its different member
states, and policy mistakes by individual members. The IMF tries to influence the
policies of its members, in the belief that poor policies have an adverse effect that extends
beyond national frontiers. Its Articles of Agreement (Article I, 1) refer to the
establishment of a "machinery for consultation and collaboration on international
monetary problems". The term used by the IMF for this function is "surveillance".
Surveillance takes two principal forms: the first is multilateral, based on a general
overview of the inter-connections and inter-actions between national economic policies
and performance, and of forecasts based on a variety of scenarios. The most important
practical expression of these calculations is an exercise conducted by the IMF's staff, and
then discussed by the Board and presented as a publication, the World Economic
Outlook. World Economic Outlook material is also used in G-7/G-8 economic summits
and in the meetings of the G-7 Finance Ministers, where the views of the IMF are
presented by the Managing Director and by the Director of the Research Department.
3

See Kenen (1986).

7

The IMF staff also prepare published assessments of world capital markets, the
International Capital Markets Reports. These focus on market developments, not only in
advanced economies, but also in emerging markets (which are dealt with much more fully
than in the analogous BIS reports). WEO and capital markets reports material is
generally highly regarded, and the econometric model used is state of the art, although
analysis of errors in past forecasting in the WEO shows a tendency toward optimism.4
Recently, the IMF has also conducted research on early warning signals that might show
the imminence of currency or banking crises: but such research - in common with similar
academic research - tends to show the difficulties in finding reliable prior indicators of
crisis .5
Secondly, there is a bilateral surveillance, based on regular consultations with
member countries (known as Article IV consultations). As a result of a feeling in the
1990’s that some of the problems in the international economy were a consequence of
inadequate surveillance, the IMF reverted to a pattern of annual consultations (after a
period in which they were less frequent). Sometimes IMF staff reports on member
countries are thought to be insufficiently critical (because of the development of a sort of
“clientism”, in which good relations with officials and ministers develop).
The economic basis of staff papers in preparation for these consultations have
been published for some years (under the title "Recent Economic Developments"). In
April 1999, the IMF launched an experimental program for the release of staff reports
subsequent to consultations. The results of the consultations are expressed in a paper,
which is now published by the IMF, given the consent of the member country concerned,
as a "Public Information Notice" (previously, the outcome of such discussions was
regarded as confidential). In 1999, the IMF began to release full staff reports.
Within the general field of surveillance, the IMF has a special mandate with
regard to exchange rate policy. This was the original rationale for the IMF's existence
(see Section 3), and exchange rate policy remains at the center of advice to member
4

See Artis (1996), and James (1996), Figure 13-2. Such problems arise in part because of the
unpredictability of economic shocks, but also in part because of the method of building up forecasts “from
the bottom up”, by the use of area department material to generate assessments of the international economy
as a whole.
5
See Kaminsky Lizondo and Reinhart (1998).

8

countries. The IMF groups and lists the exchange rate policies of its members, and a
great deal of its research is concerned with theoretical as well as practical issues relating
to exchange rate policy.
Currently, the surveillance function accounts for 42% of the IMF's budget, if
overhead costs are included.
2. The IMF is primarily a financial institution, which provides credits to member
countries, known in IMF terminology as "drawings on the Fund". Such credits are
extended in relation to the size of the quota. Since the 1950’s, credit has been provided in
“tranches”, units corresponding to 25% of a member’s quota. The first tranche is
available automatically, without any discussion of policy. The larger the credit is in
relation to the quota, in other words, the higher the tranche, the higher is the extent of
policy reform required (conditionality). These credits are at a rate of interest calculated
by the IMF to correspond with market rates of principal member countries, and to cover
the IMF's operating costs.
Figure 2: IMF Charges and Commercial Interest Rates
At the end of April 1999, the IMF had SDR 63.6 bn. credit outstanding (approx. $
87 bn.). This might look as if it is only a relatively small share of the total of quota
resources (it is less than half of the pre-quota increase total of SDR 146 bn.), but in
practice not all of the quota IMF's resources can really be used in support operations
(using the quotas paid in national currency by a small developing country, or even a larger
emerging economy, even though such currencies may nominally be convertible, might
provoke a problem for that country; in practice, the IMF is thus usually limited in lending
out the quotas paid in by its richer members.) In reality, an assessment of what really
constitutes the usable resources of the IMF requires very careful judgment of the current
state of international currency markets. A critical measurement of the Fund’s position is
the “liquidity ratio”, the proportion of uncommitted usable resources to liquid liabilities.
The highest ratio recently was 170%, in January 1995. It fell sharply after the Asian crisis

9

to 45% (April 1998), but has risen to 89% (April 1999), after the most recent quota
increase.
Figure 3: Total IMF Credit Outstanding to Members
As shown in Figure 3, IMF credit is given in different forms and on different
conditions. The stand-by arrangements assure that a member can make borrowings over a
specified period, usually between 1 and 2 years, but sometimes for a shorter period and
sometimes for up to 3 years, with repayments scheduled between 3 ¼ and 5 years after the
borrowing. The extended facility, introduced in the 1970’s, is available for a longer
period, of 4 ½ to 10 years. These facilities carry an interest rate based on an average of
rates in the major industrial countries. Thus, inevitably, for each of the IMF’s major net
contributors of resources (the industrial countries), depending on the relative state of the
business cycle, rates of remuneration on resources (the SDR interest rate) deposited with
the IMF are sometimes higher and sometimes lower than prevailing interest rates in the
national economy. Thus IMF rates were slightly higher than U.S. interest rates in the
early 1990s, and are now slightly lower (see Figure 2).
During the Asian crisis, a new facility (the Supplemental Reserve Facility) was
introduced, that resembled more closely the traditional notion of an emergency lender of
last resort, as envisaged by Walter Bagehot in his classic work Lombard Street (1873).
This facility is aimed at dealing with abrupt reversals of confidence. The amounts lent
are higher, but charged at a penalty rate of 300 to 500 basis points above the IMF’s
regular rate of charge. In making such loans, the IMF inevitably has to consider its own
liquidity position, and is obviously not capable of extending infinite credit in a manner
analogous to the monetary authority in a national setting.6
There are further possibilities of lending in response to natural disasters, in postconflict situations (such as Albania, Bosnia, Rwanda, Tajikistan), and special facilities:
the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility, for unexpected and temporary
falls in export prices, export volumes, or for increases in the cost of cereal supplies; and
6

See Capie (1998).

10

the Systemic Transformation Facility, which was used between 1993 and 1995 to support
economies in transition from plan to market.
In addition, there is also a possibility for the Fund to borrow resources outside its
quotas. Since the 1960’s the IMF has been able to borrow additional sums from 11 large
industrial countries (under the so-called "General Arrangements to Borrow", or GAB),
which may be lent "to forestall or cope with an impairment of the international monetary
system" (it was intended to deal primarily with potential problems in the major reserve
centers, the United Kingdom and the United States). This new potential source of IMF
credit broke with the previous IMF principle of operating on the lines of a credit union,
and turned the institution toward a role as a bank. After the end of the par value system,
the GAB was rarely needed as a support for reserve currencies; and the provision had in
fact been inactive for twenty years, until it was resuscitated in July 1998 to provide
resources for Russia. It was last enlarged in 1983, to an amount of SDR 17 bn. There is
also an additional amount available under a separate, but analogous, agreement with
Saudi Arabia.
The GAB has recently (1997) also been supplemented by an as yet unused
mechanism for borrowing SDR 34 bn. from a wider group of 25 members of the IMF (the
"New Arrangements to Borrow"), as a response to the Asian crisis and in order to provide
additional facilities in the event of systemic problems in emerging markets..
3. In some circumstances, the IMF is a provider of subsidized credit. Since the
1970’s, the IMF has given low interest credits to poor countries, who at that time were
especially vulnerable because of the increased cost of imported fuel. The interest subsidy
was paid through a Trust Fund, financed in part in the 1970’s by the sale of parts of the
IMF's gold reserves. Currently, the IMF’s facilities for low-income members, defined
principally on a basis of per capita income and eligibility for the concessional lending of
the World Bank Group under IDA (International Development Association), are known
as the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility. The loans are made available in three
installments over a three year period, carry an interest of 0.5%, and are repaid over a
period from 5 ½ to 10 years after the loan disbursement. At the end of July 1999, the
IMF had SDR 6.5 bn. in credit outstanding under this subsidized credit arrangement (or

11

10.2% of its total outstanding credit). The subsidy is paid in part from interest from the
Trust Fund created in the 1970’s, and in part from donations and loans from member
countries .
The provision of low-interest credit developed in the following way:
Figure 4: Low Interest IMF Lending
Such credit brought the Fund into development work. It is a task that lay outside
the traditional areas of IMF responsibilities.
4. The IMF also has the task of creating supplementary reserves, in the form of
the SDR (Special Drawing Right). The issue of SDRs is linked, according to the first
Amendment of the Articles of Agreement), to a general need for liquidity. In a world of
liquid capital markets it is hard to see a case for such a general requirement, short of a
general world deflation, and there has been no issue of SDRs since the 1970’s. The
consequence is that more recent members have received no allocation of SDRs, and in
general the SDR plays a relatively minor role in world monetary policy.
5. In the course of surveillance, the IMF collects a great amount of data, which it
has presented in a standardized and systematized way in such publications as
International Financial Statistics. There has developed an increasing awareness that
surveillance can be more effective if its results are made available to a wider public, that
is market participants. The World Economic Outlook material is also published.
Recently, in 1996, in response to the Mexico crisis of 1994-5, it provided a systematic
standard for the presentation of national data relevant to the operation of capital markets,
the "Special Data Dissemination Standard". Information supplied is displayed on an
electronic bulletin board, and the IMF monitors compliance. The IMF also publishes
regular reports on international capital markets.
6. The IMF provides training and technical assistance through the IMF Institute to
member countries on matters such as the operation of central banks, Finance Ministries,
tax regulation etc.. This educational function accounted for 22.5% of the IMF's operating
budget in 1997/8.

12

How much does it cost? Unfortunately a breakdown of its expenditures between
categories has only been available since 1995. For the latest year for which we have data,
1998, we have broken down the IMF’s activities into three categories: surveillance was
$218.2 million and represented 42% of the budget; the use of IMF resources (the IMF’s
role as a financial institution) was $184.2 million and 35.5% of the budget; technical
assistance was $117.1 million and 22.5% of the budget. The data to extend these
calculations backward is unavailable. General overhead costs are allocated to each of
these three activities in accordance with their proportionate importance. The costs of the
IMF Research Department are not shown separately. Research is directed toward these
three categories, and the costs allocated accordingly.
3. Origins and original aims
The best way of thinking of the IMF and its functions during the period of the socalled Bretton Woods regime (1945-1973) is not so much as an institution, but as the
institutional embodiment of a system of rules (the IMF's Articles of Agreement). The
construction of the postwar international monetary system, built around the IMF, came as
a result of a general agreement that a repetition of the economic and political nationalism
of the 1930’s could and should be avoided.
The IMF was established in the aftermath of the disasters of the Great Depression
to overcome perceived market failures of the 1930’s, including destabilizing short-term
capital flows (hot money movements), then the breakdown of capital markets, the
consequent inability to finance payments deficits in a time of depression, the widespread
imposition of exchange controls, competitive devaluations (‘beggar thy neighbor’), and a
turn to trade protection.
The Articles of Agreement drafted at Bretton Woods, NH in July 1944 represented
a compromise between the plans of the U.S. and U.K., the leading Allied economic
powers during the war. For the U.S., restoration of a multilateral payments system based
on convertible currencies was paramount. The British wanted the freedom from the

13

external constraint to pursue full employment policies. In the end the American Plan
proposed by Harry Dexter White for a Stabilization Fund modeled in part on the U.S.
Exchange Stabilization Fund was dominant. The par value adjustable peg system was
based on the nominal anchor of gold with the U.S. as the reserve center country. The
IMF was designated as the umpire of the system with an initial Fund of 8.8 billion dollars
to lend to members when balance of payments pressure threatened adherence to the par
values.7,8
In the vision that lay behind the Bretton Woods conference of July 1944, the
IMF's major functions were to:
1. facilitate an end of exchange controls and transition to current account
convertibility (countries maintaining controls were obliged to hold regular consultations
with the IMF referred to as Article XIV consultations).
2. deal with the fear of competitive devaluations (which may have been an
instrument of trade warfare in the 1930’s) in response to the belief, based on the
experiences of the 1920’s, that flexible exchange rates were destabilizing. It instituted
pegged, but adjustable, exchange rates based on the stable nominal rate of the U.S. dollar
or on a specific gold value. Adjustment beyond a certain margin (10%) required the
concurrence of the IMF.
3. provide short term finance to deal with temporary balance of payments
disequilibria (such problems were assumed to arise from the current account, since it was
believed that capital flows in the post war would be minimal and moreover the Articles
encouraged capital controls). The pursuit of inappropriate demand management policies
by a member country would lead to danger signals, in the form of balance of payments
imbalances. If the imbalance reflected a fundamental disequilibrium (never explicitly
defined but generally meaning an unsustainable payments imbalance), the exchange rate
would be altered with the approval of the Fund. If the problem was perceived to be
temporary, the IMF would provide financial assistance. Through the quota mechanism,

7

See Bordo (1993).
The World Bank (IBRD) was founded at the same time to provide capital to the war torn countries of
Europe and Asia and to the developing world.

8

14

the IMF de facto created an additional pool of reserves (it functioned analogously to a
credit union).9
4. constitute an economic equivalent of the United Nations (the five largest quota
holders as calculated at the time of Bretton Woods, United States, USSR, UK, China,
France, with an automatic right to seats on the IMF's Executive Board, correspond to
permanent members of Security Council).
The successes and failures of the original vision
World trade expanded quickly from the 1950’s. There was no worldwide
depression immediately after the Second World War as had occurred after World War I.
The absence of such an economic catastrophe had little to do with the IMF, which
actually undertook little activity in the first ten years of its existence, but was rather due
to the Marshall Plan, the Pax Americana and the institution of stabilization policies across
the advanced world. Implementing the Bretton Woods Articles - in particular the
attainment of current account convertibility (Article VIII) - took a long time for the
advanced countries of Western Europe. Other parts of the original vision ran into
increasing problems.
1. Current account convertibility in the advanced countries of Western Europe
took much longer than had initially been envisaged, until December 1958. It was
achieved through the efforts of the European Payments Union funded partially by the
Marshall Plan. The attainment of convertibility was preceded by a surge of IMF credit in
1956-7, and by 1958 most European countries had accepted the relevant article (Article
VIII) of the Articles of Agreement. Japan did so in 1964. Most developing countries
however retained current account restrictions until the 1980’s or 1990’s. In 1960, 13% of
the IMF’s members had accepted current account convertibility under Article VIII, in
1970 30%, and by 1990 45%. By 1998, however, of the IMF’s 182 members, 142 (or
79%) had accepted Article VIII.

9

See Kenen (1986).

15

2. The strains on the par value system increased in the 1960’s. Strains included a
continuous tension between countries in chronic deficit like the UK, which was prevented
by external constraints from expansion and was under continuous pressure to devalue.
The UK, at that time the issuer of the world's second most important reserve currency,
thus faced almost continual crisis. The surplus countries, Germany and Japan, who found
it difficult or impossible to revalue. In addition, the system itself faced considerable
strain as the center country the U.S., ran almost continuous balance of payments deficits
and persistent gold drains. Numerous efforts to prevent the inevitable collapse of the
system included U.S. drawings from the IMF, and the system eventually broke down in a
series of currency crises between 1971 and 1973. After the breakdown, the threat of trade
wars increased.
3. After 1978 no major industrial countries drew on the IMF for short term
finance, because the international capital markets now provided such funds. The growth
of capital markets, which had contributed to the breakdown of the fixed exchange rate
regime in 1971-3, surprised everyone.
4. The IMF was not initially a global institution, as had been envisaged at the
time of Bretton Woods, but became a part of Cold War politics. The USSR had refused
to join in 1945, and the IMF became an institution of the non-communist (free) world.
4. The IMF’s Role in the Post Bretton Woods era: externalities and public goods?
The decades following the breakdown of the par value system in 1973 witnessed a
sea change in the international environment from that envisioned by the architects of the
Bretton Woods system.10 The par value system was gone and with it the IMF’s main
function as the umpire of the rules of the game of that system. In the new environment,
member countries could freely choose their exchange rate arrangements—pegged
exchange rates to secure the benefits of a nominal anchor and monetary and fiscal
discipline, or floating rates for policy independence and insulation from external shocks.
The move by most advanced countries towards floating, which in theory at least provided
10

See Masson and Mussa (1996).

16

policy independence and a reduced need for international reserves, meant that the only
role seemingly left for the Fund was surveillance designed to achieve responsible
exchange rate policies under the amended Article IV. The IMF provided information and
policy advice, and acted as a medium for policy coordination.
A second development that had profound implications for the IMF was the
increasing integration of the world economy. This reflected a reduction in trade and
transportation costs and especially financial integration.11 The dramatic opening up of
private international capital markets, which had been suppressed through the Bretton
Woods years by IMF sanctioned capital controls, implied that private capital could
substitute for official financing of payments imbalances. This indeed became the case for
the advanced countries. The final change in the environment facing the IMF was a
dramatic growth in membership with the collapse of colonialism in the 1960’s to 1980’s
and the dissolution of the former socialist bloc in the late 1980’s.
New Externalities
In this new environment the IMF redefined its role aided by major political and
economic shocks and the rise of new constituencies for its services as we document in
section 5 below. A new rationale for the Fund’s role in the new environment has been
provided by the Fund’s staff and those who see it continuing to take a central part in the
institutional structure of the world economy—new sources of externalities (market
failures) and new public goods for the Fund to provide.12
The advent of managed floating exchange rates is viewed as creating a set of
problems that, in their impact, are not substantially different from those facing the par
value system: incipient balance of payments pressures were said not to be smoothly
adjusted to, and exchange rates were said to be prone to overshooting and to have
produced substantial adjustment costs to the real economy. These problems dictated the
need for active demand management and IMF policy advice and also the need for IMF
resources and conditionality as before.

11
12

See Bordo, Eichengreen and Irwin (1999), Obstfeld and Taylor (1998).
See Guitian (1992), Masson and Mussa (1996), Krueger (1998).

17

Growing interdependence and especially capital market integration in turn meant
that the independence from external shocks that floating rates would provide was greatly
eroded, again dictating a demand for IMF surveillance and financing. Financial
integration which serves the welfare enhancing roles of allocating resources both
secularly and cyclically between countries with surplus and deficient savings, and optimal
portfolio diversification, however, brings perils. These include the following:
a) that although private capital could serve as a source of reserves for advanced
countries in facilitating adjustment, it would be expensive in times of crisis;
b) private capital is only available to advanced countries or middle-income developing
(emerging) countries and not to low income or former socialist countries.
c) private capital flows are subject to sudden reversals which can precipitate currency
crises, costly current account reversals, and serious economic hardship. A number of
stories proliferate including the role of asymmetric information, changing investor
sentiment in the face of news that reveals policy inconsistencies, multiple equilibria
and contagion effects.
d) The problem of debt crises. Fears that a sovereign borrower will be unable to service
its debt can lead to a run, in an environment without some authority providing
coordination, by lenders fearful that they will not be repaid.
e) Finally, there has been an expanded Fund membership by low income countries,
which are too poor, do not have any, or if they do, have primitive credit markets, and
do not have the institutions for sound policy. Such countries do not have access to the
international private capital markets and moreover require medium term structural
loans as well as temporary balance of payments assistance. Similar problems face
many of the transition economies.
New Public Goods
In the face of these new problems a.k.a. ‘externalities’ of the ‘New Order,’ the
IMF is viewed as providing new solutions and new public goods. Most of these
developments pertain to developing countries. For the problems arising for the new
international monetary regime of free choice in exchange rate arrangements, the Fund no

18

longer is regarded as the umpire of the rules of the par value system but as the protector
of the system from instability, ‘the overseer of the code of conduct’ (Guitian 1992),
according to Article IV. Fund surveillance includes fostering policy coordination, policy
advice and providing extensive information on the state of the world economy and of the
individual members. In addition Fund financing through standby loans and other
facilities can reduce the costs of adjustment to payments imbalances.
To alleviate the problems associated with increased international integration and
capital mobility the Fund has taken on a number of roles including:
a) the provision of short to medium term capital for low income (credit constrained)
countries;
b) the provision of a ‘good housekeeping seal of approval’ or signal to potential private
lenders for sovereign borrowers who have successfully followed Fund programs and
conditionality;
c) insurance against shocks, including crises facing countries which cannot access
private markets, with surveillance serving in the role of ‘a fire marshal’ and
conditionality as a form of coinsurance.
d) an ‘honest broker’ serving as a coordinator of lenders in a debt crisis. Here the Fund
is to solve a collective action problem by arranging concerted lending.
e) a crisis manager by providing international liquidity to emerging countries in financial
crises.
f) a crisis preventor by providing ‘early warning signals’ and as a ‘policeman’ forcing
disclosure of information.
Finally to help solve the problems of the new impoverished and institutionally
backward members, the Fund provides advice and technical assistance on policy reform
as well as longer term financial assistance to correct structural imbalances.
Counterarguments
Critics contend that many of the IMF’s new roles are not necessary in the
environment of exchange rates regime choice and global financial integration. They
argue that most countries should and can follow sound independent macro policies and,

19

should they do so, can insure themselves against shocks by turning to the private capital
markets.13 Furthermore that much of the Fund’s surveillance activity could be provided
by the private sector.
With respect to medium term structural assistance to poor countries, it is argued
that it creates dependency (analogous to welfare dependency), with many IMF clients
rarely leaving the Fund.14 Moreover the record on the success of Fund programs is
mixed. IMF programs generally have been associated with improvements in the current
account, reduced fiscal deficits, money growth and inflation but at the expense of
declining real growth for a number of years.15 The proliferation of structural adjustment
facilities is also viewed as encroaching on the province of the World Bank and the case
has been made for merging the two institutions.
The IMF’s role as honest broker in debt crises is also seen as overblown. In the
absence of the IMF it is asked why couldn’t private lenders and borrowers strike a deal as
they did in crises before 1914.16
Finally, the Fund has been heavily criticized in recent years for its role as a crisis
manager. The rescue loans provided by the IMF and other authorities to Mexico and the
recent Asian crisis victims are seen as engendering moral hazard both for policy makers
who may follow too lax policies in the knowledge that the Fund will intervene, and for
lenders who believe they will be bailed out.17 Such critics also regard the contagion
argument for massive and rapid intervention as overblown. Contagion may reflect a
wake-up call that other countries are following the same inconsistent policies or have the
same financial sector weaknesses as the first country attacked, or the transmission of
shocks reflecting common fundamentals.
Finally the Fund’s conditionality has been criticized for imposing too harsh a
burden on the victims of crisis.18
13

See e.g. Schwartz (1998).
Bandow and Vasquez (1994).
15
Edwards (1987), Khan (1990), Khan and Ul Haque (1998), Conway (1994).
16
See e.g. Bulow and Rogoff (1990) who argue that coordination problems among private sector banks
blocked efficiency-enhancing debt workouts in the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980’s. See Chari and
Kehoe (1998).
17
Meltzer (1998), Friedman (1998), Schwartz (1998), Shultz (1998).
18
Sachs and Radelet (1998).
14

20

With these issues in mind, we turn to a description of the historical evolution of
the IMF from its original to its present mission.
5. The IMF in search of a mission
How adequately, and with what results, has the IMF been able to meet the
problems raised by the new externalities in the world of mobile capital? What interests
shaped the development of the IMF? To what extent was it simply driven by an instinct
for internal bureaucratic self-preservation?19
With the end of the par value system, it appeared that the IMF had lost its major
purpose as the guarantor of an exchange rate system. For some time, some countries especially France and Japan - pressed for a return to par values. A "Committee of
Twenty" discussed proposals for a new international monetary order. In 1978, the Second
Amendment of the Articles of Agreement set out a carefully worded compromise whose
function it was to indicate that there would be no return to fixed exchange rates in the
near future. The new Article IV Section 1 spoke of the obligation of Fund members "to
assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates"
(i.e. not "a system of stable exchange rates"). Expectations that major currencies would
be relatively stable against each other were disappointed, and there were large movements
between the world's major currencies, the dollar, Japanese yen and the German mark. In
any case, the IMF was no longer at the center of an institutionalized exchange rate
regime, and thus completely lost its major original function.
The IMF survived as a financial institution, and four surges in lending
corresponded to major upheavals in the international system: the oil crisis of the 1970’s,
the developing country debt crisis of 1982, the transition of formerly planned economies
to the market, and the 1997 Asia crisis. The new activity was explained in terms of
different and in part incompatible suggestions for new directions for the IMF, including
the following:

19

This is the case made most forcefully by Vaubel (1994).

21

1. The breakdown of the par value system was quickly followed by a dramatic
increase in petroleum prices, and major new imbalances in the international financial
system. According to one suggestion, the new surpluses of the 1970’s arising from the oil
price hike (so-called petro-dollars) should be deposited at the IMF and then relent to
countries facing balance of payments problems as a result of their increased import prices.
In 1974 the IMF established for this purpose an "oil facility".
Who wanted this function for the Fund? The oil facility was an initiative of the
Fund, and its Managing Director, Johannes Witteveen. The U.S. Ford administration was
initially skeptical, but supported some sort of oil facility. Initially it preferred the idea of
working through the OECD.
But both the oil producers and many developing country debtors preferred to use
the private market. An attraction of the international capital markets lay in the absence of
any policy control, and developing country finance ministers reacted against attempts of
the IMF to warn against over-borrowing. The result was a lending boom, and substantial
growth in many developing countries (especially in Latin America). In the 1970’s, the
overall proportion of developing countries' current account deficits financed by the IMF
was actually lower than it had been in the 1960’s.
2. Another possible new role of the IMF was as an international policy
coordinator. The shocks of the 1970’s - the oil price hikes, recessions, increased inflation
- posed major challenges to policy.
Such discussion also took place in other institutional settings, in the G5/G7
meetings of Finance Ministers (there were informal meetings from 1973), in economic
summits (which became an annual feature after the Rambouillet meeting in November
1975), and bilaterally, and by other institutions.
The need for international policy coordination is less evident than might at first
sight appear. There have been phases in international financial history since 1973 of
almost no coordination (1981-85), and periods of quite intense efforts at coordination
(1978, 1985-89). It is not clear that the phase of no coordination was more unstable than
the previous or subsequent periods.20 In addition, both major exercises in coordination
20

See Feldstein (1994); Frankel (1994).

22

left substantial resentments. After 1978 Germany and Japan rejected what they termed
"ambitious international demand management".21 The phase between the Plaza (1985)
and Louvre (1987) meetings of the G7 Finance Ministers was blamed in retrospect in
Japan as being at the origin of the disastrous "bubble" economy, because of the pressure
placed on Japan in these exercises by the United States to pursue a looser monetary policy
and a devaluation of the yen.22
Who wanted the Fund to be a policy coordinator? There was some institutional
momentum: the IMF was looking for a role that it might play in a world in which rules
(the par value rule) had become less important and in which more room for maneuver and
more policy choices seemed to be open to national governments.
The governments of major countries found it useful to have a forum that was less
directly political than the G7 summits, for assessing the likely outcome of a country's
economic policy on the world economy, and pressing for changes: e.g. for greater
Japanese or German expansion (1977-78, 1987), a reduction of U.S. deficits (mid1980’s). But it can hardly be said that the IMF and its advice contributed greatly to the
solving of any of these problems.
3. The most useful function that the IMF contributed to the debate about policy
coordination was through the provision of data and forecasts, in the World Economic
Outlook exercise, that might be used as a basis for such policy discussions. More
recently, the IMF extended its role in the coordination process via the supply of a wide
range of national data through the institution of the Special Data Dissemination Standard.
There are two major arguments as to why the IMF rather than another, private
sector, agency should play this role. One is concerned with the desirability of a general or
common standard for data provision as a public good. The second is that because the
IMF provides financial and other assistance to governments, these are likely to have
incentives to provide the IMF with quick and accurate data. Anne Krueger concludes that
"It is at least as likely that, in the absence of the other relationships between the
multilateral institutions and individual governments, the data would be forthcoming later,

21
22

See Guth (1988) p.211.
See Funabashi (1989).

23

in less reliable form, and be less accessible for researchers and other users."23 There have
been some prominent cases in which countries, especially borrowers, have supplied
misleading data or deceived the Fund: Hungary and Yugoslavia in the 1980’s, and most
recently Russia in relation to its foreign exchange reserves in 1996 and subsequently.
Such experiences suggest that the penalties imposed for the supply of wrong data may not
be sufficiently deterrent.
4. The IMF also developed as a purveyor of policy advice, in regular consultations
with member countries (Article IV consultations), whether or not these members were
currently involved in a financial program. Already under the Bretton Woods system, the
IMF had given policy advice, and conducted consultations with governments. The most
influential and effective policy advice, however, was given as part of IMF programs, and
was thus much more difficult to ignore than similar advice given for instance by the
OECD. Moreover, the fact that the IMF as a lender has to put its own money behind its
advice should make it more careful, and less likely to be "influenced by political
demands".24
It is hard to judge the extent to which the policy advice given in such cases
produced a positive outcome in terms of "good policy" and enhanced growth. The
willingness to take outside advice varies greatly between countries. One example of a
long term success is Korea, which had annual programs with the IMF from 1965 to 1975,
and then again in the early 1980’s. These "stand-by arrangements" involved funds, which
were often not actually drawn, but which provided a significant element of support for a
trade liberalization program. This constituted an important element in Korea's
spectacular economic success in this period.
The response to the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980’s also involved a
commitment to liberalize trade and to dismantle over-extended public sectors, and such
policies have made many Latin American economies much more robust. Chile, which
was a long-standing borrower from the Fund, and had programs from 1983 to 1990, in
particular, constituted a model of success. Even repeated failures in programs are not

23
24

See Krueger (1998) p. 1997.
See Rodrik (1995) p.174, Krueger (1998) p.1999.

24

necessarily an indicator that the next program will also fail. Turkey's successful
adjustment in 1980, for instance, had been preceded by numerous failures.
On the other hand, some countries - often very poor economies - became long-term
clients of the IMF, with little policy reform. (see Table 1) Here policy advice was clearly
ineffective. The major criticism of the IMF's effectiveness at first in the 1970’s and early
1980’s concentrated on the short-term character of IMF support, which could not be an
adequate basis for longer term sustained reform programs. In response to this criticism,
the IMF developed longer-term packages (see below).
Table 1: Average Time Spent in IMF Programs by Class of Borrower
In assessing the overall success of the IMF in policy reform, it has proved
extremely difficult to separate the influence of the IMF from that of other sources of
finance, and to make counter-factual calculations of what would have happened in the
absence of IMF programs and advice.25 Frequently, the criticism has been made that
Fund programs are "anti-growth" and that they hurt especially poor people.26 The antigrowth complaint is apparently borne out by research that shows short-term reductions in
balance of payments deficits accompanied by lower output growth as a characteristic
outcome of IMF programs.27 But these programs are often the response to the dramatic
failures of previous policies, and it is unfair to attribute the pain experienced simply to the
remedy rather than the underlying sickness. On the poverty issue, there has been an
increased sensitivity to the need to accompany reform programs with anti-poverty
measures and with safety nets.
Who wanted this consultancy function for the Fund? Advice-giving is part of the
self-image of the IMF, and has long been a powerful concern of Fund staff. It follows
from the logic of the provision of funds conditional on policy criteria (conditionality).

25

For a balanced attempt to state the IMF view, see Khan (1990) and Ul Haque and Khan (1998). Also
Guitian (1995).
26
Bandow and Vasquez (1994). For a critique from a different political angle, George (1992).
27
Edwards (1989) and items cited in footnote 20 above.

25

For whose benefit is such advice provided? Following good policy may be
thought to be in the interest of a country concerned as a whole. It might well be argued
that countries would do better to hire consultants, who might devise reform strategies
more closely attuned to the concerns of a particular country.
The argument against such a privatization of advice is a matter of public policy on
an international level. The interests of a country and its population as a whole do not
coincide with those of its elites or its government. To take one example that was
common to policy debates in many developing countries: many countries maintained
over-valued exchange rates, which they defended by exchange controls. The government
could then allocate to its preferred clients foreign exchange at cheap prices, which might
be used to import cheaply foreign food (to pacify urban populations) or luxury goods for
the elite. Devaluations as recommended by the IMF in consequence frequently hurt
powerful political lobbies, but raised the incomes of politically under-represented rural
communities, whose products became worth more as a result of the exchange rate
alteration. Such measures created a potential for longer term growth: one example is
Ghana in the 1980’s. In general, because of the income redistribution associated with the
politics of devaluation, private consultants hired by and responsible solely to the national
governments concerned might well be less likely to recommend a policy that in the long
run is likely to enhance economic growth.
The IMF as a tool of the international community can afford to go against the
immediate and direct interest of individual member governments in giving policy advice.
In doing this, it should aim to address a general interest, which is not provided by other
market providers (consultancies, or investment banks) which give useful advice on many
aspects of government policy.
5. An extension of the surveillance function was that from the mid-1980’s the
IMF became increasingly popular as a purveyor of financial credibility, or a provider of a
good housekeeping seal of approval. In the era of fixed exchange rates and the gold
standard, before the First World War, linkage to the metallic standard had provided such

26

a seal of approval.28 In the world of floating rates, and increased capital mobility, many
countries saw the IMF as a provider of credibility. The IMF thus had a function that went
well beyond its own relatively modest resources. This interpretation is supported by the
increased popularity of “precautionary programs”, undertaken without an immediate
intention of borrowing; and especially by the steady decline since the mid-1980’s in the
ratio between actual and potential borrowing. Curzio Giannini has formulated the point
in a striking way: that at the same time as this ratio has reached a historic low (i.e.
countries are concluding programs but not using the financial resources), “the number of
countries with IMF programs has risen to all-time peaks”.29 A potential corollary of the
current situation is that a seal of approval might be given for policies or economies that
are not as strong as might be desired. This phenomenon produced the suggestion that, as
a further confidence-inducing measure, the quick provision of IMF resources in a crisis
should be linked to the prior compliance with a tough set of regulatory requirements.30
This proposal was realized in April 1999, in the creation of Contingent Credit Lines,
providing short-term support in the case of a sudden and disruptive loss of market
confidence.
Figure 5: Transactions of the International Monetary Fund, 1955 – 1997
6. The IMF developed as a lender at subsidized interest rates to very poor countries,
where there existed no hopes of market access (see Figure 4). In practice, it thereby
became in part an aid agency. Such financing has given rise to much of the debate about
the effectiveness of IMF policy-advice outlined in the previous section.
Who wanted this function for the Fund? The IMF moved into a vacuum, and took
on a function that many believed it was not well prepared for (the original intention was
for the Fund to be like a credit cooperative, with short term ad hoc support and no long
term programs). It moved beyond short-term programs in large measure as a response to

28

Bordo and Rockoff (1996). The restored gold standard also served as a good housekeeping seal of
approval in the interwar period: Bordo Edelestein and Rockoff (1999).
29
Giannini (1999), p.50.
30
Calomiris (1998).

27

widespread political (and also academic) criticism that such arrangements were ill-suited
to the encouragement of long-term policy reform. This development often occurred at the
instigation of the IMF's members, especially of some of the large industrial countries
(France and the UK), who looked for a mechanism of giving support at arm's length,
without a direct involvement. In the United States, too, the experience with USAID led
to a belief that more effective policy support, and an avoidance of duplication in aid
efforts, could be achieved through a multilateral approach.
In 1975, a new Extended Fund Facility was established aimed at a longer time
framework for the adjustment process. Drawings (i.e. borrowings) occurred over three
years, with repayment over 4 to 8 years. Some of the earliest programs under the facility
were unsuccessful, in some case because of the absence of policy reform (Kenya) and
because favorable external circumstances made the IMF and its advice appear
unattractive (Mexico).
Such programs did not deal with very low income countries, in which debt service
at conventional interest rates was impossible. In 1986, the IMF created the Structural
Adjustment Facility (SAF), with a concessionary rate of interest (0.5%) with repayment
over 5-10 years after a 5 year grace period. In 1987 larger funding for such programs
came with the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). These facilities brought
the IMF into what had traditionally been the domain of the World Bank. Most ESAF
cases were in sub-Saharan Africa, and required, as part of the package, debt relief. In
some ESAF cases, reform has been effective, and some private funds began to flow
(Ghana, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka). But there are also many disappointments, which have
produced more radical demands for debt relief.
Long-standing arrears in making repayments to the IMF have arisen mostly in the
cases of states with major political problems: civil war, disintegration, or a transition to
uncooperative and aggressive dictatorship (pariah states). In April 1998, the following
had arrears overdue by more than six months: Afghanistan, Democratic Republic Congo,
Iraq, Liberia, Somalia, Sudan, Yugoslavia (which is currently no longer a member of the
IMF). In other cases, arrears have been dealt with by a mixture of policy reform and

28

bilateral and multilateral assistance. In April 1998, arrears amounted to 4% of the IMF’s
outstanding credit.
Table 2: Arrears to the IMF
7. In the 1990’s, the IMF became a manager or facilitator in the transition of the
former socialist countries into market oriented economies. The IMF was not really
prepared for this role, but already in the 1980’s, the IMF had played an important part in
implementing liberalization strategies in communist economies (China, Poland,
Hungary). Many reformers believed that the IMF would be valuable as an external source
of advice. In 1985, for instance, the office of the Polish underground opposition
Solidarity organization sent a message to the IMF's Managing Director stating that the
movement welcomed Polish membership of the IMF, but that only "extensive, allembracing economic reforms" could hope to be successful.
After the political changes of 1989-91, economic reform in the formerly centrally
planned economies was accompanied by a substantial commitment of IMF resources.31
Individual aspects of IMF advice have been criticized. For too long, the IMF
recommended a single currency, a ruble bloc, for former Soviet Republics. In 1992, the
IMF may have been too cautious in Russia, and missed the opportunity to support a farreaching reform on the model successfully adopted by Poland in 1989-90.32 Most of the
criticism of the IMF's Russian programs has focused, in our view rightly, not on overtough but rather on too lax conditionality.33 Overall, however, the IMF played a
significant role in the transition to market economies.
In the successful cases, such programs fit well with the IMF's original mission of
encouraging convertibility of currencies, and more generally a path of liberalization. A
short-term measure of support is needed when there is as yet no market confidence,
perhaps because of a pre-existing debt overhang dating back from the pre-reform period.

31
32
33

James (1996) p. 567.
Sachs ( 1995).
Meltzer (1998).

29

The support is limited to a relatively short duration, and is followed by a renegotiation of
old debt and access to markets.
The Central European experience in the 1990’s gives a good model of how IMF
support should work. Poland used IMF resources in this way from 1990-6, and Hungary
had Fund programs from 1990 to 1998, but drew little in the 1993-8 program and nothing
in the 1996-8 program. An IMF setting was used in these cases to achieve market
confidence.
Who wanted this function for the Fund? At first, the main demand for this
function comes from reformers in the countries concerned themselves, who wanted
external support for their policies. With the political changes of 1989-91, such support
became an objective of the large industrial countries.
8. The new role of the IMF that has attracted the most attention - especially after
the experience of Mexico in 1994-5 and Asia after 1997 - is as a crisis manager. Here its
clients are countries where there was access to the private capital markets that was
suddenly cut off. In cases where confidence was maintained, there would be sufficient
liquidity from private sources. However, because their track record as good borrowers or
as examples of financial probity was not as good as in the advanced countries, nor had
they set up a contingent line of credit, so that in the event of a crisis, the funds would not
be available for them.34 In such cases where confidence disappeared, it was argued that
the Fund should become a substitute for the private market, as a way of financing
imbalances and restoring expectations of stability: in short, as a reserve center or as a
lender of last resort.35
There are two ways of providing such assistance. The first, immediate support in
the case of a liquidity crisis, in order to forestall an imminent collapse of the financial
markets, is conventionally undertaken in a national setting by central banks or
conceivably, internationally by the central bankers' central bank, the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS). The second, in which policy changes as well as
persuasion of financial markets that a new leaf has been turned are required in order to
restore confidence, after a collapse has already taken place, has been the domain of the
34

At least at tolerable rates of interest.

30

IMF. This intervention requires the longer-term supply of resources than could be
possible for the BIS.
In the 1982 developing country debt crisis, the IMF saw itself acting as a crisis
manager, as an honest broker in preventing a creditor panic by the major bank lenders,
and - in the eyes of some - as a substitute for the absence of a genuine international lender
of last resort. This function was replayed in cases where there was fear of contagion, in
1994-5 in the Mexican crisis, and in the aftermath of the 1997 Asia crisis.
In the late summer of 1982, the announcement of difficulties in servicing Mexico's
external debt led immediately to fears of a systematic collapse of the international
banking system, since exposure to Mexico and other troubled debtor countries amounted
to substantially more than the capital of many major banks. At this point, the IMF was
quite ill prepared to act as crisis manager. To do so would require quick and decisive
action in the face of a sudden crisis. The IMF makes decisions in its Executive Board,
subject to voting by Executive Directors who consult their national authorities (and, in the
case of the elected Executive Directors, usually a substantial number of national
governments). These decisions, as in the Mexican case, depend on an often lengthy
negotiation of the reform program with the borrowing country. On the other hand, central
banks, with their traditions of secrecy and clear operational guidelines, are able to act
very speedily; and, in the Mexican crisis, both the U.S. Federal Reserve and the central
bankers' central bank, the BIS, did act extremely promptly in August 1982. But they
wanted assurance that they would not be left on their own, and that their short-term
assistance would be used to mobilize the rest of the financial community.
In the 1982 debt crisis, the IMF was at the center of a triangular conflation of the
functions of an international arbiter, a domestic regulator, and the market. First, the IMF
had become, for practical purposes, a part of the domestic regulatory mechanism of U.S.
banking. Linkage of commercial bank loans with IMF programs could offer a way of
avoiding the consequences of non-accruing or non-performing loans. The definitions of
what constituted sound banking were being rewritten in accordance with the requirements
of the world financial system as a whole. Secondly, the banks themselves became part of
35

See for instance Kindleberger (1978).

31

the IMF's international lending exercise. Their funds greatly enhanced the facilities that
the IMF could hold out as the reward to a country for the successful completion of a
program - in effect for rejoining the international financial system. An agreement with
the IMF was supposed to have a "catalytic" effect on the private sector. Finally, the IMF
would do the work that the banks had hitherto neglected to perform themselves: negotiate
sound criteria for the use of funds, which would make economic stabilization and
adjustment possible and would allow for banks to be repaid. In order to get this service,
however, the banks would have to pay the price of putting up additional resources. By
acting in this way, the IMF ensured that lending continued, and that the cutting off of
external credit did not produce a world depression of the type experienced in the past.
The 1982 crisis highlighted a failure of banking supervision to take account of the
internationalization of capital markets. It was now thought that banking supervision
should be carried out internationally in a more systematized and open way than the
tentative, informal, and secret coordination and exchange of regulatory experience carried
out in the framework of the Basle Committee on Banking Regulation and Supervisory
Practices (which had begun functioning in 1974). Part of the pressure came from
domestic opinion in the United States and from the widespread fear that a solution to the
international debt problem would involve a bailout of the banks. The consequent
reluctance of the U.S. Congress in 1983 to increase IMF quotas (as part of the Eighth
General Review), in the wake of the Latin American debt crisis, could only be overcome
through a legislative measure which extended control of banking. The International
Lending Supervision Act (November 1983) gave U.S. regulatory authorities the legal
right and the obligation to "cause banking institutions to achieve and to maintain adequate
capital by establishing minimum levels of capital." It also included a request for U.S.
regulators to pursue a convergence of international bank capital standards. Subsequent
negotiations, first with the United Kingdom, then with Japan and the other G-10
members, produced a set of standards embodied as the Basle Accord of 1988.36
Unlike 1982, 1994 was not primarily a problem of commercial bank credit. The
crisis of 1994-95 followed a period of euphoric confidence in Mexico's prospects and a
36

See Cohen (1986), Norton (1989), Granirer (1994), Goldstein et al (1992), pp. 10-15.

32

surge of foreign direct investment but also of portfolio flows. This new Mexican
"miracle" raised very intricate problems of how the financial sector and the exchange rate
should be managed. In particular, when the return of flight capital and the resumption of
capital inflows brought upward pressure on the exchange rate, and the exchange rate was
used as an anti-inflationary instrument, a risk arose that the result might be a
reappearance of the old problems of an external rate sufficiently high to serve as a
deterrent to domestic activity and a disincentive to exporters. The difficulties were
exacerbated by an expansionary monetary policy. At first, the Mexican authorities tried
to conceal the extent of the diminution of their foreign exchange reserves through the
issue of dollar-denominated debt. The political stakes attached to the maintenance of the
exchange rate produced a taboo on discussion of the parity in the Mexican administration
- a taboo that has often characterized pegged rate systems.
When, at the end of 1994, the Mexican authorities attempted to correct the
exchange rate over-valuation with an ill-prepared devaluation, at the same time as a large
quantity of public sector short-term dollar-denominated instruments (the tesobonos)
needed to be renewed, a new financial crisis showed the extent of the instability of the
financial system. The large current account deficit (over 8 percent of GDP) that in 1994
had been financed by private capital inflows now appeared unsustainable. The magnitude
of the deficit was a deterrent to further inflows. Mexico also produced a knock-on blow
to other emerging economies, in a manner analogous to the spread of the 1982 debt
increase to other middle-income developing countries. In early 1995 there was a "tequila
effect" as speculators sold the currencies and financial assets not only of Latin American
economies with large current account deficits and similar problems to Mexico, but also in
East Asian emerging markets. The Mexican crisis was met by a $17.8 billion IMF standby program (amounting to an unprecedented 688 percent of Mexico's quota in the IMF),
in combination with $20 billion from the U.S. Stabilization Fund and $10 billion from the
G-10, after intense high level diplomacy involving chiefly the U.S. Treasury and the
IMF's Managing Director.

33

The IMF termed the peso crisis "the first financial crisis of the twenty-first
century".37 The speed with which the IMF program had to be put together in January
1995 illustrates the way in which globalization requires faster responses: the IMF
program was already fully in place by February 1, 1995. The 1982 crisis became public
in August 1982, but the discussions with the banks about the IMF program only occurred
in November and December. In 1995 much more rapid action was required, and also a
greater commitment of funds, because the number of actors was so much greater. It was
impossible to use the strategy of 1982, and corral the foreign investors (who were now
not banks, but instead were represented in innumerable mutual and pension funds). There
was a fear of a global contagion, and a belief that the only way to limit such contagion lay
in the extension of some protection to investors. These considerations imposed a greater
immediate burden on the IMF and the U.S. government to act to limit the crisis.
However the ultimate beneficiaries of the rescue were holders of the tesobonos who were
bailed out. The size and the speed of the package ended the crisis much more quickly
than had been the case in 1982, and Mexico very soon was able to return to international
capital markets as a borrower. The IMF and U.S. Treasury loans were quickly paid off in
the first quarter of 1997 by the Mexican government, borrowing at higher rates, largely
from European banks.
According to the conventional view, the Mexican package was a success although
the real economy has yet to fully recover; but it created a precedent and expectations.
The Mexican peso crisis provided a pattern for crisis management using both global and
regional sources of rescue funds. By bailing out the holders of tesobonos it also planted
the seeds of ‘moral hazard’ which may have increased the likelihood and severity of the
next set of crises.
The Mexican model from 1994-5 guided the initial response to the 1997 Thailand
crisis, where again there was a speedily assembled IMF program ($ 4 bn.), together with
assistance not only from the nearby economic great power (Japan put up another $ 4 bn.
through its Export-Import Bank), but also from the major players in the region: Australia,
Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore. This approach in turn was extended in an initial
37

Boughton (2000).

34

response to the Indonesian crisis, with a $10 bn. contribution from the IMF, with
additional funding through the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and
Indonesia's major trading partners. But the rapidity by which crises jumped between
Asian countries underlined the limits of regional action and the problem of the finite
resources of the IMF.
The ensuing Korean crisis, however, in which banks needed to be persuaded to
roll over foreign currency denominated debt, resembled much more the Mexican crisis of
1982.
The outbreak of a generalized Asian crisis produced a general "flight to quality"
that worsened borrowing conditions for emerging markets and sensitized investors to
issues that they had previously ignored, such as poor fiscal performance in countries such
as Brazil and Russia. The Russian default and devaluation on August 17, 1998, triggered
renewed capital flight from Brazil and Argentina; and in the months that followed there
were fears of a widespread crisis. The negotiation and announcement in November 1997
of an IMF package for Brazil postponed the Brazilian devaluation to a moment (January
13 1999) when it did less damage to the international financial system.
In the debt crisis of the 1980’s, the involvement of the private sector had been a
crucial part of the IMF-led workout (first through the obligation to put up new money;
then through the debt reduction proposals systematized in the Brady Plan). In the crises
of the 1990’s, it was less easy to manage the private sector contribution to the workout.
The multiplicity of creditors precluded a repetition of the new money feature of the 1982
packages. Shareholders took substantial losses in the 1990’s. Fixed interest debt
remained a major problem, and one proposed solution involves a rewriting of bond
contracts to include a possibility of deferred repayment under negotiated circumstances.38
One response to criticisms that IMF rescue packages constitute bailouts, in which
private investors are not appropriately penalized for having taken high risks, is that some
IMF programs (notably in Ukraine) have been made dependent on a renegotiation or

38

See De Gregorio (1999).

35

restructuring of the conditions of bonds. Such an innovation, which clearly imposes costs
on the private sector, has been highly controversial.39
Who wanted the crisis management function for the Fund? The financial
community wanted and then came to expect a bailout. The response to the crisis in 1982,
but especially in 1994-5 in Mexico, created a precedent, and encouraged investors to
believe that an international rescue package would protect them against loss. Russia was
believed by investors to be in a specially protected category, because of the security
implications of any Russian collapse (this was the doctrine of "too nuclear to fail"). To
this extent, past responses to crisis, and the existence of the IMF, has created moral
hazard. It is worth noting that since most of the inflows to Asian and Latin American
economies were private sector credits, they were not protected by IMF rescues, except to
the extent that national governments used IMF resources to rescue domestic financial
institutions with debts to foreign creditors.40
Governments in industrial countries did not want a generalized financial crisis; but
in addition were especially sensitive to the problems caused by financial collapses in their
region.
It is possible to think of the crisis management function as capable of being
privatized. For much of the nineteenth century, the international banking family of the
Rothschilds played a role in crisis management quite analogous to the IMF, lending funds
to countries as well as companies that were in temporary difficulties, and making
judgments about the appropriateness of fiscal reform initiatives.41 In the interwar period,
the Swedish Match Trust took on such a function for many of the emerging markets of
the time in central and southern Europe, while J.P. Morgan dealt with more prosperous
developed countries, such as Belgium, France and the United Kingdom. But in order to
be able to take on such a role, a private firm would need to be so large as to have a clearly
recognizable long-term stake in the financial stability of the system as a whole (what
Mancur Olson referred to as a "super-encompassing interest").42 In the event, there were

39
40
41
42

See Siebert (1999).
See Chinn, Dooley and Shresta (1999).
See Ferguson (1998) and Bordo and Schwartz (1999).
McGuire and Olson (1996).

36

problems with the exercise of such power: the Swedish Match Trust was fraudulently run,
and its founder, the speculator Ivar Kreuger, killed himself in 1932 as the extent of his
defalcation emerged. In the domestic setting, also, a powerful individual or bank could
fulfill the lender of last resort function (in the United States, J.P. Morgan played this part
in the 1890s and 1900s). Such solutions ran into widespread criticism because they
seemed to offer the possibility of an abuse of power by a private individual. The result of
such criticism was a demand for a public institution: in the U.S. domestic context, the
Federal Reserve System.
In the 1990’s, some countries (notably Argentina) have experimented with prearranged (stand-by) credit lines from commercial banks, which represent a private sector
alternative to IMF support. While these might be a useful support in the case of a
localized crisis, in the case of a general or global financial panic the offer of such credits
faces the same problem of a limited supply of resources as does the IMF.
A crisis coordinator, even with limited financial resources in comparison with the
overall volume of global financial markets, will be more useful if it is able in an
emergency quickly to mobilize official resources. It is more likely that an accountable
public sector organization, such as the IMF, can take this role, although the history of
domestic central banking suggests that if it does it should lend on the basis of sound
collateral at a penalty rate. For private institutions to assume this function on a large
scale would raise the question of the abuse of private power as it did at the beginning of
this century. But smaller institutions are unlikely to perform this function, because of the
risk of loss in a panic situation. The main attraction of private market providers - that
they will be penalized by bankruptcy in the case of failure - is an attraction only in normal
circumstances; in a crisis or panic situation that strength is a weakness.
How far does the existence of the IMF distort the operation of markets by
providing crisis lending at less than the penalty rates that a market might charge? To
answer this question adequately, it would be necessary to imagine a counter-factual world
without an IMF, in other words without the security that a rescue would be mounted by a
lender whose debt enjoys a far higher measure of legal protection than that of other
(private) creditors. The pre-1914 world provided some of the elements of such a

37

counterfactual. In that era sovereign debt, even gold denominated, in many emerging
countries for example Argentina, Chile, and Brazil, paid higher risk premia in London in
non-crises periods than did the recent Asian crisis victims before 1997.43 The precedent
of the earlier Mexican bailout, but more importantly, the very existence of the IMF,
provided a security blanket that did not exist before WWI.
To summarize this long section, the reincarnation of the IMF in the three decades
after the end of the par value system reflected a supply response by a willing and
competent bureaucracy to the demands of both large and small constituents.
6. International Politics and the IMF
It remains to examine a final, and controversial, area, in which the IMF has
undoubtedly played a role which has been useful for the general national interest of the
United States, but which may on occasion lead to conflict with the more narrowly
conceived economic rationale for the IMF. What are the general political and security
implications of the existence of an institution such as the IMF?
The IMF was originally largely a creation of the United States, motivated by the
belief that - as Treasury Secretary Morgenthau put it when addressing the inaugural
session of the Bretton Woods conference - "Prosperity, like peace is indivisible. We
cannot afford to have it scattered here or there among the fortunate or to enjoy it at the
expense of others."44 The institution was a way of projecting a particular way of thinking
about the world. Behind this thinking lay the calculation that a more prosperous world
would also be a safer world, and that the transition to such stability was well worth
paying a limited financial price.
Since the collapse of communism, the basic vision of Bretton Woods has become
a matter of a global consensus. In the 1990’s, a widespread recognition developed that
economic stability and political stability go together.45 But this linkage is interpreted
43

See Bordo and Rockoff (1996).
United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference, Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, July 1 to July 22,
1944: Final Act and Related Documents (Washington D.C. U.S. Government Printing House, 1944).
45
See for instance, the Chairman’s statement at the end of the G-7 Halifax summit, June 17, 1995:
“Democracy, human rights and good governance are indispensable components of development.”
44

38

much more precisely than at the time of Bretton Woods: this means a move toward the
market and at the same time moves toward democracy and accountable institutions. It is
in the interest of the United States to promote this development.
The collapse of the communist economies, or (in the case of China) their
transformation into market economies was the last stage in the creation of the new
consensus. The consequence has been an increasing homogeneity of political outlook, as
well as of the economic order. Indeed, one key insight is that the two are linked: that
economic efficiency depends on a functioning civil society, on the rule of law, and on
respect for private property. Thus in the 1990’s, the IMF (and the World Bank) have
become intensely concerned with problems of governance.46
Such issues raise questions of political costs and limitations that may not always
coincide with economic rationality, however. There is a strategic or geo-political element
to some of the work of the Fund. Attacking excessive military expenditure, corruption,
and undemocratic practices is easier for international institutions in the cases of small
countries, such as Croatia, Kenya or Romania, or even in isolated states such as Pakistan
or Nigeria. But it is likely to be hard and controversial in large states with substantial
military and economic potential, for instance, in say Russia or China. The public position
is that expressed by the IMF’s Managing Director when he recalls telling President
Yeltsin that the IMF would treat Russia in exactly the same way it treated Burkina Faso.47
But Russia, and its strategic stability, are clearly of direct concern to the United States,
and to other major countries, in a way that Burkina Faso is not.
During the Cold War era, there was political pressure from the international
community (i.e. the West) to support financially particular states for foreign policy
reasons, because they were essential to the stability of a particular region (Egypt, or
Zaire). In these cases, IMF programs were concluded on the basis of weak conditionality
and the absence of effective reform. From the point of view of the interests of the United
States, increased stability may have been worth the price of a wasted program. Such
operations had little effect on financial markets, because the countries that received such
support generally had little market access. In the post-Cold War era, however, strategic
46

For instance, Camdessus (1998). See also Pauly (1998).

39

and security considerations have led to support operations, for states that do have access
to capital markets, notably to Russia. Here the result was a major moral hazard problem,
which in the summer of 1998 produced a threat to global financial stability. Foreign
investment in Russia frequently was justified by the (as it proved in August 1998)
eventually erroneous belief that the IMF would never let Russia collapse. Russia had
become in the 1990’s by far the largest user of IMF resources, and obtained access to IMF
loans by concealing the reserve position of its central bank from the IMF.
The IMF’s own justification of its Russian policy is also frequently presented in
the light of the wishes of the “international community”.48 The mixing of strategic policy
and economics has had unfortunate effects, not only in encouraging inappropriate private
sector inflows to Russia. The rationale for the Russian policy has also created a
precedent and an incentive for other states, notably in the Indian sub-continent, to develop
nuclear capacity as a way of obtaining attention (including financial support) from the
international community.
A substantial part of the moral hazard problem, which has been particularly acute
in the Russian case, should be recognized as deriving, not from the purely financial role
of the IMF, but from the way in which security perceptions have led to an extension of
that role. This troublesome development, however, has followed directly from the
original mission and vision of the Bretton Woods conference, in which world-wide
economic well-being was justified primarily as a way of preserving world peace and
stability.

7. Conclusion: The Case for Reform in Light of Past Experience

47

See Camdessus (1999).
E.g. Odling-Smee (1999), p.273: “The world community, through the members of this institution, has
clearly expressed the view that Russia continues to deserve support as long as it is taking appropriate steps
to tackle the difficult problems it faces.”

48

40

The IMF’s evolution since the 1970s has reflected both the demand for its services and
its willingness to provide those services justified by the perception at the Fund that there
were new market failures.
There has been a fundamental change of environment: the breakdown of the par value
system, and the new mobility of capital, and financial deregulation. Capital flows have
taken a role that no-one expected at the time the IMF was created. The international
political system has changed too: there are many new countries, with quite new problems,
and the Soviet bloc collapsed economically and politically.
The IMF responsed to these external challenges by expanding its activities. It enlarged
the scope of policies considered as part of the surveillance exercise. The number and
length of duration of stabilization packages increased, but these were successful only in a
few cases. In the 1990s, in response to crises in a globalized capital market, the IMF
engaged in liquidity crisis management. A response to the new politics of the 1990s
involved an expansion into non-macroeconomic policy areas, such as criticisms of
military spending, corruption, and non-democratic practices. After the Asian crises in
1997 and since, the IMF also discussed areas such as corporate governance and
accounting practices that traditionally lay outside its purview.
The outcome is: IMF surveillance produces highly useful general reports (WEO,
Capital Markets); but Article IV consultations have a questionable use in that they
frequently lack bite when the country concerned is not engaged in an IMF program. In
particular, they seem largely irrelevant for most of the advanced industrial countries. A
perceived over-extension of the IMF into new areas of policy concern involves unpopular
interventions into national sovereignty. The poorer clients of the IMF often become

trapped in a welfare dependency. The management of liquidity crises has contributed to
moral hazard and at the same time has not stopped crises from spreading.
In what directions is reform of the IMF likely to proceed? It is clear that markets are
powerful mechanisms for discipline, but they can be usefully supplemented by IMF
policies and advice. In general, the historical record suggests that the IMF should operate

41

as a traffic policeman as much as a fireman: anticipating and preventing disasters rather
than dealing with their painful aftermath. Such a mission might involve:
-- a commitment to improve the reliability and timeliness of statistics.
-- independence from politics (since the political instrumentalization of the IMF
conflicts and harms its core mission, which is aimed at macro-economic stability).
transparency of operations.
-- the establishment of as many rules as possible which are contingent and incentivecompatible. This would enhance transparency. Pre-qualification for crisis lending may
be desirable, and may become a powerful instrument to achieve better national policies.
-- the willingness to link lending to policy conditionality. Such conditionality, in the
past an essential part of the IMF’s mode of operations, has been severely criticized by
the Meltzer commission,49 and it has been too complicated and remains potentially
politicized. But it at present still remains the principal lever through which the IMF can
effect improvement of members’ policies. Moreover even if the IMF followed strictly
rule-based pre-qualified assistance, policy performance would continue to be an
important criterion.
In general, it is clear that the IMF is best equipped to handle a more limited range of
tasks that lie closer to its historical mission. Such a realization implies a retreat of its core
area of expertise and responsibility. Such a core includes data standards, liquidity
management, and surveillance (the provision of information that markets cannot provide).
Longer term concessional lending to very poor LDCs does not fit well into this core, and
might be handled better by the World Bank.
Such proposals are consistent with the IMF’s mandate. To go further than this could
not be achieved at the insistence of one country alone, even of the most powerful
economy in the world. It would require a new and constructive Bretton Woods
conference, which is truly unlikely in the present world conditions.

49

International Financial Institutions Advisory Committee (2000)

42

References
Artis, Michael T.(1996), How Accurate are the IMF’s Short-Term Forecasts? Another
Examination of the World Economic Outlook, IMF Working Paper WP/96/89.
Bordo, Michael D. (1993), “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A
Historical Overview” in Michael D. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds). A Retrospective
on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Bordo, Michael D. and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a ‘Good
Housekeeping Seal of Approval’”, Journal of Economic History 56/2, pp. 389-428.

43

Bordo, Michael D., Michael Edelstein and Hugh Rockoff (1999), “Was Adherence to the
Gold Standard a ‘Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval’ During the Interwar Period?”,
NBER Working Paper 7186 (June).
Bordo, Michael D., Barry Eichengreen, and Douglas Irwin (1999) “Is Globalization
Today Really Different that Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?” NBER Working Paper
No. 7195. June
Bordo, Michael D., and Anna Schwartz (1999), “Under What Circumstances, Past and
Present, Have International Rescues of Countries in Distress Been Successful?” Journal
of International Money and Finance Vol. 18, No. 4 (August) pp. 683-708
Boughton, James M. (2000), ‘From Suez to Tequila: The IMF as Crisis Manager’,
Economic Journal. Pp.1-19.
Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1990). “Cleaning Up Third World Debt Without
Being Taken to the Cleaners.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (Winter) pp. 31-42
Calomiris, Charles W. (1998), “Blueprints for a New Global Financial Architecture”,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Conference on Asia, October 8-10, 1998.
Camdessus, Michel (1998), “The IMF and Good Governance”, Address at Transparency
International, Paris, January 21, 1998.
Camdessus, Michel (1999), “Nous ne pouvons suivre chaque dollar que nous déboursons”
(interview), Le Temps, August 31, 1999.

Capie, Forrest (1998) “Can There be an International Lender of Last Resort?”
International Finance. Vol. 1, No. 2. December. pp. 311-326

44

Chari, V.V. and Patrick Kehoe (1998) “Asking the Right Questions about the IMF.”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 1998 Annual Report
Chinn, Menzie D., Michael P Dooley, Sona Shrestha (1999) “Latin America and East
Asia in the Context of an Insurance Model of Currency Crises.” Journal of International
Money and Finance Vol. 18, No. 4. August. pp. 659-682
Cohen, Benjamin J., In Whose Interest? International Banking and American Foreign
Policy (New Haven: Yale University Press), 1986.
Conway, Patrick (1994) “IMF Lending Programs: Participation and Impact.” Journal of
Development Economics Vol. 45: pp. 365-391
Edwards, Sebastian, “The International Monetary Fund and the Developing Countries: A
Critical Evaluation”, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 31, 1989,
pp. 7-68.
Eichengreen, Barry (1999), Toward a New International Financial Architecture: A
Practical Post-Asia Agenda. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics
Feldstein, Martin (1994) “American Economic Policy in the 1980s: A Personal View”,
in (ed.) Martin Feldstein, American Economic Policy in the 1980s, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, pp. 1-79.
Feldstein, Martin (1998) “Refocusing the IMF.” Foreign Affairs 77 (March/April) pp. 2023
Ferguson, Niall (1998), The World’s Banker: The History of the House of Rothschild,
London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson

45

Frankel, Jeffrey (1994), “The Making of Exchange Rate Policy in the 1980s”, in (ed.)
Martin Feldstein, American Economic Policy in the 1980s, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 293-348.
Friedman, Milton (1998) “Markets to the Rescue.” The Wall Street Journal October 13.
Funabashi, Yoichi (1989), Managing the Dollar: From the Plaza to the Louvre,
Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
George, Susan (1992), The Debt Boomerang: How Third World Debt Harms Us All
Boulder: Westview Press.
Giannini, Curzio (1999), “Enemy of None but a Common Friend of All”? An
International Perspective on the Lender-of-Last-Resort Function, Princeton Essays in
International Finance No. 214, June 1999

Goldstein, Morris, et al. International Capital Markets: Developments, Prospects and
Policy Issues (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 1992).
Granirer, Daniel, ‘A Modern Great Power Concert: New York, Tokyo, and the Political
Economy of International Financial Regulatory Cooperation’, Princeton PhD 1994.
Guitian, Manuel (1992), The Unique Nature of the Responsibilities of the International
Monetary Fund. IMF Pamphlet Series No. 46
Guitian, Manuel, “Conditionality: Past, Present, and Future”, IMF Staff Papers 42:4,
1995, pp. 792-835.

46

Guth, Wilfred (1988) in Guth (ed) Economic Policy Coordination, Washington D.C. IMF
1988. P. 211
International Financial Institutions Advisory Commission (2000) Report of the
International Financial Institutions Advisory Commission Allan H. Meltzer, Chairman,
Washington D.C. GPO
James, Harold, International Monetary Cooperation Since Bretton Woods (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1996).
Kaminsky, Graciela, Saul Lizondo and Carmen Reinhart (1998), “Leading Indicators of
Currency Crises” IMF Staff Papers 45/1, pp. 1-48.
Kenen, Peter B. (1986), Financing, Adjustment and the International Monetary Fund.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
Khan, Mohsin S., “The Macroeconomic Effects of Fund-Supported Adjustment
Programs”, IMF Staff Papers 27:2, 1990, pp. 195-231
Kindleberger, Charles (1978) Manias, Panics and Crashes. New York: Basic Books
Krueger, Anne O. (1998) “Whether the World Bank and the IMF?” Journal of Economic
Literature XXXVI.
Masson, Paul and Michael Mussa (1990), The Role of the IMF: Financing and its
Interactions with Adjustment and Surveillance. IMF Pamphlet Series No. 50
McGuire, Martin C. and Mancur Olson, “The Economics of Autocracy and Majority
Rule: The Invisible Hand and the Use of Force.” Journal of Economic Literature 34/1: pp.
72-96.

47

Meltzer, Allan (1998) “What’s Wrong with the IMF? What Would be Better?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago. October.
Norton, Joseph Jude, ‘Capital Adequacy Standards: A Legitimate Regulatory Concern for
Prudential Supervision of Banking Activities?’ Ohio State Law Journal, 49, 1989.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor (1998) “The Great Depression as a Watershed:
International Capital Mobility over the Long-Run.” In Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin
and Eugene N. White (eds) The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the
American Economy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
353-402
Odling-Smee, John (1999), “Russia’s current economic policies are deserving of IMF
support” IMF Survey 28/17 (August 30), pp.273-4.
Pauly, Louis (1997), Who Elected the Bankers? Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press,
1997.
Pauly, Louis (1998), “International Financial Institutions and National Economic
Governance”, paper presented at Princeton University conference, April 16/17, 1998.
Rodrik, Dani, “Why is there Multilateral Lending?” in (eds.) Michael Bruno and Boris
Pleskovic, Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, Washington,
D.C.: World Bank, 1995
Sachs, Jeffrey D, (1995), “Why Russia has failed to stabilize”, in (ed.) Anders Aslund,
Russian Economic Reform at Risk, London: Pinter, pp. 53-63.

48

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Stephen Radelet (1998), “The East Asian Financial Crisis:
Diagnosis, Remedies, Prospects”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp.1-74.
Sachs, Jeffrey (1998) “Do We Need an International Lender of Last Resort?” Harvard
University Mimeo
Schwartz, Anna J. (1998) “Time to Terminate the ESF and the IMF.” Cato Journal (1998)
Shultz, George, William Simon and Walter Wriston (1998) “Who needs the IMF?” The
Wall Street Journal, February 3.
Siebert, Horst (1999), “Improving the World’s Financial Architecture: The Role of the
IMF”, Kiel: Institut für Weltwirtschaft Discussion Paper 351
Ul Haque, Nadeem and Mohsin Khan (1998) “Do IMF Supported Programs Work? A
Survey of Cross-Country Empirical Evidence.” IMF Working Paper WP/98/169
Vaubel, Roland (1994) “The Political Economy of the IMF: A Public Choice Analysis.”
In Doug Bandow and Jaime Vasquez (eds). Perpetuating Poverty: the World Bank, the
IMF and the Developing World. Washington, D.C. The Cato Institute.

49

Table 1. Average time spent (in years) in IMF programs by Class of Borrower
A: Stand by Arrangements
Decade

1981-90

Major
Industrial
Economies
0.5
(0.36)
1.5
(0.66)
0.5
(0.36)
0

1991-99

0

1951-60
1961-70
1971-80

Other Industrial
Economies

Developing
Economies

Transition
Economies

0.7
(0.93)
0.3
(0.30)
0.8
(0.82)
0.3
(0.54)
0.1
(0.18)

0.4
(0.92)
1.8
(2.50)
1.3
(1.30)
2.1
(1.84)
0.7
(1.31)

0
0.1
(0.54)
0.2
(0.74)
0.5
(1.25)
1.6
(1.35)

B: Extended Arrangements (July 75-Dec 98)
Decade

Other Industrial
Economies

Developing
Economies

Transition
Economies

1971-80

Major
Industrial
Economies
0

0

0

1981-90

0

0

1991-99

0

0

0.3
(0.78)
0.6
(1.24)
0.5
(1.34)

1.1
(1.59)

0

C: Structural Adjustment (Aug86-Dec98)
Decade

Other Industrial
Economies

Developing
Economies

Transition
Economies

1981-90

Major
Industrial
Economies
0

0

0

1991-99

0

0

1
(1.54)
0.2
(0.69)

50

0

D: Enhanced Structural Adjustment (July 88-Dec98)
Decade

Other Industrial
Economies

Developing
Economies

Transition
Economies

1981-90

Major
Industrial
Economies
0

0

0

1991-99

0

0

0.3
(0.87)
2.1
(2.80)

1.2
(2.19)

Other Industrial
Economies

Developing
Economies

Transition
Economies

1991-99

0

0.7
(0.93)
0.3
(0.30)
0.8
(0.82)
0.3
(0.54)
0.1
(0.18)

0.4
(0.92)
1.8
(2.50)
1.6
(1.66)
3.7
(2.77)
3.3
(2.94)

0

1981-90

Major
Industrial
Economies
0.5
(0.36)
1.5
(0.66)
0.5
(0.36)
0

All IMF programs
Decade
1951-60
1961-70
1971-80

Source: International Monetary Fund, Annual Reports
Note: Numbers in parentheses indicate standard deviations

51

0.1
(0.54)
0.2
(0.74)
0.5
(1.25)
3.8
(2.59)

Table 2. Arrears to the IMF of Countries with Obligations Overdue by More than Six
Months (End of Financial Year: April 30)
Year

Number of members

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998

8
8
9
11
11
9
10
12
9
8
6
7
7

Source: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report 1998

52

Amount
(in millions of SDR’s)
489.0
1,186.3
1,945.2
2,801.5
3,251.1
3,377.7
3,496.0
3,006.4
2,911.3
2,982.6
2,174.9
2,212.2
2,2612.2

Source: James (1996), updated by the IMF.

53
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994

1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998

1998

1996

1976

1966

1970

1980

1964

1968

1974

1962

1966

1978

1960

1964

1972

1958

1962

1976

1956

1960

1970

1954

1958

1974

1952

1956

1968

1950

1954

1972

1948

2
1952

1950

1948

Figure 1. IMF Quotas as a Share of World Imports
(In percent)

14

14
12

12
10

10
8

8
6

6
4

4
2

Figure 2. IMF Charges and Commercial Interest Rates
(In percent)

14
U.S. 3months T-bill rate
SDR rate
12

Ave IMF basic rate

10

8

6

4

2

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Source: James (1996), updated by the IMF.

54

1995

2000

Figure 3. Total Fund Credit Outstanding to Members
(In billions of SDR’s; end of period)

60

Total
Stand-by and credit tranche
Compensatory and buffer stock
Trust Fund

50

SAF and ESAF
Systemic transformation Facility
Oil facility
Extended Fund facility

40

30

20

10

0
1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

Source: James (1996), updated by the IMF.
1
Including Trust Fund, SAF and ESAF; financial years ended April 30, 1974-1998.

55

1998

Figure 4. Low interest IMF lending
(In millions of SDR’s)

5000
SAF
4500

ESAF

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Source: International Monetary Fund, Annual Report 1998.

56

1998

Figure 5. Actual and Potential Borrowing from the IMF, 1955-1997.
(In percent)

Source: Giannini (1999)

57

