NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ALTERNATIVE MONETARY POLICY RULES:
A COMPARISON WITH HISTORICAL SETTINGS FOR
THE UNITED STATES, THE UNITED KINGDOM, AND JAPAN
Bennett T. McCallum
Working Paper 7725
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7725

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2000

This paper has been prepared for the Economic Quarterly of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. For
comments, suggestions, or assistance I am indebted to Miguel Casares, Martin Gervais, Marvin Goodfriend,
Robert Hetzel, Yash Mehra, Allan Meltzer, Athanasios Orphanides, Edward Nelson, and Jeffrey Walker.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Alternative Monetary Policy Rules: A Comparison with Historical Settings
for the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan
Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 7725
June 2000
JEL No. E52, E42, E31
ABSTRACT
This paper conducts counterfactual historical analysis of several monetary policy rules by
contrasting actual settings of instrument variables with values that would have been specified by the
rules in response to prevailing conditions. Of particular interest is whether major policy mistakes,
judged ex post, would have been prevented by candidate rules. The rules studied include those of
Taylor and McCallum, previously considered by Alison Stuart, plus several additional combinations
of instrument and target variables. The time spans examined are 1962-1998 for the U.S. and U.K.,
and 1972-1998 for Japan. In addition to various substantive findings, the paper develops several
methodological arguments. A surprising result is that rules’ messages are evidently more dependent
upon the specification of their instrument than their target variable.

Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Tel. (412) 268-2347 Fax (412) 268-7357
and NBER
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu

Recent years have witnessed an upsurge of interest among monetary policy
analysts in the topic of simple and explicit rules for monetary policy. In this recent work
it is presumed that such rules would not be followed literally and slavishly by central
banks, but that they could be consulted for indicative purposes—perhaps by providing a
starting point for policy discussions. Tangible evidence of this interest is provided by
publications based on two 1998 conferences, both titled “Monetary Policy Rules,”
sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and by the Sveriges
Riksbank in collaboration with Stockholm University’s Institute for International
Economic Studies (IIES).1 Most of the work in these papers is based on some variant of
the now-famous Taylor rule, introduced in Taylor (1993), which specifies settings of a
nominal interest rate instrument in response to observed or predicted values of inflation
and the output gap (i.e., the percentage difference between output and its reference
value2).3 Some of the studies consider alternative instrument or target variables,4 and
very recently some criticisms of the Taylor rule have been expressed by Orphanides
(1998,1999), Meltzer (1999), and others. Accordingly, the purpose of the present paper
is to conduct counterfactual historical analysis of the type utilized by Stuart (1996) and
Taylor (1999b), and to compare and consider the messages provided by Taylor’s rule
with others featuring alternative instrument and/or target variables.
Proceedings of the NBER conference have been published in Taylor (1999a); papers
from the Riksbank-IIES conference appear in the June 1999 issue of the Journal of
Monetary Economics.
2
This reference value is defined variously, in different studies, as the trend or capacity or
potential or natural-rate or market-clearing value of output.
3
In many of the studies, a lagged value of the interest rate is also included as a
determinant of the current value, thereby reflecting interest rate smoothing behavior.
1

1

The type of historical analysis developed by Stuart (1996) and Taylor (1999b)
consists of contrasting actual settings of instrument variables during some historical time
span with the values that would have been specified by particular rules in response to
prevailing conditions. Discrepancies or agreements between rule-specified and actual
values can then be evaluated, in light of ex-post judgements concerning macroeconomic
performance during the span studied, to yield tentative conclusions concerning the merits
of the various rules. Of particular interest is whether major policy mistakes, judged expost, would have been prevented by adherence to some of the candidate rules. Stuart
(1996) conducted such comparisons for Taylor’s rule and also one promoted by
McCallum (1987, 1993) that features a monetary base instrument and a nominal-income
growth target.5 The sample period utilized by Stuart was 1985.1-1996.2 for the United
Kingdom. In the present study experiences will be considered for the United States, the
United Kingdom, and Japan with the time span beginning in the early 1960s or (for
Japan) 1970s and extending through 1998.4. The investigation will also extend the range
of rules considered by combining interest rate and monetary base instruments with both
Taylor-type and nominal-income target variables.
It should be said explicitly that no suggestion is intended to the effect that
historical analysis of the Stuart-Taylor type represents the only useful approach to policyrule evaluation. Most of the author’s own work, in fact, has involved simulations with
quantitative structural macroeconomic models (e.g., McCallum, 1988, 1993; McCallum
and Nelson, 1999a,b). The position advanced is merely that the Stuart-Taylor type of
See, for example, McCallum and Nelson (1999a, 1999b).
In its growth-rate version, considered exclusively here and by Stuart (1996),
McCallum’s rule is similar (though not identical) to one promoted by Meltzer (1987).
4
5

2

study can also be useful, in addition to simulations with structural models. In this regard,
it is important to be clear about the nature of the exercise involved, i.e., to appreciate its
limitations and strengths—both of which are considerable. Accordingly, these will be
reviewed in Section 2, immediately following the paper’s first application of the StuartTaylor procedure.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 1 the alternative rules are
specified, notation is established, and some general issues are discussed. Applications to
the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan are then conducted in Sections 2-4.
Issues concerning the specification of target variables are taken up in Section 5 and issues
related to instrument variables in Section 6. A brief conclusion is presented in Section 7.

1. Specification of Rules
The well-known Taylor rule can be expressed as follows:
(1)

Rt = r + ∆pat + 0.5(∆pat – π*) + 0.5 ~y t.

Here Rt is the short-term nominal interest rate that the central bank in question uses as its
instrument or “operating target,” i.e., the interest rate over which it exerts control at a
daily or weekly frequency. Next, r is the long-run average real rate of interest, ∆pat is an
average of recent inflation rates (or a forecast value) , and π* is the central bank’s target
inflation rate. Finally, ~y t is a measure of the output gap, the percentage difference
between actual and capacity output values. In Taylor’s original application (1993), the
values r = 2 and π* = 2 were specified, expressing the belief that 2 percent per annum is
an approximation to the long-run average real rate of interest in the United States, and
that 2 percent per annum is a reasonable specification for the Federal Reserve’s target

3

inflation rate.6 Also, in Taylor (1993) the measure used for ∆pat is the average of GDP
deflator inflation rates over the past four quarters, while capacity output is represented by
a linear trend for the log of real GDP fit to quarterly observations for the years 19851992. In Taylor (1999b), the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter is used instead to generate
residuals from “trend” that are taken to represent ~y t. The rule suggests, of course, that
monetary policy should be tightened (by an increase in Rt) when inflation exceeds its
target value and/or output exceeds capacity.
Subsequent applications of the Taylor rule have modified or extended formula (1)
in several ways. Some have used proxies for expected future inflation in place of ∆pat
while others have done something similar for ~y t or used ~y t-1 instead. A common and
major change is to include Rt-1 on the right-hand side as a determinant of Rt; this
adjustment is intended to reflect the practice of interest rate smoothing, which is widely
believed to be prevalent in the behavior of many central banks.
An important line of investigation has been pioneered by Orphanides (1997,
1999), who has attempted to base rule calculations on values of ∆pt (inflation) and ~y t that
were actually available to central bank policymakers at the time that historical instrument
settings were chosen. Orphanides (1997) recognizes that current-period values for ~y t
could not be known until after the end of period t,7 and also emphasizes the fact that
macroeconomic data is often substantially revised after its initial reporting. In
Orphanides (1999) it is argued that these problems are so severe that adherence to the
It is not necessary that constants be used for these values, but they are in Taylor (1993)
and for additional postwar periods in Taylor (1999b).
7
This type of operationality issue has been emphasized by McCallum and Nelson (1999a)
and McCallum (1999a).
6

4

Taylor rule would not have prevented the inflation of the 1970s, as claimed by Taylor
(1999b). Partly for reasons to be mentioned in Section 5 and partly because of the
difficulty of doing otherwise, the present study will be based on data available in June
1999, not on real time data of the type recommended by Orphanides.
The rule proposed by McCallum (1987, 1988, 1993) can be expressed as follows:
(2)

∆bt = ∆x* – ∆vat + 0.5(∆x* − ∆xt-1).

Here ∆bt is the change in the log of the adjusted monetary base, i.e., the growth rate of
the base between periods t−1 and t. The term ∆x* is a target growth rate for nominal
GDP, ∆xt being the change in the log of nominal GDP. This target value ∆x* is specified
as π* + ∆y*, where ∆y* is the long-run average rate of growth of real GDP. The second
term on the right-hand side of (2), ∆vat, is the average growth of base velocity over the
previous 16 quarters, vt = xt − bt being the log of base velocity. This term is intended to
reflect long-lasting changes in the demand for the monetary base that occur because of
technological developments or regulatory changes (presumed to be permanent); it is not
intended to reflect cyclical conditions. These conditions are responded to by the final
term, which prescribes that base growth is adjusted upward (i.e., policy is loosened) when
∆xt-1 falls short of ∆x*. In McCallum (1988, 1993) values other than 0.5 are considered
for the coefficient attached to ∆x* − ∆xt-1 and variants of (2) that respond to discrepancies
of the level type, rather than the growth rate type, are investigated. Here, however, we
shall limit our attention to the particular formulation given in (2).
A bit of discussion needs to be given to the topic of units of measurement. In
previous studies by McCallum, growth rate variables such as ∆xt have been measured as
changes in logs. Therefore such variables reflect quarterly changes, not annualized, and

5

in fractional (rather than percentage) units. Accordingly, such variables need to be
multiplied by 400 to be commensurate with similar variables as measured by Taylor and
in most papers concerned with policy rules. Similar comments pertain as well to interest
rate measures. To maintain consistency among the different rules considered, we shall
here report all results in terms of annualized percentages, rather than in the quarterly
fractional units previously used in the work of McCallum.
Another detail of rule specification concerns timing. In (2), both of the variables
on the right-hand side are based on variables realized in period t-1 or earlier; i.e., currentperiod values are not utilized. The reason, as suggested in footnote 6, is to make the rule
specification realistically operational. In Taylor’s studies, the inflation variable ∆pat is
typically measured as referring only to previous-period values but it is assumed that ~y t
pertains to period t. Since it is rather clear that current-quarter values of real GDP cannot
be observed until well into the next quarter, in the present study ~y t will be measured as
the value of the output gap variable (however measured) pertaining to the previous
quarter.
Clearly, the Taylor and McCallum rules differ in terms of both instrument and
target variables.8 There is no obvious reason, however, why these should be paired in
any particular combination. It would be quite natural, that is, to consider a rule with an
interest rate instrument and a nominal income growth target. Similarly, it would be
reasonable to consider a rule with a base growth instrument and a Taylor-style target
Here I am using the term “target variable” to refer to a variable that the policy rule
responds to in a manner designed to reduce its deviations from some reference path.
Svensson (1999) objects to this usage, preferring to reserve the word “target” for
8

6

specification. Accordingly, the investigation that follows will also consider, in addition
to (1) and (2), rules of the form
(3)

Rt = r + ∆pat − 0.5(∆x* − ∆xt-1)

and
(4)

∆bt = ∆x* − ∆vat – 0.5ht,

where we define the “hybrid” target variable ht = (∆pat − π* + ~y t).9 Thus rule (4)
features responses to the same macroeconomic conditions as in Taylor’s rule (1) but with
a base instrument. Examination of the results involving (1)- (4) should then enable one to
determine whether differences in policy advice offered by (1) and (2) are due primarily to
their different instruments or targets.
2. United States
We begin with the case of the United States. For xt, yt, and pt we use the
logarithms of nominal GDP, real (chain-linked) GDP, and their ratio. The monetary base
is the series computed by the St. Louis Fed, which incorporates adjustments for changes
in reserve requirements. In addition, an adjustment for sweep accounts has been made
for 1994-1998.10 Finally, Rt is the federal funds rate averaged over the quarter. All
variables except Rt are seasonally adjusted. The series are taken from the FRED data
base of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. In what follows, ∆pat = 0.25(∆pt-1 + ∆pt-2
+ ∆pt-3 + ∆pt-4) while for ~y t we report the percentage excess ( in period t-1) of output

variables appearing in loss functions. For a brief discussion see McCallum and Nelson
(1999b).
9
The term “hybrid” was used for this variable by Hall and Mankiw (1994).
10
Specifically, 0.10 times the cumulative total of sweeps of transaction deposits into
MMDAs, reported by FRED, are added to the adjusted base series. Here 0.10 represents
the marginal reserve requirement ratio.

7

over a “trend” reference value provided by the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter, as in Taylor
(1999a). The effect of the latter choice will be discussed below, in Section 5.
Figure 1 plots values of Rt implied by the Taylor rule (1) with π* = 2 and r = 2
together with actual values over 1960-1998.11 From an inspection of this figure, it can be
seen that the actual interest rate was lower than the rule-implied value throughout the
1970s, indicating that monetary policy was too loose, according to the rule. Beginning in
1981 policy was then too tight until 1987, the first year considered in Taylor’s original
study (1993). Over 1987-1995 policy was about right, according to the figure, but since
1996 has been somewhat too tight.
As mentioned above, it is important to recognize the limitations and virtues of the
type of comparison provided by Figure 1. If in a particular period the actual value of Rt
was lower than the rule-specified value, then the rule’s indication is that policy was too
loose in that period, given the prevailing conditions. There is no suggestion that the
actual setting of Rt in that period was too low unconditionally. Indeed, the presumption
of Stuart (1996) and Taylor (1999b), which is adopted here, is that prevailing inflation
would have been lower during the 1970s if Taylor’s rule had been followed in practice.
So the Rt settings that would have been appropriate, according to rule (1), would have
been lower than those indicated by the solid line in Figure 1.12 Thus the solid line in
Figure 1 does not pretend to represent an optimal or even desirable path for Rt over the
period. But that does not prevent the comparison of the two lines from indicating that,
conditional upon prevailing conditions, actual Rt values were set lower than the rule
Because our data base is for 1960.1-1998.4, rule-implied values begin with 1961.2
because of the lags needed to determine ∆pat.
11

8

would have called for in virtually every period during the 1970s. From the standpoint of
rule (1), therefore, monetary policy was too loose during the 1970s. That is the only type
of conclusion provided by Figure 1, and other such plots presented below.
Thus the principal weakness of this type of comparison is that it does not provide
an indication of what an “optimal” policy would have been or even of what time path
crucial variables would have followed under the rule being examined. But there is an
offsetting virtue. Any designation of optimality—indeed, any specification of how Rt or
other variables would have evolved historically under any specified policy rule—is
necessarily dependent upon the specific model of the economy used to predict how ∆pt
and ~y t would have responded to Rt settings. The Stuart-Taylor procedure, by contrast,
does not require adoption of any specific model. This is a highly significant virtue,
because there is no professional agreement concerning the proper specification of the
“correct” model of the economy.13
We now return to the main line of analysis and move on to rule (2). For its
application, we take ∆x* = 5, combining a 2 percent inflation target with an assumed
long-run average output growth rate of 3 percent per year.14 The comparison of base
growth values implied by rule (2) with actual historical values is presented in Figure 2.15

If ∆pat had been lower in each period, the Rt values prescribed by (1) would have been
lower.
13
For an elaboration on this last point, see McCallum (1999, pp. 1490-1). As mentioned
in the introduction, the purpose of the present digression is not to object to counterfactual simulation studies, based on specific models, but only to argue that different
procedures have different strengths and weaknesses.
14
The value of 3 percent for output growth was used in McCallum (1987, 1988)—
together with an inflation target of 0 percent—and in subsequent studies. The actual
average over 1960-1998 was 2.97 percent.
15
Rule values begin with 1964.2 because of the lags needed to calculate ∆vat.
12

9

There it will be seen that policy was too loose—actual base growth was greater than
specified by the rule—during the second half of the 1960s and much too loose throughout
the 1970s. This discrepancy was gradually reduced between 1981 and 1987. Then policy
was slightly too loose during 1990-1992 and too tight during 1994-1995, according to the
rule. Since 1995 it has been about right, on average, although the final observation of
1998 suggests slightly excessive base growth at that date.
Figure 3 gives results for rule (4), which combines the base instrument (as in (2))
with the hybrid target variable (as in (1)). Somewhat surprisingly, the broad overall
characterization of the results can be described with the same words used for the base
rule (2). The main difference is that the rule-indicated path of ∆bt has less quarter-toquarter variability than in Figure 2. The reason, evidently, is that (4) does not respond to
quarter-to-quarter movements in the growth rate of output (real GDP), which are quite
volatile. The basic message provided by the hybrid target variable is much the same as
that provided by nominal GDP growth because the HP filter yields quite small values for
the output gap, as will be illustrated below. Therefore, ht and ∆xt behave alike except for
the volatility introduced into the latter by the ∆yt component.
Results with rule (3), featuring the interest rate instrument with a nominal GDP
growth target variable, are shown in Figure 4. Now the broad overall signals are much
like those of Figure 1, the Taylor rule, except with a more erratic path because of the
output growth component of the target variable. So the comparison among the four
figures suggests that the choice of an instrument variable matters more for the trend of
monetary policy than the choice of a target variable. It should be emphasized, however,
that this preliminary conclusion pertains only to the nominal GDP growth and hybrid

10

variables, with the output gap component of the latter determined by the HP filter
method.

3. United Kingdom
Before delving more deeply into the comparisons among the rules, let us now
look at the basic cases using data for the United Kingdom. Again xt, yt, and pt are
nominal GDP, real GDP, and their ratio. For the monetary base bt we use the Bank of
England’s M0 measure, seasonally adjusted, which requires no adjustments for reserve
requirements because the latter are small enough to be negligible.16 The interest rate
utilized is a one-month treasury-bill rate, averaged over the quarter. For the United
Kingdom, we use a value of 2.25 for r , 2 for π*, and 2.25 for ∆y*. Thus ∆x* = 4.25.
The output gap measure is the percentage departure of real GDP from trend, obtained
from the residuals from a regression of the log of real GDP on a linear trend fitted over
the years 1960-1998.
Results using the Taylor rule (1) are shown in Figure 5. The indication there is
that monetary policy was much too loose during the 1970s, with the rule calling for an
interest rate of 38 percent in 1975.3, as compared with an actual value of 10.4.17 From
1983 through 1987 policy was slightly too tight, according to the rule, and since 1987 has
been just about right, except perhaps in 1994.

Data for M0 are published by the Bank of England for 1969.3-1998.4. Earlier values
were obtained from Capie and Webber (1985) and spliced on.
17
Of course if rule (1) had been followed throughout, actual inflation would probably
have been much less severe and the values of Rt indicated by the rule would have been
much lower.
16

11

The McCallum rule (2) gives a somewhat different story, as is shown in Figure 6.
It agrees that policy was much too loose during the 1970s, but suggests that it stayed too
loose most of the time until 1990 (when the U.K. entered the European Union’s exchange
rate mechanism in October, dropping out in September 1992). Since 1992, policy was
slightly loose, according to Figure 6, until 1997 when it became just about right. The
main difference in the messages of Figures 5 and 6 is that the latter suggests that policy
was too loose during the mid-1980s. Ex-post, this suggestion seems correct, as U. K.
inflation rose prior to 1990 to excessive heights—probably as a consequence of the
episode of “shadowing the D-mark” that occurred during 1986-1988.
As in the case of the United States, the messages from rules (3) and (4) tend to
agree when the instrument used is the same, not the target variable. Thus in Figure 7 we
have base growth figures implied by rule (4), with the hybrid target variable, and the
policy messages are much the same as in Figure 6, but with less quarter-to-quarter
variability of the indicated ∆bt values. And in Figure 8, plotted for an interest instrument
and a ∆xt target, we find substantial agreement with the indications of Figure 5, which
pertains to the Taylor rule. Agreement is incomplete, however, since this rule does not
call for looser policy in the mid-1980s.

4. Japan
In the case of Japan, our rules will be applied only to the period 1972.1-1998.4,
rather than a time span beginning in the early 1960s. The reasons are that Japanese data
for constructing a monetary base series does not exist for years prior to 1963; that Japan
kept a fixed exchange rate with the U. S. dollar prior to 1971; and that there was a

12

marked break in the growth rate of Japanese real GDP around that time.18 For the
subsequent period we use r = 3, a higher value than for the United States or the United
Kingdom, because real output growth was higher in Japan. Nevertheless, for ∆x* we
adopt a value of 5, corresponding to an average long run real output growth rate of 3
percent and (again) a target inflation rate of π* = 2 percent. In measuring the output gap
~y we cannot use either the HP filter or a linear trend because output in 1998 was quite
t
far below capacity, in the judgement of most observers. Instead, we have measured the
fractional gap over 1972.1-1992.2 as the residual from a regression of the log of real
GDP on a linear trend (fitted to 1972.1-1992.4 observations), and have assumed that
trend or capacity output grew at a rate of 2.5 percent per annum since 1992.2. This
procedure yields a gap that grows to a figure of 11.2 percent for 1998.4.
The Bank of Japan now publishes four monthly data series on the monetary base,
beginning in 1970, with and without adjustments for seasonality and reserve requirement
changes. The monthly series with both adjustments was averaged to generate values for
1970.1-1998 and data from McCallum (1993) was spliced on to cover 1963.1-1969.4.
(Values prior to 1967.4 were not used in the study, however.) For Rt the overnight call
rate (uncollateralized) was used and official GDP statistics provided the basis for the
remaining variables.
Application of Taylor’s rule (1) to Japan for 1972.1-1998.4 is depicted in Figure
9. There the indications are that policy should have been much tighter during 1973-1974
and somewhat tighter over 1975-1978. Since then, policy was slightly too tight most of
the time over 1982-1987, and then about right until 1994. Since then it has been too tight
18

For these reasons McCallum (1993) begins its rule study with the quarter 1972.1.

13

most of the time, but not in 1997. At the end of 1998, the call rate was almost 4
percentage points too high, the Taylor rule-indicated value being –3.6 percent. Of
course, the latter value is not feasible, but it indicates that the rule calls for much more
stimulative policy than actually prevailed in late 1998.
This last message is also provided by the base rule (2), as shown in Figure 10, but
to an even greater extent. Indeed, this rule suggests that monetary policy has been too
tight most of the time since the middle of 1990. Like (1), it points to a too-loose stance
over 1972-1978. Interestingly, in light of the “asset-price bubble” of the late 1980s,
Figure 10 indicates that monetary policy was slightly too loose during 1986-1988.
We now turn to rules (3) and (4). In the case of Japan, Figure 11 shows that the
latter again gives much the same signals as does the other rule with the ∆bt instrument,
rule (2). And again the hybrid target variable yields a smoother path for base growth than
does (2). As for the interest rate rule with a nominal GDP growth target, rule (3), the
Figure 12 results are more similar to those in Figure 9 than in Figure 10. The extent to
which rule (3) calls for added stimulus in recent years is even less than in Figure 9,
however. The rule does call for easier policy in the last half of 1998, but finds policy
about right during 1995-1997.
5. Issues Concerning Target Variables
One of the main preliminary indications of the foregoing discussion is that rather
similar policy signals are provided by rules with ∆xt and ht target variables, provided that
the instrument variable is the same. This notion needs to be strongly qualified, however,
as will now be discussed. The main point is that the similarity of ∆xt and ht signals
observed in Sections 2-4 depends upon the use of output gap measures that do not yield

14

large numerical magnitudes over the time span studied. In the case of the United States,
the measure used was based on residuals from the HP filter. The standard deviation of
these values over 1960-1998 is only 1.63, in percentage points. If instead the output gap
measure was based on residuals from a linear trend (for the log of real GDP), the standard
deviation would be 4.15 and the impact of the gap measure would be significantly
greater. In that case the Taylor rule vs. actual comparison, comparable to Figure 1,
would be as shown in Figure 13. Here the monetary policy message is not drastically
different from that of Figure 1 for the subperiod 1966-1990, although the need for tighter
policy during the 1970s would be more clearly indicated. But for the early 1960s and the
late 1990s the message would be quite different, with lower interest rates indicated by the
gap based on the log-linear detrending. According to the Figure 13 version of the Taylor
rule, the federal funds rate was too high by about 300 basis points throughout 1995-1998!
It is the author’s belief that reliance of a policy rule upon any output gap measure
is risky, for different measures give quite different values and there is at present no
professional consensus on an appropriate measure—or even a concept. Linear detrending
depends rather sensitively on the time period selected for fitting of the trend, as is
illustrated in Figure 14 where gap measures based on log-linear trends fitted over 19601998 and 1980-1998 are shown, together with values based on the HP filter. It might be
suggested that this problem could be alleviated by quadratic detrending, but quadratic
trends are themselves rather sensitive to the time period selected for fitting. The latter
claim is supported by Figure 15, which shows gap measures based on quadratic trends for
the log of real U.S. GDP fitted over the time periods 1960.1-1998.4 and 1980.1-1998.4.
As can be seen, these measures often differ by as much as 3 percentage points.

15

With respect to the HP filter, the problem is that this procedure produces a “trend”
that is so flexible that it follows the time path of actual GDP rather closely, thereby
yielding measures of the output gap that would appear to underestimate (in absolute
terms) the economically relevant gap values.19 To illustrate this point, Figure 16 shows
how the HP filter handles U.S. observations on real GDP during the 1920s and 1930s.
According to this figure, U.S. output had fully returned to “trend” by 1934 and the
incidence of above-trend output was approximately the same as below-trend output
during the 1930s, suggesting that the Great Depression actually did not occur!
More fundamentally, McCallum and Nelson (1999a) argue that any gap measure
based on an output detrending procedure, which excludes the effects of current shocks
from the measured gap, is conceptually inappropriate. The point is that (e.g.) positive
technology shocks serve to increase the capacity or natural-rate value of output, not the
value of actual output relative to the latter; but many univariate detrending procedures
presume just the opposite. To overcome this difficulty, McCallum and Nelson (1999a)
propose a measure based on the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas production function and
utilizing values of manhours employed per member of the civilian workforce. This
measure treats technological change appropriately, at least arguably, but relies upon
debatable assumptions about labor supply and does not have a well-defined zero value.
As mentioned above, the recent work of Orphanides (1997, 1999) has attracted
considerable attention. In the earlier of the cited papers, Orphanides constructed data
series for 1987-1992 reflecting values of macroeconomic variables that were actually
The present discussion presumes adoption of the standard value of 1600 for the HP
filter’s smoothing coefficient in work with quarterly data.
19

16

available at the time of FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee) policy decisions in the
past. These series do not, accordingly, reflect data revisions and measurements that have
taken place after the FOMC meetings at which instrument settings (usually values of the
federal funds rate) were actually decided. In this context, the measurement of “potential”
or “natural-rate” output is especially problematical. This study indicated that the
magnitude of the informational problems were serious enough that “real-time policy
recommendations differ widely from those obtained with the revised published data
employed [by researchers] later on” (Orphanides, 1997, p. 3). The broad overall policy
messages offered by the Taylor rule for 1987-1992 are not overturned, however, by the
results of the 1997 study.
The results in Orphanides (1999) are more drastic. In this later paper, the time
span studied goes back until 1966.1 and so includes the major inflationary buildup and
continuation that Taylor (1999b) refers to as “The Great Inflation.” Orphanides’s
dramatic conclusion is that adherence to Taylor’s rule throughout the period would not, in
constrast to Taylor’s (1999b, pp. 338-9) contention, have prevented the Great Inflation.
Developing an appropriate evaluation of Orphanides’s (1999) analysis is not a
trivial undertaking. Certainly the data reconstruction represents a major contribution to
economic policy analysis, and Orphanides’s arguments are very carefully constructed and
exposited. In my judgement, they do not imply that simple monetary policy rules cannot
be useful when constrained by real-time data availability. Instead, I believe, the (1999)
study shows in a dramatic fashion that reliance on an inappropriate concept of potential
(or reference) output can be ruinous, i.e., can result in a monetary policy rule that is
counterproductive. But some rules do not rely upon such measures, as the examples of

17

Sections 2-4 above illustrate.20 Also, the truly dramatic results in Orphanides (1999)
stem from a potential output concept revision, rather than a data revision. Thus, although
the data-revision problem is not of negligible significance, it is not as profound as a quick
reading of Orphanides (1999) might suggest. To the author, it seems satisfactory to
abstract from that problem for the purposes of the present study.
Given the foregoing argument, and also the findings of Sections 2-4, a natural
step would be to investigate the performance of rules that use inflation as the target
variable, i.e., the cyclical variable responded to by the instrument. Accordingly, we now
present figures based on the two policy rules
(5)

Rt = r + ∆pat + 0.5(∆pat – π*)

(6)

∆bt = ∆x* - ∆vat – 0.5(∆pat – π*),

which can be compared with (1) and (4). The results are shown in Figures 17-22. For the
United States, the interest rate rule in Figure 17 calls for Rt values quite close to those of
Figure 1. Also, the base growth rule in Figure 18 yields settings for ∆bt that are rather
close to those shown in Figure 3, in which the rule responds to the hybrid target variable.
Likewise, the plots in Figures 19 and 20 for the United Kingdom are rather similar to
those in Figures 5 and 7. In the case of Japan, however, the policy advice for recent years
provided by the inflation-target rule in Figure 21 is quite different than that in Figure 9.
In particular, in the absence of an output gap signal, rule (5) calls for Rt settings
somewhat higher than actual values during 1997 and 1998. The base rule (6) results in
This conclusion is basically consistent with Orphanides’s warning against “activist”
policy rules, by which he means rules that place emphasis on measures of the level of an
output gap concept. Orphanides finds that a rule featuring “natural growth targeting,”
20

18

Figure 22 remain more stimulative than the actual record for recent years, but to a lesser
extent than in Figure 11.
One attractive aspect of the inflation target variable ∆pat relative to the nominal
income variable ∆xt-1 is that the former features smaller quarter-to-quarter movements
and therefore imparts a smoother, less choppy path to the instrument variables in (5) and
(6), in comparison to (2) and (3). One reason for this, certainly, is that ∆pat reflects fourquarter averaging while ∆xt-1 does not. Accordingly, it should be of some interest to see
how the nominal income variable would perform if averaged over periods t-1 through t-4.
Results with that modification are presented in Figures 23-28. In these plots, it can be
seen that the choppiness of rules with a nominal GDP growth target is reduced
substantially, although the implied instrument settings remain slightly more variable than
with the inflation target. Are there any compensating advantages of the averaged ∆x
values relative to the averaged ∆p values? For the United States and the United
Kingdom, the policy advice seems to be basically the same in Figures 23-26 as in Figures
17-20. In the case of Japan, however, the nominal income targets in Figures 27-28 give
more stimulative signals than with inflation targeting (Figures 21-22), which seems
desirable. But the magnitude is not very large.

6. Issues Concerning Instrument Variables
One of the more surprising aspects of the results in Sections 2-4 is that the policy
diagnoses provided by the various rules seem to be more dependent upon the instrument

which is rather similar to nominal income growth targeting as in rules (2) or (3) above, is
not strongly subject to the difficulties that he emphasizes.

19

variable utilized than upon the choice of target variable. This indication seems
inconsistent with most analysts’ beliefs about monetary policy design. Reflection upon
the role and nature of the rules makes this finding understandable, however, in the
following manner. First, the way in which the rules are utilized in a study such as the
present one implies that the rule-specified instrument settings are actually being used as
magnitudes of indicator variables, not instruments. That is, one could view the resulting
values for quarterly settings of Rt or ∆bt as intermediate targets to be obtained by day-today or week-to-week manipulation of other variables actually serving as the central
bank’s instrument.21 Second, the policy stance—i.e., degree of tightness or ease—
represented by rule-specified settings of Rt or ∆bt depends upon the magnitude of those
variables relative to some reference value that can vary from period to period. In the case
of the Taylor rule (1) the reference value is r + ∆pat, which serves to convert Rt
movements into movements in a real interest rate measured relative to r , since Rt –
( r + ∆pat) = (Rt − ∆pat) − r . With the McCallum rule (2), the reference value for ∆bt is
∆x* - ∆vat. In this case, ∆bt – (∆x* − ∆vat) reflects the difference between ∆bt and the
value of base growth that would yield an inflation rate of π* if output growth were equal
to its long-run average value and base velocity growth were equal to its average over the
past 16 quarters (a value that is implicitly being used as a forecast of the average over the
indefinite future).

A study that proceeds in this fashion is McCallum (1995), which considers how the
U.S. federal funds rate could be manipulated on a week-to-week basis to hit quarterly
intermediate targets for monetary base growth with the latter set so as to keep nominal
income growth close to a specified target value.
21

20

In each case, in other words, there is a necessary reference variable that must be
specified to convert raw values of Rt or ∆bt into measures of monetary ease or tightness.22
Accordingly, the precise specification of these reference variables is of considerable
importance to a rule’s performance. If rules are to be relatively simple, it is necessary
that the specification of these reference values be simple—hence Taylor’s specification
of a constant “equilibrium” real rate of interest or McCallum’s constant “long-run growth
rate of output.” Evidently, however, the properties of any rule will depend critically upon
how these reference values are specified. Consequently, it would appear that future
research should perhaps devote more attention to this aspect of policy rule specification.
To date, most of the attention of researchers has instead been directed to the choice
among target variables, details of their specification, and the magnitude of coefficients
attached to them.

22

This statement applies to all of the rules, of course, not just (1) and (2).

21

7. Conclusion
Let us close with a brief summary of the findings developed above, based on
historical policy-rule studies for the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan. The
basic results come from comparisons of actual values with rule specifications regarding
either interest-rate or monetary-base instrument settings, together with nominal GDP
growth or Taylor-style hybrid (inflation plus output gap) target variables. For the United
States, all of the rules considered would have called for tighter monetary policy during
the 1970s, although the base-instrument rules would have done so more strongly than
those with the Fed’s actual funds-rate instrument. There is some disagreement among the
rules concerning the 1980s and 1990s, although all of the candidate rules indicate that
policy has not been highly inappropriate since 1987, at least. For the United Kingdom,
the various rules agree regarding the excessive inflation of the 1970s, but the baseinstrument rules suggest that policy was too loose during the middle and late 1980s
whereas the interest-instrument rules do not. In the case of Japan, interest centers on the
record since 1990. Most of the examined rules indicate that policy was too tight in 1998,
but the base rules suggest excessive tightness for the entire period 1990-1998, while the
interest rate rules do not. All in all, the recommendations provided by the base rules
seem somewhat more appropriate from an ex-post perspective.
Some of the study’s suggestions are methodological, rather than substantive. In
particular is it argued that reliance on output gap measures is risky, because various
measures of potential or natural-rate output levels differ widely and there is no
professional consensus regarding the most appropriate measure or even concept to be
used. Most univariate detrending procedures, which are frequently utilized, would seem

22

to be fundamentally inappropriate, because they assign the effects of technology shocks
primarily to the gap between output and its reference value, rather than to the latter
variable itself. Omission of the output gap term from a rule with the hybrid target
converts it into an inflation targeting rule; it is shown that such rules give good advice in
most of the episodes. So, too, do nominal income growth rules that average recent
values.
A somewhat surprising finding is that rules’ messages are evidently more
dependent upon the specification of their instrument than their target variable.23 This
finding can be understood as resulting from the necessity of specifying a reference value,
relative to which instrument settings are implicitly compared, in representing policy
tightness or ease. For rules to be sufficiently simple, these reference-value specifications
must themselves be simple, but different implicit assumptions about macroeconomic
behavior are accordingly built into the rule. The paper suggests, accordingly, that
investigation of these implicit assumptions could be an important topic for future research
concerned with alternative monetary policy rules.

23

Provided that strong dependence upon an output gap measure is avoided.

23

References
Capie, Forrest, and Alan Weber. A Monetary History of the United Kingdom,
1870-1982, Vol. 1. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1985.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. “Monetary Policy Rules in
Practice: Some International Evidence,” European Economic Review, vol. 42 (June
1998), pp. 1033-1067.
Hall, Robert E., and N. Gregory Mankiw. “Nominal Income Targeting,” in N.
Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott. “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An
Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 29 (February
1997), pp. 1-16.
Judd, John P., and Glenn D. Rudebusch. “Taylor’s Rule and the Fed:1970-1997,”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review (No. 3, 1998), pp. 3-16.
Kozicki, Sharon. “How Useful Are Taylor Rules for Monetary Policy?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, vol.84 (Second Quarter, 1999), pp. 5-33.
McCallum, Bennett T. “The Case for Rules in the Conduct of Monetary Policy: A
Concrete Example,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, vol. 73
(September/October 1987), pp. 10-18.
________________. “Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 29 (Autumn 1988), pp.
173-203.
____________ “Specification and Analysis of a Monetary Policy Rule for Japan,”
Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, vol. 11 (November 1993), pp. 1-45.

24

__________________. “Monetary Policy Rules and Financial Stability,” in
Kuniho Sawamoto, Zenta Nakajima, and Hiroo Taguchi, eds., Financial Stability in a
Changing Environment. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
___________________. “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John
B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics. Amsterdam:
North-Holland Publishing Co., 1999.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson. “Performance of Operational Policy
Rules in an Estimated Semiclassical Structural Model,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary
Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER, 1999.
_______________________. “Nominal Income Targeting in an Open-Economy
Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June 1999), pp. 553-578.
Meltzer, Allan H. “Limits of Short-run Stabilization Policy,” Economic Inquiry
vol. 25 (1987), pp. 1-14.
_______________. “The Transmission Process,” in The Monetary Transmission
Process: Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe.” London: Macmillan Publishers,
Ltd., for Deutsche Bundesbank, 1999 (forthcoming).
Orphanides, Athanasios. “Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data,”
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 1998-03, Federal Reserve Board, 1998.
______________. “The Quest for Prosperity Without Inflation,” Working Paper,
Federal Reserve Board, May 1999.
Stuart, Alison. “Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, vol. 36 (August 1996), pp. 281-287.

25

Svensson, Lars E. O. “Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol.43 (June 1999), pp. 607-654.
Taylor, John B. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (November 1993), pp. 195-214.
_____________, ed. Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press for NBER, 1999a.
_______________. “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER,
1999b.

26

