                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE STRUCTURE AND CONDUCT OF CORPORATE LOBBYING:
          HOW FIRMS LOBBY THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION


                                               John M. de Figueiredo
                                                 Emerson H. Tiller


                                               Working Paper 7726
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w7726



                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 2000




The authors would like to thank a large number of officials at the Federal Communications Commission and various
telecommunications trade associations and lobbying groups for their time and insight. In addition, we wish to
acknowledge Rui J. de Figueiredo, Jr., Gregory Rosston, Howard Shelanski, James M. Snyder, Thomas Spavins, Pablo
Spiller, Larry Strickling, Oliver Williamson, and participants at the Conference on Positive Political Theories of Business
Strategy, University of Texas, University of Georgia, and the American Political Science Association Annual Meetings
for their time and comments. de Figueiredo acknowledges the generous financial support of the Sloan Foundation
through its grant to the Industrial Performance Center at MIT. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2000 by John M. de Figueiredo and Emerson H. Tiller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Structure and Conduct of Corporate Lobbying: How Firms Lobby
the Federal Communications Commission
John M. de Figueiredo and Emerson H. Tiller
NBER Working Paper No. 7726
June 2000
JEL No. K2, L5


                                            ABSTRACT

          This paper examines the amount and organization of lobbying (internal organization vs.

trade association) by firms in administrative agencies. It explores the power and limitations of the

collective action theories and transaction cost theories in explaining lobbying. It introduces a dataset

of over 900 lobbying contacts cover 101 issues at the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)

in early 1998. We find that the structure and conduct of large firm lobbying at the FCC is consistent

with the predictions of theories of transaction costs and the main results of theories of collective

action. However, large firms do not change their behavior drastically as structures arise to remedy

the free rider problem. Small firms show no sensitivity to collective action issues or transaction cost

issues in the organization or amount of their lobbying, but they do lobby less when having to reveal

proprietary information. In sum, large firms behave largely consistent with theoretical predictions,

while small firms do not.


John M. de Figueiredo                                          Emerson H. Tiller
MIT                                                            University of Texas at Austin
Sloan School of Management                                     CBA 5.202
50 Memorial Drive                                              Austin, TX 78712
Cambridge, MA 02142                                            tiller@mail.utexas.edu
and NBER
jdefig@mit.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

       Firms engage in both market and "nonmarket” strategies to create shareholder

value (Spulber 1994; Baron 1996). Whereas market strategies involve decisions such as

product positioning and pricing, nonmarket strategies are actions taken by the firm in its

political, regulatory and social environments for the purpose of increasing firm value

(Baron 1997, 1999). Nonmarket behavior includes such company activities as lobbying a

legislator or regulator, litigating a case in court, and making campaign contributions.

Two aspects to understanding nonmarket activity are (1) “how much” nonmarket

behavior firms are likely to undertake, and (2) whether nonmarket activity will be done

individually or collectively within the industry. These questions are important as they

relate to both firm strategy and the boundaries of the firm. We apply these questions to

the lobbying of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) by firms. In particular,

we examine the number of FCC lobbying contacts by firms and in what organizational

forms (trade associations v. individual firm) the lobbying occurs.

       The current theory on lobbying tends to be focused on the amount of lobbying

that occurs, and has largely omitted the options firms have to organize their lobbying.

Since the seminal work of Olson (1965), the literature has focused on the ability of

individuals and groups to overcome the free-rider problem in creating collective action

(Bendor and Mookherjee 1987, Sandler 1992, Sandler and Tschirhart 1980). While the

collective action literature has much to say about the amount of lobbying that occurs, it is

less informative when it comes to the organization of lobbying. The theories articulating

the free-rider problem do not address whether firms will choose to internalize the

lobbying function, or choose to do it through a common body. The only conclusion that



                                                                                          3
can be made from the literature is that less lobbying occurs when there are collective

action problems.

       The empirical literature on the subject has been no more informative. Because of

the difficulty in obtaining data on lobbying activities, most empirical studies that examine

the amount and organization of corporate political activity have focused on political

action committee (PAC) contributions to legislators (Strattman 1992, Kroszner and

Strattman 1998, Snyder 1990, Grier, Munger and Roberts 1994, Pittman 1976). This

literature has found evidence consistent with the collective action theories in the amount

of contributions PACs give to legislators. They have also found evidence that support the

theories of production economics, such as economies of scale, in the amount of PAC

contributions made. That is, empirical studies have shown that larger firms do give more

to legislators (Grier et al 1994, Schuler 1999). Those handful of published studies which

have examined lobbying have not examined lobbying directly or have only conducted

descriptive (yet valuable) case studies (e.g. Hansen 1991, Schlozman and Tierney 1986,

Coleman 1988, Walker 1991, Maitland 1985).

       In this paper, we address these shortcomings by examining the power of the

collective action theories and transaction cost economics theory to predict both the

quantity and organization of lobbying, while controlling for other explanations. We build

hypotheses based on the predictions of these two theories, and then we test them using a

data set of “ex parte” lobbying presentations at the Federal Communications Commission

in early 1998. This data set contains over 900 instances of lobbying on over 100 different

issues before the FCC.      We find that both collective action and transaction cost




                                                                                          4
economics theories help to explain the amount and organization of lobbying by larger

firms, but that there are limits to these theories, especially with respect to small firms.

       This article extends the study of corporate lobbying in a number of ways. First, it

is the first paper to examine lobbying at the transactional or contact level. Second, using

multivariate statistical techniques we examine how both collective action problems and

transactional hazards affect the quantity and organization of lobbying. Third, we study

lobbying of regulators instead of Congress, as has been done by every other large sample

empirical study. Finally, rather than use PAC proxies for lobbying, we measure the

actual quantity and organization of the lobbying effort, making this one of the first

studies to examine actual lobbying events statistically.



II. THEORY

       The collective action and the transaction costs theories are alternative, although

not mutually exclusive, approaches for understanding organizational issues. Each has

implications for both the quantity and organizational form of lobbying of federal

regulators. In the remainder of the paper we will define quantity of lobbying as the

number of contacts an individual firm or trade association makes with the FCC. By the

term individual firms, we include those contacts made by either in-house or outside

counsel or lobbyists to make contacts. By trade associations, we mean the multi-member

industry organization to which firms from the industry contribute money and support for

the greater benefit of the industry as a whole. Examples of such include the National

Association of Broadcasters, the American Cable Association, and the United States

Telephone Association.




                                                                                              5
       A. Collective Action Theory

       Collective action theory emphasizes the barriers to group action and how they are

overcome (Olson 1965).      A requirement to achieve group action is for there to be

common interests amongst firms. Divergent interests amongst firms generally means that

a regulatory policy will differentially impact their businesses. We can think of rules

regarding unbundling of network elements as an example. The effect of unbundling the

elements and charging for them separately will differentially affect companies that have

heavy investments in modern switching equipment, companies that maintain legacy

systems in rural areas, and competitive local exchange carriers who wish to offer local

service. Indeed, each company may have its own view on what is a network element and

how unbundled it has to be. Such conflict over policy outcomes will have two effects:

one, multiple viewpoints will be expressed to regulators; and two, the likelihood of acting

collectively (through a trade association) is reduced because members are not motivated

to work together for each other's goals. This leads to the following proposition.



       Hypothesis 1. If the policy goals of individual firms are not consistent on an issue,

       then:

           (a) firms tend to lobby individually, and thus favor internal organization, and

           (b) the amount of lobbying on an issue increases (due to the multiple

               viewpoints from multiple actors)




                                                                                             6
       While divergent interests has received some attention in the collective action

literature, the mainstay of the literature concerns the free-riding problem. For a given

level of interest convergence, collective action will be difficult because individuals will

attempt to free ride on the group effort. When the cost to lobbying is high, and the

benefits are cannot be localized, no one will have the incentive to engage in political

activity, and thus little lobbying will occur. Individuals will not lobby on their own,

either because the cost is too high relative to the benefit or because they believe another

firm will do the bidding for them. In equilibrium, no lobbying occurs because of this free-

riding behavior. Note that the literature does not make a prediction how the ability to free

ride affects the organization of lobbying. This then leads to the following theoretical

prediction that has been carried through the literature:



       Hypothesis 2: The greater the potential for free-riding, the less lobbying that will

       occur.



       There may be issues, however, where the solution to the free-riding problem may

be supported by the organization chosen. We examine two possibilities in this paper.

First, if the benefits conferred by the trade association (such as information, studies,

special lobbying and policy benefits) can be allocated solely to the participating members

of the association, then individual firms have an incentive to participate in group action,

thereby overcoming the free-riding problem. If individual firms defect, they would not

get the benefits of the collective body. Second, if selective benefits can be obtained by




                                                                                          7
lobbying individually, individual firms may engage in lobbying individually. These two

possibilities can occur separately or together.



       Hypothesis 3A: If the benefits from trade association lobbying (collective action)

       can be allocated solely to the participating members of the association, then:

           (1) lobbying by a trade association will be favored,

           (2) there will be an increase in the amount of lobbying because the free rider

           problem is mitigated



       Hypothesis 3B: If firms can obtain unique and selective benefits by lobbying

       individually, then:

           (1) lobbying by individual firms will be favored

           (2) there will be an increase in the amount of lobbying because the free rider

               problem is mitigated



       B. Transaction Cost Theory

       The transaction cost approach to organizational issues is more comparative in its

analysis, emphasizing the benefits of alternative organizational choices. In its more

standard economic applications, this approach addresses the "make or buy" decision --

that is, the decision of the firm to either internalize production or purchase goods and

services on the market. This perspective suggests that in an effort to promote efficiency

in firm governance, the objective for the firm is to match organizational forms (ranging

from market to hierarchy) with any transaction “hazards” facing the firm in making




                                                                                        8
agreements, or contracts, with others. The contracting hazards are many, some related to

maladaptation in the presence of specific assets (Klein, Crawford and Alchian 1978;

Williamson 1985, 1996), some related to the appropriation of property rights (Teece

1986, Oxley 1997), and still others related to measurement of performance (Holmstrom

and Milgrom 1991). These factors often call for the internalization of a particular

transaction (or lobbying activities in our case). The hazard particular to our analysis is the

appropriation of proprietary information by a party to the lobbying transaction -- that is,

appropriation of proprietary information by other members of a trade association. When,

the revelation of proprietary information is required for effective lobbying, the trade

association may become less attractive as an organizational choice. The information

dissemination and disclosure mechanisms within the trade association would increase the

probability that proprietary competitive information of the firm (e.g., future pricing

strategies or new market entries) necessary for effective lobbying would be divulged, or

"leaked," to other members of the trade association -- the firm's competitors.                    An

individual firm would find it difficult to depend upon trade association agents to prevent

leakage because the agents have multiple principles (industry competitors). Thus, if

competitive proprietary information is involved in the lobbying process, the trade

association is a poor governance vehicle.1

         While internal governance or “gun for hire” may be better able to protect internal

information, it has an additional attractive feature: better incentive properties than trade

associations. Contracting out the lobbying effort is particularly attractive because the

profits (for work done efficiently) or the inflated returns from contingent fees (for work


1 We could see a similar finding with specialization, and the role of specific information in lobbying
affecting the organization of the lobbying.


                                                                                                    9
done successfully in the case of lawyering) accrue to the agent, thus creating the

incentive for the agent to perform more efficiently.2 The incentive to specialize is higher

in repeated transactions than in one-shot transactions. While the incentives to operate in

an integrated firm are not as high as in a contractual relationship, they are still higher than

that of a trade association. There is a single principal monitoring effort and there is a

unified goal to the company.               Incentives for the trade association as an agent for

individual firms, by contrast, will tend to be muted as each member tugs at the trade

association to become a lobbying arm for its own interests.

         This is not to say that the trade association is a lost cause. It conveys many

advantages. When acting individually, the firm incurs organizational costs that are

relatively high, as they must maintain a legal or government affairs department and its

associated administrative costs. If the use of lawyers and lobbyists is infrequent, the

costs of internalizing these functions are most likely too burdensome to take on. The

trade association, by comparison, is able to distribute costs across members and avoid

these problems. Moreover, it is able to carry significant political weight because it has

large amounts of geographical coverage in its political coalition. These all mean that the

trade association can act as a cost effective mechanism for lobbying, and indeed, will

often be the default case. We summarize this discussion in Table 1.

         Transaction cost theory, then, predicts the organizational form of lobbying in the

following way.




2 The firm may encounter other principal-agent problems when the lawyers work on contingency, such as
settling when it is in the best interest of the firm to litigate (Dana and Spier 1993).


                                                                                                  10
           Hypothesis 4: For a given level of cost and convergent interest, when there is

               proprietary information at risk, lobbying in the integrated form will be

               favored over a trade association form.



       Finally, we consider the direct effect of proprietary information.       Firms are

generally reticent to lobby at all when there is proprietary information at stake, because

there is fear that despite the usual protections to safeguard this information, the secrets

will either intentionally or unintentionally leak out from the agency (Demski, Lewis,

Yao, and Yildirim 1999, de Figueiredo and Teece 1996). Thus, no matter which form of

organization is chosen we can hypothesize:



           Hypothesis 5: The more proprietary information at risk, the less lobbying that

               will occur.



   C. Extensions and Summary

       Although the collective action theory and transaction cost theories are treated as

independent phenomenon in this section, there is a strong possibility that they may be

interrelated. That is, the choice of organization may affect the amount of lobbying that

occurs. When firms choose to use a trade association as the vehicle to communicate with

regulators, they may no longer each need to mobilize lobbying efforts individually to

make their position known. Instead, the collective body made up of many organizations

can lobby on the group’s behalf. Conversely, if each firm made a decision to lobby

internally, it would then increase the amount of lobbying that would occur. Given this




                                                                                        11
potential link between the organization of lobbying and the amount of lobbying, we

propose:



       Hypothesis 6: The more firms choose trade association lobbying, the less

               lobbying that will occur; the more firms choose internal organization

               lobbying, the more lobbying which will occur.



       In Figure 1, we explain the expected results that will occur. Note that each

variable has an effect on organization, and that each variable affects the amount of

lobbying in two ways. First, indirectly through the organization, the variable affects the

amount of lobbying (trade association lobbying produces fewer total contacts than

multiple individual lobbying). Second, it affects the amount of lobbying directly. In

some cases the direct and indirect effects of the variables affect lobbying in opposite

directions, and it is an empirical question to determine the net effect.

       A final comment must be made regarding large and small firms.                 First,

theoretically, one would predict there would be differences in the two samples. Small

firms might be severely budget constrained in their ability to hire full time lobbyists and

may not have the sufficient economies of scale required to support an internal lobbyist.

Thus, they may not have organizational choice. For them, it may be the trade association

or nothing. Second, smaller firms might also behave in less sophisticated ways than their

more experienced and larger counterparts. Without the frequent experience and learning

that accompanies continual and active federal regulation, small firms might not behave as




                                                                                        12
theoretically expected. Because of this, the difference between large and small firms has

been highlighted in the empirical exposition that follows.



III. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON THE ORGANIZATION OF LOBBYING



         A. Lobbying at the FCC

         The empirical setting for the paper is lobbying of the Federal Communications

Commission (FCC). The FCC is charged with regulating the telecommunications sector3

and has actively promulgated rules and regulations governing market actions of

companies.4 Before the FCC renders a decision on a docket, there is a formal and

informal comment procedure for the parties potentially affected. The Code of Federal

Regulations and FCC Guidelines establish a set of formal procedures that must be

followed to comment on, or challenge, an FCC ruling. The informal procedure is a bit

more opaque. Parties are permitted to make ex parte presentations to the FCC. These

written or oral presentations can be to any official within the FCC, from the

commissioners who make the final rulings, to the industry-level bureau officials, who are




3 There are actually many industries within telecommunications, such as wireless telecommunications, long
distance provision, local service, broadcast television, radio services, and so on.
4 For example, between 1990 and 1993, the FCC handed down an average of over 1000 regulatory
decisions per year. See the FCC Record for the text of those decisions. Also see Greenstein, McMaster,
and Spiller 1995, for an example of the impact of regulatory decisions in the telecommunications sector.


                                                                                                      13
                      Figure 1: Predictions of the Theory



                        ORGANIZATIONAL                      AMOUNT OF
     VARIABLE               FORM                             LOBBYING



   Shared Interests                Trade Association          Decrease

                                                              Decrease

      Free Riding                 No Prediction               No Prediction

                                                              Decrease

Trade Association Benefits       Trade Association            Decrease

                                                              Increase

 Unique Benefits to Firms            Firm                     Increase

                                                              Increase
   Proprietary Information
   (Weak Appropriability)            Firm                     Increase

                                                              Decrease




                                                                              14
industry experts who help craft the ruling for the Commission. Ex parte contacts by the

telecommunications industry constitute the lobbying activities we examine here.

       Ex parte contacts, as a measure of lobbying, have several attractive properties for

empirical research of this type.     First, because all contacts are required by federal

regulation to be reported, there is not a sample selection bias problem. Second, the

Secretary of the FCC provides uniform and consistent information on each ex parte

presentation, minimizing the problem of missing and temporally inconsistent data.

Finally, all contacts relate to a particular regulatory issue before the FCC and are reported

as such. This allows us to investigate each and every instance of this primary form of

lobbying.

       We have collected data on every ex parte presentation made to an FCC official

and reported to the Secretary’s Office in January and February 1998. This includes

presentations made by parties spanning from December 1997 to February 1998. (There is

roughly a 15-day delay from lobbying contact to public disclosure by the FCC.) These

lobbying contacts cover 111 individual dockets facing the FCC. Ten dockets have been

eliminated because of incomplete information, yielding 101 distinct issues over which the

FCC was lobbied. The issue is the unit of observation.

       In this data set, there are 930 lobbying contacts made during the time period. We

record a contact as the following: each party, i, that contacts regulator, j, about issue, k,

on date, t, receives a count in the data set (each (i,j,k,t) quadruplet represents a count).

Because we are concerned about business lobbying, we have eliminated observations that

involve lobbying by federal, state or local government representatives. We have also

eliminated 12 cases where information is incomplete. The remaining number of contacts




                                                                                          15
is 823.     We supplemented this database with interviews of over thirty regulators,

companies, lawyers, and trade associations in the telecommunications industry, to derive

the key variables of interests.

          To create and check some of the variables, we recruited three individuals: one

former FCC regulator, one current FCC regulator, and one lawyer who represented

companies on many of these issues. For each of the docket numbers, we asked two of the

officials to rate the variables on a Likert Scale (1 to 5). High ratings mean that the

experts strongly agreed with the characterization of the variable in the questionnaire; low

numbers indicate a strong disagreement. We used the average of the two experts’ results

to determine the values of the variables. The raw data had a reasonably high degree of

consistency, with 81% of answers within one rating point and 95% of answers within two

rating points. The questions used in this study from the original questionnaire are found

in Appendix 1.       We then asked the remaining official to take a version of the

questionnaire with the same, but a smaller number of questions. We then checked his

answers with the results from the previous two individuals to insure consistency with the

answers. Again, the results were similar.



          B. The Data on the Organization of Lobbying

          The unit of observation is the issue docket (n=101). The dependent variable in

this section is the percentage of individual firm contacts of the total contacts on a given

issue, and is defined as (number of individual firm contacts/number of total contacts).




                                                                                          16
       There are three sets of independent variables. The first set of variables, derived

from the questionnaire in Appendix 1, relates to measuring how collective action issues

and their remedies affect the organization of lobbying. Collective action itself has two

main components, the degree of shared interests, and the degree of free-riding. We

measure both. The first variable, SHARED INTERESTS, measures the degree of shared

interests between firms on a given issue. We expect that as SHARED INTERESTS

increase, ceteris paribus, firms are more likely to engage in collective action, and thus

companies move toward a trade association form of organization (Hypothesis 1). The

second component, free-riding, is measured by the variable, FREE RIDING. While the

theory has no prediction on how free-riding will affect the organization of lobbying

(Hypothesis 2), we include a FREE RIDING variable in the regression for completeness.

FREE RIDING examines the ability of non-contributors to enjoy the fruits of lobbying by

others. Although opportunities for free-riding may not favor one organizational form

over another, remedies of the free-riding problem – nonmember exclusion and unique

benefits -- may.     To account for this, we introduce the two remedy variables.

NONMEMBER EXCLUSION represents whether it is possible for a group, like a trade

association, to exclude members from benefits of its lobbying efforts, and thus overcome

the free-riding problem. If trade associations are able to exclude nonmembers from the

benefits of their lobbying effort, firms are more likely to join the trade association and

rely on its lobbying efforts (Hypothesis 3A). Thus we expect a negative coefficient on

NONMEMBER EXCLUSION. UNIQUE BENEFITS measures the ability of firms to

obtain selective benefits on this issue from their own lobbying efforts (Hypothesis 3B).

We expect a positive coefficient on UNIQUE BENEFITS because a firm could obtain




                                                                                       17
unique benefits through lobbying on its own.5                  Note that the two remedies are not

mutually exclusive and a firm could use both a trade association to obtain industry-wide

benefits (when nonmember exclusion is possible) and an internal organization form of

lobbying to obtain selective benefits.

         The second set of independent variables focuses on proprietary information; in

particular, the difficulty of protecting information when lobbying. In measuring this

transactional hazard, we asked the experts to assess whether lobbying on each of the

issues is likely to lead to leakage of proprietary information during lobbying, outside of

FCC safeguards that protect proprietary information. WEAK APPROPRIABILITY

measures the likelihood that lobbying through a trade association will result in

proprietary information revelation, with high values indicating a high probability of

proprietary information leakage. The transactional theory argues that we should see the

trade association form of organization disfavored when there is a transactional hazard of

proprietary information leakage in the lobbying (Hypothesis 5). If this were true, we

would expect to see a positive coefficient on WEAK APPROPRIABILITY, as firms that

face higher transactional hazards tend to shy away from trade association forms of

lobbying. We do include a second variable FIRM LEAKAGE to measure whether firms,

in lobbying internally, would have to reveal proprietary information anyway. Thus, if a

firm feels its proprietary information will leak out to its competitors anyway, it will be

more likely to use the trade association, ceteris paribus, over an internal organization

form of lobbying to take advantage of the least cost option available.




5 Note that unique benefits does not necessarily mean divergent interests.



                                                                                              18
       The third set of variables is control variables. The first three variables – LARGE

FIRM COST OF ACTION, SMALL FIRM COST OF ACTION, and COST OF

ORGANIZING -- control for the cost of acting collectively. In particular, LARGE FIRM

COST OF ACTION and SMALL FIRM COST OF ACTION measure if a large or small

firm, respectively, would find it cost-beneficial to lobby individually in the absence of a

trade association. COST OF ORGANIZING measures how the costs increase in the trade

association form as a function of the number of members of the trade association. As

costs to the trade association form of organizing increase, and the costs of organizing

internally decrease, the firm should move toward an internal form of organization.

LARGE FIRMS and SMALL FIRMS measure the number of large and small firms

affected, respectively, and are designed to control for issues before the Commission that

disproportionately affect either large or small firms. FIRM PROFITS measures the

impact of an issue on firm profits; larger values of this variable indicate the larger the

effect of this issue on firm profits (and arguably should increase lobbying due to

importance of issue). YEAR represents the number of years the docket has been before

the Commission. This is a measure of where in the docket life cycle the issue is, and is

meant to control for any organizational effects that might be attendant to that particular

phase. Finally, we include control variables that are not on the questionnaire. First, we

control for docket (or industry) effects fixed effects.          COMMON CARRIER,

ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY, MASS MEDIA, WIRELESS, and CABLE

SERVICES refer to the docket designation of the issue, and control for these types of

industry effects, relative to miscellaneous agency issues (which includes international,

public mobile radio, compliance, and other minor bureaus), the omitted category.




                                                                                        19
         We provide three tables regarding the data. Table 2 has a list of the variable

names, and what they measure. Table 3 contains the descriptive statistics. Table 4 is the

correlation matrix.



         C. Empirical Method and Specification

         In order to estimate the equation, we use four methods. The first is a standard

tobit regression, assuming normal error distribution.                   We use the tobit formulation

because the dependent variable includes those situations in which there is lobbying, but

no large firm has taken part. In 27 of the 101 observations, there is no lobbying by large

firms.6 This means there is a large probability mass at 0, which could result in biased

estimates in the standard OLS formulation. The normal tobit formulation allows us to

account for a distribution that is censored from the left, and allows us to generate

unbiased parameter estimates. Sigma is positive and statistically significant at the 99%

level in the tobit formulation, suggesting biased estimators in OLS. We also consider a

censored logistic regression, which assumes a logistic error distribution.

         A second concern that might arise is that there is censoring from the right as well.

Twenty-four of the 101 observations are equal to one. That is, in 24 cases, only large

firms lobby with internal organization, which creates a large probability mass at 1. To

account for this, we consider a two-sided tobit, which allows for censoring at 0 and at 1.

Finally, we provide the ordinary least squares estimation as a basis for comparison, with

Newey-West AR-4/heteroskedastic consistent errors.



6 In these cases, large firms might wish to lobby, but the costs to doing so outweigh benefits.



                                                                                                  20
       We have also bifurcated the sample into a small and large firm sample. The large

firm sample includes all Fortune 1000 firm contacts and all trade association contacts in

which large firms are participants. The small firm sample includes all Fortune 1000

firms and all trade associations in which small firms are participants. We have done this

for four reasons. First, theoretically, one would predict there would be differences in the

two samples. Small firms might be severely capital constrained in their ability to hire

lobbyists and not have the sufficient economies of scale required to support an internal

lobbyist. Second, smaller firms might also behave in less sophisticated ways than their

more experienced and larger counterparts. Third, our interviews tend to confirm that,

when compared to large firms, smaller firms are more often concerned about the social

and trust aspects to their relationships with trade associations, rather than a merely

calculative strategy. Finally, we have determined that there is a statistical difference in

the two samples.      We have examined a unified model’s explanatory power using

interactive variables for the theoretical variables of interest versus no interactive variables

on the variables of interest, and we can reject with a simple F-test that the models have

similar explanatory power at the 99% level of confidence.

       Finally, we have also examined the variables for multicollinearity.            While a

concern, it does not seem to be a large problem. Table 3 indicates that the highest

correlation between two variables is .81, most variables have bivariate correlations in the

.30 range or lower.




                                                                                            21
       D. Organizational Results

               1. Large Firms

       We first look at large firms. In Table 5 we provide six models. Model 1 is the

base model, without the collective action or transactional hazard variables, using a simple

one-sided tobit. Model 2 includes the collective action variables of interest. Model 3

includes all the variables of interest. Model 4 presents the results with a two-sided tobit.

Model 5, considers a one-sided censored logistic regression. Model 6 provides the OLS

estimation for comparison. The coefficients estimates are presented with their standard

errors in parenthesis below. The statistical significance of the coefficients is noted at the

10% and 5% level using two-sided t-tests. A positive coefficient means that an increase

in the variable will cause the lobbying to tend toward internal organization; a negative

coefficient means that an increase in the variable will result in a more trade association

form of organization. We focus on Model 3 as it has all the variables included and

highest likelihood. Note, however, that the signs of the coefficients are the same in nearly

every model, no matter which error distribution assumption or specification is preferred.

       Consider first the collective action variables.         SHARED INTERESTS, as

predicted, has a negative coefficient and is statistically significant, which suggests that as

interests converge, firms are more likely to move into a trade association form of

organization (Hypothesis 1).      The coefficient on FREE RIDING is negative and

statistically significant, meaning that the greater the possibility of free-riding on a docket

outcome, the more likely the firm is to use the trade association. The theory did not pose

a prediction on this variable. The coefficient on NONMEMBER EXCLUSION, also

negative and statistically significant, suggests that as trade associations are increasingly




                                                                                           22
able to block nonmembers from their benefits, firms respond by joining the trade

association and having the trade association lobby on its behalf, consistent with the

theory (Hypothesis 3A). The coefficient on UNIQUE BENEFITS is not statistically

different from zero at the conventional levels of significance. The theory had predicted

this coefficient would be positive – that is, unique benefits would produce a tendency for

firms to lobby themselves to obtain those benefits (Hypothesis 3B).

       Consider the transaction cost variables next.         The coefficient on WEAK

APPROPRIABILITY, which is the key measure of the transaction cost variable, is

positive, as predicted, and statistically significant at the 90% level of confidence

(Hypothesis 4). Though not an overwhelming level of significance for large firms, the

coefficient is positive and statistically significant at either the 90% or 95% level of

confidence in every model presented. The coefficient suggests that firms will organize

internally or through their own agents, rather than use a trade association, the more

proprietary information is at stake. FIRM LEAKAGE has a negative coefficient that is

statistically significant at the 90% level. When firms who would lobby individually are

unable to keep the proprietary information from regulators, they are likely to rely on a

trade association form of lobbying, consistent with theory

       Table 6 lists the magnitude of the effects a one-standard-deviation move in the

theoretical variables has on the probability of lobbying internally.     A one-standard

deviation move in shared interests, free-riding, and nonmember exclusion results in a

14%, 28%, and 16% greater probability of organizing the lobbying through a trade

association form, respectively. Consistent with transaction cost theory, a one-standard

deviation move in proprietary information revelation increases the probability of




                                                                                       23
organizing internally or through an own-hired agent by 16% for large firms. If it is not

possible to keep the information proprietary no matter what the organizational form,

firms prefer to lobby through a trade association with a 22% higher probability.

        A number of control variables are also of interest. The coefficient on LARGE

FIRMS is positive and significant. The more large firms affected by the issue, the more

likely they are to organize internally. The coefficient on YEAR is also positive and

statistically relevant. The later in the life cycle of the docket, the more likely firms are to

organize their lobbying internally. The Common Carrier Bureau and the Wireless

Telecommunications Bureau also encounter more integrated lobbying from large firms.

Note that the impact of the docket on firm profits (FIRM PROFITS) does not favor one

type of organization over another.



                2. Small Firms

        Now consider small firms. Again, in Table 7 we present six models (Models 7-

12), that follow Table 5. SIGMA is statistically significant for small firms as well

suggesting a Tobit formulation. A log-likelihood ratio test does not allow us to reject the

hypothesis that all the tobit models have similar explanatory power at the 95% level of

confidence. That is, Model 7 has similar explanatory power to Models 8-9. From a

modeling perspective, this suggests that jointly the theoretical variables have little

explanatory power of small firm behavior. Different models have similar results, but

those results seem to be fraught with problems.            For example, the coefficient on

NONMEMBER EXCLUSION is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that the

more benefits trade associations offer, the less likely smaller firms are to join. FREE




                                                                                             24
RIDING among small firms has a positive and also statistically significant coefficient,

suggesting small firms, in the presence of free-riding, tend to organize internally. To the

extent that collinearity might be a problem, it should have plagued the large firm analysis

as well as the small firm analysis. However, the large firm analysis seems to perform

well. Given this outcome, the discussion of individual coefficients and variables, and

how they affect the organization of lobbying, must be interpreted carefully because

jointly they add little to our understanding of the organization of small firms. The reason

underlying this could be that there is so much unobserved heterogeneity in the behavior

of small firms, that it completely swamps the theoretical effects, and thus generates

nonsense results. These results are also consistent with the view that small firms do

indeed behave differently than large firms. It could be that they may be limited in their

choices of organization, or that they are maximizing a utility function that does not

include these variables.



IV. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON THE QUANTITY OF LOBBYING

       A. Data

       The dependent variable measuring the quantity of lobbying occurring is the

number of lobbying contacts made by firms and trade associations, as defined in Section

IIIA. The range of the number of lobbying contacts is 1 to 114. The independent

variables are as defined in the previous section, with two exceptions. The first is that we

have omitted the cost variables that refer to the cost of organization, because they are not




                                                                                         25
expected to have an impact on the amount of lobbying.7                        Second, we have added

variables that measure the organization. That is we have included in the dependent

variables from the previous equations as independent variables in this equation (like a

recursive model) to examine Hypothesis 6.



         B. Method and Specification

         To estimate these equations, we begin with the assumption that the count

variables are Poisson distributed.             Unfortunately, two different specification tests

(Wooldridge 1996, and Cameron and Trivedi 1994) indicate there is overdispersion in the

data. Thus we rely on a negative binomial assumption to estimate the model. We also

provide the results using a quasi-maximum likelihood estimator.                          This estimation

technique has the advantage of producing consistent estimates of the parameters of a

correctly specified conditional mean, even if the distribution is incorrectly specified.

Finally, we provide the estimates from a simple ordinary-least-squares estimator with

Newey-West corrected standard errors, which provide a basis for comparison.

         A second specification concern is whether error terms are correlated across the

organizational model and the count model. We have examined the error correlation

structure across specifications and can reject the hypothesis of error correlation.

Moreover, a two-stage least-squares specification imposes a linearity assumption on the

two equations, which may not be appropriate for the count data here. Nevertheless, in

estimates not reported here, we have run the regression using instrumental variables

techniques, and the signs of the theoretical coefficients of interest do not change.



7 These will serve as instruments in the two stage least squares estimation described below.



                                                                                                     26
       A third specification concern is related to the differences between small and large

firms. For the same reasons elucidated in Section IIIC, we might be concerned about the

differences in lobbying by large and small firms. Thus, we have conducted specification

tests to examine whether there should be a split in the sample. We can reject at the 95%

level that these two groups behavior similarly, and thus we present results here of the two

separate regressions, one for large firms and one for small firms.

       A fourth specification concern relates to outlyers. Given the skewness of the

dependent variable, a small number of outlyers may bias the results substantially. To

account for this, we ran the regressions at various cutoff points in the data, and the results

are nearly identical to the results presented here.

       Finally, we considered using the predicted values on organization from the

previous equation on the right hand side of these count equations. We think that this is

not a prudent course to follow because we have no reason to believe that the actual values

of these variables would be correlated with the error term of these equations, yet they

would introduce measurement error into the equation. Nevertheless, we have run the

regressions with the predicted values and results are roughly the same, with slightly

stronger results for the organizational effects.



       C. Results

           1. Large Firms




                                                                                           27
       Table 8 presents the results for large firms. Model 13 presents the base model

with only the control variables. Model 14 adds the collective action variables. Model 15

also includes the appropriability variable and leakage variable. Model 16 presents the

same variables, under a quasi-maximum likelihood estimator. Model 17 presents an OLS

estimation.

       A log-likelihood ratio test shows that Model 14 performs better than Model 13 at

the 95% level of confidence, and that Model 15 performs better than Model 14 at the

90% level of confidence. The QML does not improve explanatory power, and the OLS

estimation offers results similar to the nonlinear models.        For the purposes of the

foregoing discussion, we will focus on the full negative binomial model, Model 15. A

positive coefficient on the variable means that there is more lobbying; a negative

coefficient means less lobbying, and the standard errors are below the coefficient

estimates, with the significance of the coefficient estimates noted.

       The signs of the coefficients are remarkably stable across the models, suggesting

some robustness to the results presented. We begin by focusing our attention on the

organization variable, PERCENT INTEGRATED LARGE (Hypothesis 6). In all of the

specifications, the coefficient on the percentage of large firms is positive as predicted,

indicating that a shift in organizational form toward an internal or “for-hire” structure

does result in more lobbying. Unfortunately, the coefficients never reach the standard

levels of statistical significance, calling into question the organizational hypotheses

presented here.




                                                                                       28
       Next we examine the direct effect of the transactional and collective action

variables on the quantity of lobbying. The coefficient on WEAK APPROPRIABILITY

is negative, as predicted, and statistically significant at the 90% level (Hypothesis 5). A

one standard deviation move in the variable results in 40% less lobbying, holding the

remaining variables at their mean values. The coefficients on all of the collective action

variables are negative.     SHARED INTERESTS seems to have little statistically

significant direct effect on the amount of lobbying. The theory predicted a negative

coefficient (Hypothesis 1). FREE RIDING does negatively impact the amount of

lobbying that occurs. This is consistent with a large body of literature emanating from

political economy that suggests that free-riding problems will result in less lobbying

(Hypothesis 2). A one standard deviation increase in FREE RIDING results in 35% less

lobbying.    Opportunities to correct the free-riding problem through NONMEMBER

EXCLUSION and UNIQUE BENEFITS do not show statistically significant direct

effects as hypothesized (Hypotheses 3A and 3B). Two reasons may underlie this result.

First, remedies to the collective action problem may not be as effective as has been

suggested in the literature. Second, large firms while concerned about collective action

do not consider remedies in designing the nonmarket organization.

       The results also indicate that the more large firms are impacted by an issue, the

more lobbying that will occur. More importantly, and perhaps consistent with intuition,

the coefficient on FIRM PROFITS is positive and statistically significant.         A one-

standard deviation increase in the impact the issue has on firm profits will result in 51%

more lobbying. Finally, the Common Carrier dockets receive the most attention from the

lobbyists.




                                                                                        29
               2. Small Firms

        In Table 9, Models 18 through 22 mirror the results for large firms.              The

coefficients are remarkably stable across error distributional assumptions, and Model 20

possesses the most explanatory power, so the discussion will focus on this model. The

results for the amount of small firm lobbying are somewhat better than the results for the

organization of small firm lobbying, however, it does seem in this case that the large

amounts of unobserved heterogeneity persist, causing many results to be insignificant.

Below, we discuss the statistical results in more detail.

        As with large firms, the coefficient on the organizational variable, PERCENT

INTEGRATED SMALL, is positive across all specifications, but does not reach

statistical significance in any specification. Thus, like in the case of large firms, we can

reject the hypothesis that organizational form has an impact on the amount of lobbying,

as hypothesized in the theory section, at the 95% level of confidence. In the direct effects

of the variables, all the coefficients on the theoretical variables of interest are negative in

all (but one) specifications, but none of the collective action variables are statistically

significant.   Although this suggests that free-riding may not be an important

consideration for smaller firms, it may be due to the other considerations facing small

firms, which were discussed earlier in the paper.

        The only statistically significant coefficient of theoretical interest is the negative

coefficient on WEAK APPROPRIABILITY. Its sign suggests that small firms are

reticent to lobby if they must reveal proprietary and sensitive information in the process.




                                                                                            30
A one standard deviation increase in the independent variable results in 65% less

lobbying.

        The estimation does find positive and statistically significant effects for small

firms with issues emanating from the Common Carrier Bureau, the Cable Services

Bureau, and the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau. In addition, issues that have large

impacts on the profitability of small firms will receive more lobbying. The coefficient on

FIRM PROFITS is positive and statistically significant, as with large firms. A one

standard deviation increase in FIRM PROFITS results in 86% more lobbying contacts.



   V.       DISCUSSION

        This paper takes lobbying data at the level of the lobbying contact, and analyzes

the determinants of organizational form that lobbying takes and the amount of lobbying

that occurs.    It statistically examines administrative agency lobbying using actual

lobbying contacts. How firms structure their lobbying of the FCC is important because it

may not only determine the strategies they pursue, but it may also determine the

effectiveness of those strategies and the potential for externalities.

        We introduced a dataset of ex parte presentations at the FCC, and examine the

pattern in the organization of corporate lobbying efforts. We show that large firms,

which are systematically different from the small firms, act in ways that collective action

theories and transaction cost theories predict in organizing their lobbying effort, with

limitations. Consistent with the collective action theory, large firms will tend to organize

through trade associations when there is shared interests and when the trade association

offers benefits to members. Consistent with transaction cost economics, they will attempt




                                                                                         31
to protect information by lobbying internally or through their own agents when there is a

possibility that sensitive information will leak out through the trade association form of

lobbying. Small firms, however, show little systematic behavior; the data provide no

statistical support to the traditional collective action or transaction cost theories of

organization. This may be because the small firms are constrained in their options for

organization, because of resource constraints and economies of scale considerations. It

could also be because smaller firms do not have as sophisticated lobbying strategies as

large firms. It may also be due to extreme amounts of unobserved heterogeneity in the

small firm behavior which make the results difficult to interpret. We believe it is a

combination of all three factors, and, as such, a question is worthy of future research.

       The second part of this paper turns to the quantity of lobbying. Again, the key

results for large firms are broadly consistent with the conventional theories: large firms

lobby less in the presence of free-riding. They also lobby less the higher the probability

of proprietary information leaking out in the process. The statistical analysis here shows

that remedies such as nonmember exclusion and selective benefits to the free-riding

problem seem to be ineffective for large firms.         This suggests that there may be

limitations to the literature on clubs and collective bodies as remedies to the free rider

problem as they apply to the political realm. Small firms, however, are not responsive to

the free-riding problem, as the theory has predicted. They show no increase or decrease

in tendencies to lobby by the intensity of the free-riding problem, and remedies to the

free-riding problem do not have a statistically discernible effect on the amount of

lobbying which occurs by small firms. Small firms are responsive to the potential

leakage of their proprietary information, and will lobby less if their proprietary




                                                                                           32
information is at risk. We must, however, consider these small firm results, especially

the collective action results, carefully in light of the small firm caveats noted above.

        We hypothesized that the choice of organizational form would have an impact on

the amount of lobbying that occurred. The more a trade association form of organization

was favored, the less lobbying that would result. In both the large and small firm case,

the coefficient on the relevant variables was signed as predicted, but never reach

statistical significance, calling into question this hypothesis.

        Taken together, the results suggest that the structure and conduct of large firm

lobbying at the FCC is consistent with the predictions of theories of transaction costs and

the main results of theories of collective action. However, it suggests that the large firms

do not change their behavior drastically as structures arise to remedy the free rider

problem. Small firms seem to be insensitive to these issues. On the organizational front,

they show no sensitivity to collective action issues or transaction cost issues. On the rate

of lobbying, they show little sensitivity to collective action issues, but do lobby less if the

have to reveal proprietary information. In sum, small firms seem to face a “lobby, don’t

lobby” decision, while large firms choose both the organization and amount of their

lobbying effort when they do lobby.

        The paper also points to future research as well. For example, we lack a good

understanding of the nature and governance structure of trade associations where small

and large firm interests are both represented. In addition, opening up the black box of

executive-branch agencies, to study how and to whom lobbying is most effective is a

question that is still unanswered. Also, understanding the relationship between PAC-

giving and lobbying would help us to understand the relationship between these two




                                                                                            33
forms of political influence.8 Finally, integrating the market aspects of regulatory

decision-making with the nonmarket lobbying strategy would seem to be a useful area to

examine. This paper, integrating political science theories of lobbying with economics

and strategic management theories of organization, has attempted to begin to tackle this

agenda.




8 Ansolabehere, Snyder, and Tripathi (2000) have begun to examine this question looking at lobbying
expenditures and PAC-giving in Congress.


                                                                                                      34
                                   REFERENCES



Ansolabehere, Steven, James M. Snyder, and Suhas Tripathi (2000). "Campaign
Contributions and Lobbying Expenditures.” MIT Political Science Working Paper.

Baron, David P. (1996). Business and its Environment. Englewood Cliffs N.J.: Prentice-
Hall.

Baron, David P. (1997). “Integrated Strategy and International Trade Disputes,” Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy 6(2): 291-346.

Baron, David P. (1999). “Integrated Market and Nonmarket Strategies in Client and
Interest Group Politics,” Business and Politics 1(1): forthcoming.

Bendor, Jonathan, and Dilip Mookherjee (1987). “Institutional Structure and the Logic
of Ongoing Collective Action,” American Political Science Review 81(1): 130-154.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi (1994). “Regression-Based Tests for
Overdispersion in the Poisson Model,” Journal of Econometrics 46: 347-364.

Coleman, William D. (1988). Business and Politics: A Study of Collective Action.
McGill-Queen’s University Press: Kingston, Canada.

Dana, James D., and Kathryn E. Spier (1993). “Expertise and Contingent Fees: The
Role of Asymmetric Information in Attorney Compensation,” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization 9(2): 349-67.

de Figueiredo, John M., and David Teece (1996). “Mitigating Procurement Hazards in
the Context of Innovation,” Industrial and Corporate Change 5(2): pp. 537-559

Demski, Joel S., Tracy R. Lewis, Dennis Yao, and Huseyin Yildirim (1999). “Practices
for Managing Information Flows within Organizations,” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, forthcoming

Hansen, John Mark (1991). Gaining Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby, 1918-1981.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1991). "Multi-Task Principal-Agent Analysis."
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 7 (special issue): 24-52.

Greenstein, Shane, Susan McMaster, and Pablo Spiller (1995). “The Effect of Incentive
Regulation on Infrastructure Modernization: Local Exchange Companies' Deployment of
Digital Technology,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 4(2): 187-236.




                                                                                    35
Grier, Kevin B., Michael C. Munger, and Brian E. Roberts. “The Determinants of
Industry Political Activity, 1978-1986,” American Political Science Review 88(4).

Klein, Benjamin, R. A. Crawford, and A. A. Alchian. (1978). "Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process," Journal of Law and
Economics (October):297-326.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Thomas Strattman (1998). “Interest Group Competition and
the Organization of Congress: Theory and Evidence from Financial Services’ Political
Action Committees,” American Economic Review 88(5): 1163-1187.

Maitland, Ian (1985). “Interest Groups and Economic Growth Rates,” Journal of Politics
47(1): 44-58.

Olson, Mancur (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Oxley, JoAnne (1997). “Appropriability Hazards and Governance in Strategic
Alliances: A Transaction Cost Approach,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
13(2): 387-409.

Pittman, Russell (1976). “The Effects of Industry Concentration and Regulation on
Contribution in Three 1972 U.S. Senate Campaigns,” Public Choice 27: 71-80.

Sandler, Todd (1992). Collective Action. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Sandler, Todd, and John Tschirhart (1980). “An Economic Theory of Clubs: An
Evaluative Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature 18: 1481-1521.

Schlozman, Kay L., and John T. Tierney (1986). Organized Interests and American
Democracy. New York: Harper & Row.

Schuler, Douglas (1999). “Uncovering the Dimensionality of Corporate Political
Involvement,” Business and Politics 1(1): forthcoming.

Spulber, Daniel F. (1994). “Economic Analysis and Management Strategy,” Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy 3(2): 355-406.

Snyder, James (1990). “Campaign Contributions as Investment,” Journal of Political
Economy 98: 1195-1227.

Strattman, Thomas (1992). “Are Contributors Rational? Untangling Strategies of
Political Action Committees,” Journal of Political Economy 100: 647-664.

Teece, David J. (1986). "Profiting From Technology Innovation," Research Policy 15
(December): 285-305.



                                                                                    36
Walker, Jack L. (1991). Mobilizing Interest Groups in America. Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free
Press.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1996). The Mechanisms of Governance. Oxford University
Press: Cambridge.

Wooldridge, Jeffery (1996). “Quasi-Likelihood Methods for Count Data,” Handbook of
Applied Econometrics, vol 1.




                                                                                  37
             TABLE 1: PROPERTIES OF ORGANIZATION FORMS
                FOR LEGAL AND LOBBYING ACTIVITIES

                        Trade       Contract Lobbyist    In-house Legal Dept. or
                      Association   Outside Counsel     Government Affairs Dept.

Incentives               Low              High               Low-Moderate

Overcome Weak            Low           Moderate                  High
Appropriability

Cost                     Low           Moderate                  High




                                                                            38
                               TABLE 2: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS

       VARIABLE                                              SUMMARY DEFINITION
SHARED INTERESTS          Degree of Shared Interests Amongst Firms
FREE RIDING               Ability to Free Ride
NONMEMBER EXCLUSION Degree of Trade Associations’ Ability to Exclude Nonmembers from Benefits
UNIQUE BENEFITS           Ability of Firms to Extract Selective and Unique Benefits through Individual Lobbying
WEAK APPROPRIABILITY      Amount of Proprietary Information that is required to be divulged by a firm to a trade association
FIRM LEAKAGE              Amount of Proprietary Information that is required to be divulged by a firm to a regulator
LARGE FIRM COST OF        Cost of individual lobbying by large firms relative to trade association lobbying
ACTION
SMALL FIRM COST OF        Cost of individual lobbying by small firms relative to trade association lobbying
ACTION
COST OF ORGANIZING        Rate of increase in costs of lobbying
SMALL FIRMS               Percentage of Small Firms Affected by Issue
LARGE FIRMS               Percentage of Large Firms Affected by Issue
FIRM PROFITS              Impact on firm profitability
YEAR                      Year of Docket Introduction
COMMON CARRIER            Common Carrier Bureau
MASS MEDIA                Mass Media Bureau
CABLE SERVICES            Cable Systems Bureau
WIRELESS TELECOM          Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
ENGINEERING AND TECH      Engineering and Technical Bureau
PERCENT INTEGRATED        Percentage of lobbying contacts through integrated form of organization for large firms
LARGE
PERCENT INTEGRATED        Percentage of lobbying contacts through integrated form of organization for small firms
SMALL
LARGE COUNT               Count of large firm lobbying contacts
SMALL COUNT               Count of small firm lobbying contacts




                                                                                                                    39
                      TABLE 3: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

         VARIABLE                  MEAN                 STD DEV
    SHARED INTERESTS                3.08                   .81
       FREE RIDING                  3.91                    .75
  NONMEMBER EXCLUSION               1.14                    .38
     UNIQUE BENEFITS                2.79                  1.07
  WEAK APPROPRIABILITY              2.18                   .78
      FIRM LEAKAGE                  2.13                    .80
LARGE FIRM COST OF ACTION           3.56                   .77
SMALL FIRM COST OF ACTION           2.73                   .63
   COST OF ORGANIZING               3.06                   .80
       LARGE FIRMS                  4.13                    .94
       SMALL FIRMS                  3.60                   1.10
       FIRM PROFITS                 2.31                   .88
           YEAR                    1994.7                  3.03
    COMMON CARRIER                  .485                    .50
       MASS MEDIA                   .109                   .31
     CABLE SERVICES                 .069                    .26
    WIRELESS TELECOM                .109                    .31
  ENGINEERING AND TECH              .079                    .27
PERCENT INTEGRATED LARGE             .36                    .43
PERCENT INTEGRATED SMALL             .34                    .42
      LARGE COUNT                   5.65                  12.20
      SMALL COUNT                   4.70                  10.19




                                                                  40
                                                          TABLE 4: CORRELATION MATRIX


1    SHARED INTERESTS            1.00
2    FREE RIDING                 0.24    1.00
3    NONMEMBER EXCLUSION         -0.27   -0.60   1.00
4    UNIQUE BENEFITS             -0.49   -0.65   0.40    1.00
5    WEAK APPROPRIABILITY        -0.31   -0.45   0.58    0.44    1.00
6    FIRM LEAKAGE                -0.22   -0.58   0.40    0.61    0.81    1.00
7    LARGE FIRM COST OF ACTION   0.33    0.22    -0.13   0.06    0.02    0.10    1.00
8    SMALL FIRM COST OF ACTION   0.07    0.21    0.10    -0.15   0.01    -0.20   0.12    1.00
9    COST OF ORGANIZING          -0.01   0.29    -0.06   0.00    0.20    0.01    0.44    0.52    1.00
10   SMALL FIRMS                 0.54    0.24    -0.28   -0.27   -0.22   -0.07   0.58    0.12    0.22    1.00
11   LARGE FIRMS                 0.46    0.33    -0.10   -0.48   -0.30   -0.42   0.19    0.48    0.27    0.60    1.00
12   FIRM PROFITS                -0.28   -0.35   0.37    0.52    0.56    0.60    0.22    0.14    0.24    0.00    -0.13   1.00
13   YEAR                        0.21    -0.04   0.03    0.10    0.03    0.10    0.16    -0.12   0.07    0.06    0.01    -0.11   1.00
14   COMMON CARRIER              0.06    -0.26   0.35    0.14    0.42    0.45    0.11    -0.23   -0.22   0.14    -0.06   0.31    0.03    1.00
15   MASS MEDIA                  0.14    0.08    -0.14   -0.13   -0.16   -0.14   -0.01   -0.06   -0.03   -0.03   -0.05   -0.12   -0.18   -0.34   1.00
16   CABLE SYSTEMS               0.19    0.14    -0.11   -0.31   -0.09   -0.17   0.05    0.18    0.17    0.11    0.15    -0.14   0.10    -0.26   -0.10   1.00
17   WIRELESS TELECOM            -0.09   0.21    -0.09   -0.07   -0.12   -0.16   -0.03   0.07    0.15    -0.05   0.02    -0.16   0.19    -0.34   -0.12   -0.10   1.00
18   ENGINEERING AND TECH        -0.12   0.06    -0.07   0.09    -0.12   -0.12   -0.14   0.15    0.05    -0.20   -0.03   -0.15   0.07    -0.28   -0.10   -0.08   -0.10   1.00


                                    1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9      10      11      12      13      14      15      16      17     18




                                                                                                                                                                                41
                 TABLE 5: ESTIMATION OF THE ORGANIZATION OF LOBBYING
                                    BY LARGE FIRMS

Dependent Variable: PERCENTAGE INTEGRATED LARGE = non-trade association lobbying
                    on a given issue divided by total lobbying on the issue
                             MODEL 1 MODEL 2      MODEL 3    MODEL 4 MODEL 5 MODEL 6
           VARIABLE                                           TWO-
                              TOBIT    TOBIT       TOBIT      SIDED  CENSORED   OLS
                                                              TOBIT   LOGISTIC
   SHARED INTERESTS                     -.21**     -.19**     -.28**    -.21** -.16**
                                         (.09)      (.09)      (.13)     (.09)  (.08)
         FREE RIDING                    -.30**      -.36**     -.57**     -.34**     -.26**
                                         (.11)       (.12)      (.19)      (.11)      (.09)
NONMEMBER EXCLUSION                      -.31*      -.48**     -.73**     -.50**     -.37**
                                         (.17)       (.19)      (.29)      (.21)      (.17)
     UNIQUE BENEFITS                      -.13        -.08       -.14       -.06       -.05
                                         (.09)       (.09)      (.13)      (.09)      (.08)
WEAK APPROPRIABILITY                                  .24*       .43*      .27**       .19*
                                                     (.14)      (.22)      (.14)      (.10)
       FIRM LEAKAGE                                  -.27*     -.46**     -.31**     -.22**
                                                     (.14)      (.22)      (.14)      (.11)
  COST OF LARGE FIRM           -.06        .03         .04        .06        .05        .01
        ACTION                (.09)      (.09)       (.09)      (.14)      (.09)      (.08)
  COST OF ORGANIZING           -.08       -.04        -.09       -.13       -.13       -.06
                              (.08)      (.08)       (.08)      (.13)      (.09)      (.07)
        LARGE FIRMS           .13**      .16**       .19**      .24**      .21**      .15**
                              (.07)      (.07)       (.08)      (.11)      (.07)      (.05)
        FIRM PROFITS            .08        .04         .07        .09        .07        .06
                              (.07)      (.07)       (.08)      (.11)      (.08)      (.07)
              YEAR             .03*      .04**       .04**      .06**      .04**      .04**
                              (.02)      (.02)       (.02)      (.03)      (.02)      (.01)
    COMMON CARRIER            .41**      .51**       .55**      .70**      .52**      .44**
                              (.16)      (.16)       (.17)      (.25)      (.17)      (.10)
         MASS MEDIA            -.06        .05         .11        .13        .09        .15
                              (.21)      (.21)       (.21)      (.30)      (.20)      (.13)
      CABLE SERVICES            .18        .21         .24        .25        .22        .09
                              (.23)      (.24)       (.24)        .34      (.23)      (.11)
   WIRELESS TELECOM             .27       .35*       .41**       .55*       .35*      .26**
                              (.21)      (.20)       (.20)      (.29)      (.20)      (.13)
ENGINEERING AND TECH            .13        .24         .29        .37        .13        .23
                              (.24)      (.22)       (.22)      (.32)      (.22)      (.15)
          CONSTANT           -65.27*   -81.01**   -87.80**   -121.10**   -87.54**   -70.39**
                             (36.32)    (37.81)    (37.20)    (55.34)     37.54      18.00

               N               101      101         101        101        101         101
         Log Likelihood       -71.40   -65.56      -63.64     -87.79     -64.26
          R-Squared                                                                  .3387
** 95% confidence interval
* 90% confidence interval




                                                                                               42
               TABLE 6: LARGE FIRM TENDENCY TO ORGANIZE LOBBYING

                    Variable                             Shift in Probability Toward Internal
                                                                     Organization
Shared Interests                                      -14%**
Free Riding                                           -28%**
Nonmember Exclusion                                   -16%**
Unique Benefits                                       -9%
Weak Appropriability                                  +16%*
Firm Leakage                                          -22%*
Note: This table measures the effect a one standard deviation move in the independent variable will have on
probability of organizing internally.




                                                                                                              43
                 TABLE 7: ESTIMATION OF THE ORGANIZATION OF LOBBYING
                                    BY SMALL FIRMS

      Dependent Variable: PERCENTAGE INTEGRATED SMALL = non-trade association
                lobbying on a given issue divided by total lobbying on the issue
                             MODEL 7 MODEL 8     MODEL 9 MODEL 10 MODEL 11 MODEL 12
           VARIABLE                                       TWO-
                              TOBIT    TOBIT      TOBIT   SIDED   CENSORED   OLS
                                                          TOBIT    LOGISTIC
   SHARED INTERESTS                      .07        .04     .04       .02     -.00
                                        (.08)      (.09)   (.13)     (.09)   (.07)
         FREE RIDING                    .29**     .31**     .48**     .28**     .19**
                                        (.11)     (.12)     (.19)     (.12)     (.07)
NONMEMBER EXCLUSION                      .32*     .47**     .69**      .41*      .33*
                                        (.18)     (.21)     (.32)     (.23)     (.17)
     UNIQUE BENEFITS                      .07       .05       .08       .03       .01
                                        (.08)     (.09)     (.13)     (.09)     (.09)
WEAK APPROPRIABILITY                               -.21      -.26      -.24      -.11
                                                  (.15)     (.23)     (.16)     (.11)
       FIRM LEAKAGE                                 .17       .21       .18       .07
                                                  (.16)     (.24)     (.16)     (.09)
  COST OF SMALL FIRM           -.02      -.06      -.04      -.05      -.06      -.05
        ACTION                (.11)     (.11)     (.11)     (.17)     (.12)     (.11)
  COST OF ORGANIZING           -.06       .00       .04       .06       .05       .03
                              (.08)     (.08)     (.09)     (.14)     (.10)     (.08)
        SMALL FIRMS            -.04      -.06      -.07      -.11      -.08      -.05
                              (.05)     (.06)     (.06)     (.10)     (.06)     (.04)
        FIRM PROFITS            .07       .09       .09       .11       .10       .09
                              (.07)     (.08)     (.08)     (.12)     (.08)     (.07)
              YEAR             -.01      -.01      -.01      -.01      -.00      -.00
                              (.02)     (.02)     (.02)     (.03)     (.02)     (.02)
    COMMON CARRIER             -.10      -.19      -.18      -.27      -.16      -.13
                              (.15)     (.16)     (.17)     (.26)     (.19)     (.19)
         MASS MEDIA             .40      .33*      .32*      .52*     .41**       .29
                              (.19)     (.20)     (.20)     (.31)     (.20)     (.21)
      CABLE SERVICES           -.09      -.09      -.09      -.13      -.04      -.18
                              (.23)     (.24)     (.23)     (.35)     (.23)     (.21)
   WIRELESS TELECOM             .25       .16       .14       .11       .17       .12
                              (.20)     (.20)     (.20)     (.30)     (.21)     (.17)
ENGINEERING AND TECH          .46**      .41*      .40*      .63*     .50**      .36*
                              (.22)     (.21)     (.21)     (.34)     (.22)     (.18)
          CONSTANT            10.95     16.09     19.98     21.50      8.47      7.49
                             (35.70)   (37.73)   (37.59)   (57.76)   (42.13)   (38.98)

               N               101      101        101      101       101       101
         Log Likelihood       -71.68   -68.13     -67.20   -92.09    -68.16
          R-Squared                                                            .2459
** 95% confidence interval
* 90% confidence interval




                                                                                         44
                        TABLE 8: ESTIMATION OF THE COUNT OF LOBBYING
                                       BY LARGE FIRMS

           Dependent Variable: LARGE COUNT = count of lobbying contacts on the issue
                               MODEL 13    MODEL 14    MODEL 15    MODEL 16     MODEL 17
           VARIABLE               ML           ML           ML                    QML
                               NEGATIVE    NEGATIVE    NEGATIVE      OLS        NEGATIVE
                               BINOMIAL    BINOMIAL    BINOMIAL                 BINOMIAL
   SHARED INTERESTS                           -.12         -.17       -2.69         -.17
                                              (.26)       (.26)      (2.07)        (.24)
         FREE RIDING                         -.80**       -.58*       -3.75       -.58**
                                              (.30)       (.30)      (3.46)        (.28)
NONMEMBER EXCLUSION                         -1.62**      -1.16*       -2.38      -1.17**
                                              (.60)       (.63)      (5.06)        (.59)
     UNIQUE BENEFITS                         -.49**      -.55**       -2.92       -.54**
                                              (.23)       (.23)      (2.10)          .21
WEAK APPROPRIABILITY                                      -.65*      -5.91*       -.64**
                                                          (.35)      (3.36)        (.33)
       FIRM LEAKAGE               -.13        -.23          .32        1.76          .30
                                 (.19)       (.27)        (.38)      (2.34)        (.36)
        LARGE FIRMS              .73**       .67**        .57**      3.10**        .57**
                                 (.17)       (.21)        (.21)      (1.46)        (.20)
        FIRM PROFITS               .16       .48**        .47**       4.40         .48**
                                 (.21)       (.22)        (.22)      (2.82)        (.20)
              YEAR                -.02         .06          .03         .47          .04
                                 (.07)       (.07)        (.08)       (.56)        (.07)
    COMMON CARRIER                .96*        .95*         .97*       7.60*       1.00**
                                 (.52)       (.56)        (.53)      (3.91)        (.50)
         MASS MEDIA                .49         .00          .07        6.17          .14
                                 (.63)       (.65)        (.63)      (5.37)        (.59)
      CABLE SERVICES               .96         .53          .75        4.46          .77
                                 (.67)         .70        (.69)      (3.81)        (.64)
   WIRELESS TELECOM                .40         .27          .25        1.95          .26
                                 (.65)       (.65)        (.63)      (4.07)        (.59)
ENGINEERING AND TECH              -.22        -.05         -.08       3.35          -.05
                                 (.71)       (.69)        (.68)      (3.65)        (.64)
      PERCENTAGE                   .71         .44          .57         .88          .54
   INTEGRATED LARGE              (.47)       (.46)        (.45)      (2.35)        (.42)

          CONSTANT               39.86       -106.81     -61.48      -909.30      -69.02
                                (146.78)    (148.76)    (149.10)   (1123.811)    (137.45)

               N                  101         101         101         101          101
         Log Likelihood         -245.50     -239.90     -238.29                  -238.73
          R-Squared                                                  .2381
** 95% confidence interval
* 90% confidence interval




                                                                                            45
                        TABLE 9: ESTIMATION OF THE COUNT OF LOBBYING
                                       BY SMALL FIRMS

           Dependent Variable: SMALL COUNT = count of lobbying contacts on the issue
                               MODEL 18    MODEL 19    MODEL 20    MODEL 21    MODEL 22
           VARIABLE               ML           ML           ML                   QML
                               NEGATIVE    NEGATIVE    NEGATIVE      OLS       NEGATIVE
                               BINOMIAL    BINOMIAL    BINOMIAL                BINOMIAL
   SHARED INTERESTS                            .20         -.03      -.71          -.03
                                              (.26)       (.26)     (1.05)        (.26)
         FREE RIDER                           -.45         -.03       -4.28        -.03
                                             (.30)        (.31)      (4.21)       (.30)
NONMEMBER EXCLUSION                         -1.56**        -.62       -5.73        -.62
                                             (.54)        (.60)      (4.28)       (.60)
     UNIQUE BENEFITS                          -.18         -.27       -1.90        -.27
                                             (.24)        (.23)      (2.29)       (.23)
WEAK APPROPRIABILITY                                     -1.33**      -3.30      -1.33**
                                                          (.42)      (2.05)       (.41)
       FIRM LEAKAGE                -.11        -.35         .75        -.19         .74
                                  (.29)       (.31)       (.45)      (2.10)       (.44)
        SMALL FIRMS                 .12         .07         .06         .27         .06
                                  (.20)       (.20)       (.19)         .84       (.18)
        FIRM PROFITS               .38*       .67**       .71**      4.44**       .71**
                                  (.22)       (.24)       (.23)      (2.24)       (.23)
              YEAR                 -.02        -.01        -.06        -.16        -.06
                                  (.07)       (.07)       (.07)       (.53)       (.07)
    COMMON CARRIER                  .76         .79        .90*       5.23         .90*
                                  (.49)       (.52)       (.48)      (3.26)       (.48)
      CABLE SERVICES              1.13*         .84       1.25*      5.86*        1.25*
                                  (.69)       (.71)       (.68)      (3.24)       (.67)
ENGINEERING AND TECH                .40         .54         .76        4.26         .76
                                  (.70)       (.68)       (.64)      (3.14)       (.64)
         MASS MEDIA              1.24**         .66         .84        8.70         .84
                                  (.62)       (.65)       (.61)      (5.86)       (.61)
   WIRELESS TELECOM                 .90         .93       1.07*       8.19        1.07*
                                  (.64)       (.62)       (.58)      (5.82)       (.58)
      PERCENTAGE                    .65        .87*         .60        2.50         .60
   INTEGRATED SMALL               (.52)       (.49)       (.45)      (1.92)       (.45)
       CONSTANT                  46.03        23.55      127.46     338.17       126.87
                                (145.40)    (144.43)    (135.44)   (1076.18)    (134.13)

               N                  101         101         101        101          101
         Log Likelihood         -248.70     -242.87     -238.10                 -277.01
          R-Squared                                                 .1842
** 95% confidence interval
* 90% confidence interval




                                                                                           46
                        APPENDIX 1: QUESTIONS FOR EXPERTS


                         NonMarket Strategy in Telecommunications

For each issue in the attached spreadsheet, rate on a 1 to 5 scale each statement below for that
issue. 1= strongly disagree; 5=strongly agree.

THEORY:

1. Shared Interests: Large segments of the industry (a majority of firms) share the same
   interests or side of the issue.

2. Free Riding: If a trade association lobbied on this issue, the benefits of passage or defeat of
   this regulation(s) would be conveyed to large segments of the industry, irrespective of
   whether they were involved in the trade association or not. In other words, free-riding is
   possible because the trade association cannot localize the benefits to only its members.

3. Nonmember Exclusion: If a trade association lobbied on this issue, you should be a
   member of a trade association to be included in the benefits of passage or defeat of this
   regulation(s).

4. Unique Benefits: An individual firm can obtain unique benefits from passage or defeat of
   this regulation(s). (For example, it could realistically expect the Commission to specifically
   exclude it or small class of firms like it, from adhering to the regulation.)

5. Weak Appropriability: If the trade association lobbied on the firm’s behalf, the firm would
   be required to divulge sensitive or proprietary information that might put it at a competitive
   disadvantage relative to other members of the trade association.

6. Firm Leakage: If the firm lobbied on its own behalf, the firm would be required to divulge
   sensitive or proprietary information at some point in the lobbying process that would become
   public, and that might put it at a competitive disadvantage relative to competitors.


CONTROL:

7. Large Firms: This issue relates to many large firms in the industries affected (1=<20%;
   2=20-40%; 3=40-60%; 4=60-80%; 5=80%+)

8. Small Firms: This issue relates to many small firms in the industries affected (1=<20%;
   2=20-40%; 3=40-60%; 4=60-80%; 5=80%+)

9. Large Firm Cost of Action: If there were no trade association, and each firm individually
   lobbied on this issue, the large firms would generally find the benefits from their lobbying to
   be higher than their costs of lobbying.



                                                                                                   47
10. Small Firm Cost of Action: If there were no trade association, and each firm individually
    lobbied on this issue, the small firms would generally find their benefits from lobbying to be
    higher than their costs of lobbying.

11. Cost of Organizing: The total cost of organizing on this issue (through a trade association)
    increases, at an increasing rate, with the number of firms.

12. Firm Profits: The issue has a very large impact on the profitability of firm(s) and threatens
    survival of firm(s).




                                                                                                48
                 APPENDIX 2: ISSUES BEFORE FCC THAT REPORTED EX PARTE
                        PRESENTATIONS JANUARY –FEBRUARY 1998

CC 80-286 Establishment of Joint Board
CC 85-166 Investigation of Special Access Tariffs of Local Exchange Carriers
CC 90-6 Cellular Service
CC 91-141 Expanded Interconnections
CC 91-281 Caller Identification Service
CC 91-35 Operator Service Access and Pay Telephone Compensation
CC 92-115 Public Mobile Services
CC 92-235 Private Land Mobile Radio Services
CC 92-237 North American Numbering Plan
CC 92-297 Local Multipoint Distribution Service
CC 92-77 Billed Party Preference
CC 94-1 Price Cap Performance
CC 94-102 Emergency Calling System
CC 94-129 Consumers Long Distance Carriers
CC 94-54 Commercial Mobile Radio Services
CC 94-97 Expanded Interconnection
CC 95-116 Telephone Number Portability
CC 95-155 Toll Free Service Access Codes
CC 95-182 Alascom, Inc.
CC 95-184 Telecommunications Services-Inside Wiring
CC 95-185 Interconnection between LECs and CMRS Providers
CC 96-115 Consumer Proprietary Network Information
CC 96-128 Pay Telephone Reclassification
CC 96-149 Implementation of Non-Accounting Safeguards
CC 96-150 Accounting Safeguards
CC 96-158 Southwestern Bell Telephone Co.
CC 96-160 Expanded Interconnection Offerings
CC 96-262 Access Charge Reform
CC 96-45 Universal Service
CC 96-61 Interstate, Interexchange Marketplace
CC 96-98 Local Competition Provisions
CC 97-11 Implementation of Section 402(b)(2)(a) of Telecom Act
CC 97-112 Commercial Mobile Radio Services
CC 97-121 In-Region, InterLATA Service in Oklahoma
CC 97-137 In-Region, InterLATA Service in Michigan
CC 97-146 Competitive Access Providers
CC 97-149 1997 Annual Access Tariff
CC 97-151 Pole Attachments
CC 97-158 Southwestern Bell Telephone Company
CC 97-160 Economic Cost Studies
CC 97-160 Universal Service -Forward Looking Mechanism for High Cost Support
CC 97-172 Ex Parte and Pleading Cycle Procedures Established
CC 97-208 InterLATA Service in South Carolina
CC 97-211 Special Authority To Transfer Control
CC 97-213 Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act
CC 97-219 Petition for Preemption-Discriminatory Ordinances, Fees and Right-of-Way Practices
CC 97-249 Beehive Telephone Company Beehive Telephone, Inc., Nevada
CC 97-250 Tariffs Implementing Access Charge Reform
CC 98-11 Petition of Bell Atlantic Corporation for Relief from Barriers to Deployment of Advance Telecommunications Services




                                                                                                                     49
CS 92-260 Cable TV-Cable Home Wiring
CS 95-184 Telecommunications Services Inside Wiring;Customer Premises Equipment
CS 96-83 Broadcast and Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Service
CS 97-151 Implementation of Section 703 (e)-Pole Attachments
CS 97-206 Technical Requirements To Enable Blocking of Video Programming
CS 97-248 Implementation of the Cable TV Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992
CS 97-55 TV Ratings System
ET 93-62 Radiofrequency Radiation
ET 94-124 New Radio Applications
ET 95-18 Mobile Satellite Service
ET 95-183 37.0-38.6 GHz and 38.6 - 40.0 GHz Bands
ET 95-19 Digital Devices
ET 97-214 Allocate the 455-456 and 459-460 MHz bands
ET 97-94 Amendments of Parts 2,15,18, et al.
ET 97-99 Digital Electronic Message Service
FO 91-171 Emergency Broadcast System
FO 91-301 Technical Improvements
GN 89-573 Regional Public Safety Plan; Philadelphia, PA
GN 90-7 Regional Public Safety Plan; Wash. DC
GN 93-252 Regulatory Treatment of Mobile Services
IB 95-59 Satellite Earth Stations
IB 96-111 Domestic and International Satellite Service
IB 96-220 Non-Geostationary Mobile Satellite Service
IB 96-261 International Settlement Rate Benchmark
IB 97-142 Rules and Policies on Foreign Participation
IB 97-95 Allocation and Designation of Spectrum
MD 96-186 Annual Regulatory Fees for Fiscal Year 1997
MM 87-268 Advanced TV Systems
MM 87-7 Television Satellite Station Policies
MM 91-221 TV Broadcasting
MM 92-264 Cable Ownership Limits, Cross- Ownership and Anti-Trafficking
MM 93-25 Direct Broadcast Satellite Service Obligations
MM 94-150 Attribution of Broadcast Interest
MM 95-176 Video Programming
MM 96-16 Broadcast EEO Rules and Policies
MM 96-222 Broadcast TV Ownership Rules
MM 97-138 Broadcast Television and Radio Stations
MM 97-182 Preemption of State and Local Zoning and Land Use Restrictions
PR 93-253 Private Land Mobile Radio Services
PR 89-552 Use of 220-222 MHz
PR 93-144 SMR Systems
WT 94-148 Terrestrial Microwave Fixed Radio Services
WT 95-157 Microwave Relocation
WT 96-6 Flexible Service Offerings
WT 96-86 Development of Operational, Technical, and Spectrum Requirements
WT 97-112 Commercial Mobile Radio Services
WT 97-153 Private Land Mobile Radio Services
WT 97-182 Preemption of State and Local Zoning and Land Use Restrictions
WT 97-192 Procedures for Reviewing Request for Relief from State and Local Regulations
WT 97-207 Calling Party Pays Service Option
WT 97-81 Multiple Address Systems
WT 97-82 Competitive Bidding




                                                                                           50
51
