NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN MANAGERIAL PAY STRUCTURES
1986-1992 AND RISING RETURNS TO SKILL
K.C. O’Shaughnessy
David I. Levine
Peter Cappelli
Working Paper 7730
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7730

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2000

Helpful comments were received by Erica Groshen, Daniel Levine, Georgina Moreno, and Jimmy Torrez.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2000 by K.C. O’Shaughnessy, David I. Levine, and Peter Cappelli. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Changes in Managerial Pay Structures 1986-1992 and Rising Returns to Skill
K.C. O’Shaughnessy, David I. Levine, and Peter Cappelli
NBER Working Paper No. 7730
June 2000
JEL No. J3, J2, J0
ABSTRACT
We examine the relationship between wages and skill requirements in a sample of over
50,000 managers in 39 companies between 1986 and 1992. The data include an unusually good
measure of job requirements and skills that can proxy for human capital. We find that wage
inequality increased both within and between firms from 1986 and 1992. Higher returns to our
measure of skill accounts for most of the increasing inequality within firms. At the same time, our
measure of skill does not explain much of the cross-sectional variance in average wages between
employers, and changes in returns to skill do not explain any of the time series increase in betweenfirm variance over time. Finally, we find only weak evidence of any declines in the rigidity of
internal wage structures of large employers.
K.C. O’Shaughnessy
Hayworth College of Business
Western Michigan University
Grand Rapids, MI 49526
Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu

David I. Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720

3

CHANGES IN MANAGERIAL PAY STRUCTURES 1986-1992
AND RISING RETURNS TO SKILL
Earnings inequality has increased considerably in the US economy during the past 20
years. Economists have examined a number of possible explanations for the change, with
an emphasis on demand-side changes that increased the returns to skills [Levy and
Murnane, 1992]. We examine these important explanations for rising inequality by
analyzing a data set with three unique characteristics. First, the data include a quantitative
measure of the actual requirements of each job B the skills, responsibility, and
accountability B that is constructed from a detailed analysis of each job. This measure has
much higher validity and reliability than most measures of job-relevant skills because it
captures actual job requirements. Most prior studies rely on proxies for job requirements
that focus on characteristics of workers, such as years of education, or broad descriptions
such as job titles. Second, the time series data report on multiple jobs (hundreds and in
many cases thousands of positions) across 39 companies, allowing us to analyze
inequality both within employers and between high- and low-wage employers. Finally,
because these data are for managerial jobs, they allow us to extend the prior research on
inequality within and between employers which focused on production workers [e.g.,
Davis and Haltiwanger 1991] and to contribute to the growing literature on wage
structures within enterprises [e.g., Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom 1994, Lazear 1995].
We analyze these data to address a number of questions relating to firm-level wage
inequality. We begin by describing a number of important features of wage structures at
large employers. These include the magnitude and persistence of employer-specific wage
levels, employer-specific returns to our measure of skill, and the sorting of employees
between employers by skill. We then test explanations about inequality and firm-specific
wage structures that are based on human capital theory. Among the most important of
these tests is the extent to which differences in skill requirements explain apparent
differences in employer wage levels. Our conclusion that differences in job
characteristics do not explain differences in wage levels is so strong and surprising that
we replicate the test with a second dataset, where the results were similar. We also
examine the popular claim in much of the business press that wage structures at large
employers have become less rigid and more responsive to markets and to individual
performance in recent years [e.g., Annable, 1997; Burack and Singh, 1995; Chasman and
Feldman, 1995; Manticade and Pennell, 1992]. In general we find little evidence of
declining rigidities between 1986 and 1992, although use of bonuses has increased.
The basic method of this paper is to decompose inequality into two pieces: wage
inequality between high- and low-wage employers (the employer wage effect), and
inequality within each employer. The inequality between employers is captured in our
model by estimating a separate intercept (firm effect) for each employer. We then
examined each of these forms of inequality in 1986 and changes in them between 1986
and 1992. Finally, we measure how each form of inequality is related to our precise
measure of skill and job requirements.

4
I. Human Capital Theory
The Appendix presents an illustrative model where wage differences are determined
solely by differences in skill requirements. In such a world where skill levels also differ
among firms and good (but imperfect) measures of skills exist, then:
H1: Differences in employers= mean wages are primarily due to differences in
mean measured skills. Empirically, the standard deviation of the coefficients on
the firm effects should be substantially smaller when controlling for skills than
when not controlling for skills.
Human capital theory also offers explanations about changes in wage levels and in
employer wage effects that are based on returns to skill. If firms differ in their initial
complements of skills and returns to skill have increased over time, then wage inequality
should increase across firms:
H2: If returns to skill have increased, then wage inequality between firms will
also increase at the same pace. (This result assumes that the sorting of skills
across firms is constant, which is roughly true in this dataset, as noted below.)
Other researchers have used the corollary of this argument to conclude that rising
inequality among employers is due to higher returns to skill. For example, Davis and
Haltiwanger estimate a rising effect of establishment size on wages within manufacturing
between 1967 and 1983 [1991, pp. 156-7]. They interpret this result as consistent with a
size-wage effect that results from a relationship between unmeasured skills and size
coupled with rising returns to skill.
These arguments also imply that most of this rise in between-firm inequality should be
eliminated empirically if one can control for skill requirements with an accurate measure
of skills (as shown in the appendix):
H3: The apparent increase in inequality between firms should be eliminated or at
least sharply reduced when controlling for differences in skill levels. Empirically,
the increase in the standard deviation of the coefficients on the firm effects should
be much smaller when controlling for skill than when not controlling for skill.
More complex models of wage determination suggest other reasons why between-firm
inequality may rise. For example, the standard deviation of firm effects will also rise if
employers make greater use of company-wide profit sharing and profit levels differ
across firms. Less obviously, changes in comparisons that compensation professionals
use to establish pay systems can also increase inequality among employers. Consider, for
example, the extreme case where employers had set pay in line with a wage survey based
on other firms= pay levels. If this institutional pay-setting arrangement breaks down, then
inequality among employers may rise [Levine, 1995]. Perhaps the best example of such a
change has been the breakdown of pattern bargaining in unionized settings where unions
set their bargaining demands based on prior settlements of other unions.

5
Other developments may reduce inequality among employers. If wage levels above the
market level were largely due to the ability of some employers to pay more (as in
rentsharing, bargaining, and some fairness theories), then increased competition from
imports, deregulation, and other product market shifts should reduce wage inequality
among employers by driving down the Arich@ employers= ability to pay above-market
wages. This pressure is reinforced if the increase in product market competition is greater
for companies whose employees have the highest bargaining power and would therefore
be more able to secure higher wages (Bertrand provides indirect support for this
proposition [1997].) More generally, compensation practices such as internally consistent
wage structures (as described in prescriptive compensation textbooks and Levine [1993])
will lead to some inequality among employers. If, as the business press claims, these
institutional forces have eroded, this should reduce inequality among employers.
A. Base Pay vs. Total Compensation.
The analyses described above can be calculated for base pay as well as the sum of base
pay and annual bonuses, and there are reasons to examine both. Base salary should be the
aspect of compensation most directly related to skill requirements as employers typically
describe it as the compensation for meeting the basic requirements of the job. Individual
bonuses, in contrast, typically reflect performance above and beyond those base
requirements. Moreover, at some employers bonuses may become an expected part of
compensation and are paid even when individual performance does not exceed expected
performance levels, then they should be included as part of the wage paid for stated job
requirements.
To the extent that bonuses reflect pay for individual performance, inequality of total pay
which includes bonuses should be larger than inequality of base pay because it includes
differences attributable to variations in individual performance. To the extent that
bonuses also reflect company performance (for example, due to profit sharing), betweencompany inequality should be higher with total pay than with base pay. Alternatively, the
theory of compensating differentials suggests that higher average bonus payments may
offset lower base pay because employees are ultimately interested in the risk-adjusted
level of total compensation. If employers differ for some reason in the size of the bonuses
they pay, then competitive labor markets that work to equalize total compensation would
suggest that total pay should be more equal across firms than is base pay.
II. Changes in Internal Labor Markets over Time.
Our data cover only a relatively short time period, from 1986 to 1992. Nevertheless, this
short panel permits us to test several claims about how pay structures within large
employers have evolved. Numerous newspapers and magazines report massive changes
in Americans= careers during this period. These discussions frequently start with a
canonical “old” model of an internal labor market, one filled with numerous rigidities.
For example, in the old model, companies paid similar nominal wages in different local
labor markets. Large employers also had difficulty implementing meaningful merit pay
and ended up giving most employees in the same job title about the same pay [see, e.g.,

6
Foulkes 1980]. The popular press indicates that many of these practices have declined as
companies have replaced rigid rules with greater responsiveness to the external market, to
individual performance, and to the employer=s financial and stock market performance.
The arguments below examine potential changes in wage setting practices associated
with internal labor market and their empirical implications.
A. Have Local Labor Markets Become More Important?
In many classic internal labor markets, wage policies and structures were common across
different locations of a company=s operations, paying similar wages to similar job titles
even across very different labor markets. To the extent that internal company wage
structures have become less rigid, we should see local labor market conditions such as
wages and unemployment having a stronger effect on wages. Belman and Levine [1998]
find that wage levels and structures (e.g., returns to education) at large employers have
not become more similar to those in nearby small employers from 1979 to 1993, but
Bertrand [1997] finds that the sensitivity of wages to local unemployment rates has
increased in companies with increasingly competitive product markets.
H4A: Wages have become increasingly correlated with average regional wages
and increasingly negatively correlated with regional unemployment.
This effect should be more pronounced at jobs that have a closer connection to the local
labor market. For management jobs like those in our data, first-line supervisory positions
are more closely linked to the local labor market than are senior executive positions
which operate more in a national or international labor market.
H4B: This increase in correlation should be more pronounced for lower-level than
top-level positions.
B. Has Pay for Individual Merit Become More Important?
The practitioner literature on compensation advocates the use of individual-level rewards
for performance and suggests that its use has increased over time. Merit pay is the term
used to describe increases in base compensation attributable to individual performance.
To the extent that merit pay has risen in importance, we expect:
H5A: Inequality of base pay among employees in the same job title should have
risen.
Some employers increase incentives for individual performance not by increasing merit
pay but by increasing their use of short-term bonus or incentive payments that do not
enter base pay in future years. If this trend is widespread we expect:
H5B: Inequality of total pay (that is, base + bonus) within a job title should have
increased faster than inequality of base pay, and

7
H5C: Inequality of total pay within a firm should have increased faster than
inequality of base pay.
C. Has Rentsharing Become More Important?
We can also provide imperfect measures of the extent to which companies are tying more
pay to company-wide performance. These measures are subject to many problems noted
below; most importantly the dataset contains a limited number of employers.
First, we can decompose bonuses into a portion that is handed out to individuals and a
portion that is shared company-wide. In the former, the company identifies good
performers and gives them bonuses that are proportional to pay, bonuses that act much
like merit pay except that they do not raise base wages. In the latter, the company
distributes bonuses equally to individuals across the company. We can regress [bonus /
(base + bonus)] against control variables plus a set of employer effects where the
standard deviation of these estimated employer effects measures the extent of companywide bonus; the residual measures individual merit bonuses. If company-wide
gainsharing is increasingly important, we expect:
H6: The variability of firm-wide bonuses (compared to total pay) has increased.
Tests of this hypothesis are subject to a number of limitations, however. Any secular
trend may be obscured by the recession in the early 1990s which should have dampened
the profits that fund the bonus pool at many employers. Further, this simple
decomposition cannot distinguish bonuses that are shared by a division or team. Our
procedure will allocate such bonuses into individual or company-wide portions based on
the size of the group sharing the bonus.
A number of arguments have been made about the rising power and influence of
shareholders in corporate governance in recent decades. Much of the discussion has
focused on investors= increasing ability to advance management practices designed to
further their interests such as linking the pay of executives more closely to changes in
shareholder value [see, e.g., Useem 1996]. We measure company performance directly
using financial indicators of profits and stock market returns and estimate whether base
pay and/or bonus became more tightly tied to past corporate performance over the period
1986 to 1992. (Our method follows Blanchflower, Oswald and Sanfrey [1996]. They
survey the many difficulties in using correlations between pay and financial performance
to measure the causal link between performance and pay. Most problematic is reverse
causality: an accounting identity assures us that the direct effect of a dollar of excess
wages is to lower profits by $1. Thus, even if higher product-market rents (for example)
raise wages, the wage, profit correlation may be low or negative.)
H7: The correlation between recent past financial performance and pay has
increased over time.

8

D. Have Wage Structures Converged?
Many press stories recount how competition and the reduction of product market rents
have induced large U.S. firms to move closer to market levels of pay. The effect of this
development on average compensation might well be obscured in practice by other
developments such as increased variation in skill levels across employers or increased
incentive compensation such as profit sharing that varies across employers and affects
pay levels. The trend toward equalization should nevertheless appear in returns to basic
units of skill. They should become more common across employers if competitive
product and labor markets are reducing the ability to pay above or below market rates for
equivalent units of labor.
H8: The variation in returns to skill between-firm should decline over time.
III. Data
We analyze a proprietary data set collected by Hay Associates, the world=s largest
compensation consultant. The Hay system begins by identifying the skills that are needed
to perform particular jobs adequately using detailed and consistent measures of job
requirements. Job analyses based around detailed questionnaires are developed for each
functional area such as finance, personnel, or engineering, in order to establish exactly
what an incumbent does in a job. These include job duties, allocation of time,
responsibility, critical tasks, customer contact, and many other tasks. The questionnaires
are completed for each job title, usually by a team of managers, employees holding those
jobs, and Hay consultants.
The measure of skill used by Hay measures the autonomy and complexity of jobs which
are issues central to the theories of wage determination described above. The Hay
measures are grouped into three categories: “Know How” measures the capabilities,
knowledge, and techniques needed to do the job ranked according to their complexity.
The skills captured by this measure include the kind of formal knowledge usually
associated with years of education. “Problem-Solving” measures how well-defined and
predictable job tasks are (less defined and predictable tasks make greater demands on
employees). Finally, “Accountability” measures how much autonomy or individual
discretion employees have in decision making. The three dimensions are then combined
into a single index known as AHay points@ that is designed to measure the extent of job
requirements that workers must perform. Hay=s intention is to make these scores
comparable across occupations, companies, and over time.
Hay maintains a data base on what its client companies in different industries pay for
occupations with a given number of Hay points. Individual clients choose a comparison
set of employers (e.g., by size, industry, and location) and decide how they would like
their overall wage structure to be positioned in comparison to those paid by the
comparison set -- e.g., at the median or at the 75th percentile. Clients also exercise

9
discretion in deciding how to position the pay of individual jobs in their organization
compared to that reference set. They may decide to pay some jobs more or less than the
levels prevailing in the data set, for example, in order to establish wage structures that
facilitate internally consistent promotion pathways or job ladders consistent with the
unique set of jobs in their company.
A. Are the Hay Measures Valid?
Data from Hay compensation surveys have been analyzed by a number of researchers
[e.g., Smith and Ehrenberg 1981; Cappelli 1993; and Gibbs and Hendricks 1995]. But it
is worth considering in some detail the merits and drawbacks of using these data.
An important goal of the Hay systems is that the measure of skill created by its job
analysis be consistent both within and across organizations because one of the services
they are effectively selling is salary comparisons based on skill across firms. Hay asserts
that “compensation lines are directly comparable from one organization to another” (their
emphasis [Hay Group, p.8]. Reliability of the measures across jobs and firms is especially
important for our purposes.
The process of job analysis (defining the requirements of jobs) and attaching Hay points,
the measure of skill requirements, to jobs is conducted at an employer by a team of the
company’s managers that is trained and led by a Hay consultant. The team begins the
process with a set of “benchmark jobs,” such as nurses, secretaries, or accountants, that
represent common occupations easily identifiable in the labor market. The skill
requirements for these benchmark jobs are reasonably constant across employers and are
largely general as opposed to firm-specific. After the team has completed its analyses of
the skill requirements of the benchmark jobs, the Hay consultant does another,
independent evaluation of these jobs. These results are compared to the scores produced
by the team in order to check for any biases in their work. After attempting to correct
biases in the team’s judgments and then revising the scores, the consultant does yet
another comparison, this time with the average scores generated across client companies
for the same benchmark jobs. A correction factor is generated from that comparison and
is applied to all of the job analyses generated by the team, for benchmark and nonbenchmark jobs. If, for example, the scores produced by the team for its benchmark jobs
are 5 percent higher than the average across other companies, then the consultant
calculates a “correlation factor” that will reduce the scores produced by the team for all
of the jobs in that company by 5 percent.
As a final check on the consistency of these skill measures, the company maintains an
internal Job Measurement Quality Assurance Group to check on the comparability of the
scores produced across client companies. The consultants in this group are senior
practitioners known as “correlators” who are certified by Hay in their ability to apply the
Hay system consistently across client companies. After a consultant and the client team
complete their analysis of jobs and pay, including any corrections described above, the
correlators come out to the client company and assess the results for consistency with
Hay practice elsewhere. And every three years after a compensation system has been

10
introduced, a Hay consultant returns to the client to evaluation the system and ensure its
consistency.
In addition to these internal checks, external pressures also help ensure the reliability of
the Hay procedures. First, the fact that Hay Associates has been using essentially the
same job evaluation process for more than fifty years provides opportunities to identify
and eliminate obvious sources of error. Hay Associates=s success in the market over many
decades implies that many employers find their job evaluation and weighting scheme to
be useful. The tens of thousands of dollars that employers spend and the hundreds of
hours that their managers spend working on job analyses suggests that employers
consider the services Hay provides as highly valuable. Second, the fact that Hay
Associates relies on repeat business from large corporations provides important
incentives to maintain reliable systems: A client would immediately recognize and find it
disturbing if the Hay job evaluation system generated different skill points in subsequent
years for jobs that the employer knew had not changed.
Further, the Hay measures have widespread influence on how jobs are structured and
evaluated in the economy as a whole and, in that sense, have good external validity.
During the 1980’s, for example, over 2 million employees were in jobs evaluated by Hay,
and its system was used by 40 percent of the Fortune 1000 [Labich 1992, pp. 116-117].
Moreover, comparisons by non-Hay firms with these establishments extend the influence
of the Hay system even further.
In addition to the issue of consistency or reliability, it is also important to consider
explicitly whether the Hay measures are valid: Specifically, whether they do a better job
at measuring the dimensions of skill than alternative measures that are available. The Hay
points= measure of skills and responsibility -- as with any such measure -- is subject to
several constraints. The process of writing job descriptions and determining which tasks
and responsibilities should be included in them is somewhat arbitrary, and difficulties in
matching actual job duties with Hay Associates= compensable factors can also introduce
errors. How to weight different factors in determining an overall measure of skill is also
largely arbitrary.
A potentially important concern is the extent to which clients may have an incentive to
bias the decisions governing Hay points as a means of shaping pay decisions in one
direction or another, despite the consistency controls noted above. For example, a
powerful job incumbent involved in the job analysis process may want to justify his or
her high current pay, creating reverse causality between Hay points and compensation.
While such incentives no doubt exist, the clients and the individual employees in them do
not need to bias the skill measures to shape those wage decisions. The process of
designing compensation systems gives the client firms ample opportunity to shape wages
as they wish without altering the measure of Hay points. As noted above, clients choose
the comparison set for compensation data, they decide where their average compensation
should be relative to the market, and they make such decisions differently across jobs.
Because the relationship between pay and points is not mechanical, clients do not need to
try to bias Hay points up in order to increase compensation for their positions [see Bellak

11
1984]. (As a further check, in many of the analyses below we control for the level of
individual jobs in the management hierarchy, a key factor that may influence the ability
to influence the job analysis -- top executives potentially have more power over the
process than supervisors. Including these controls rarely altered the results.)
Finally, it is helpful to contrast the Hay measures and the various procedures they use to
guard against biases with alternative measures of skills that are typically used in research.
Job titles and education levels are the most common alternative measures. Both education
and job title data are typically self-reported and come with all the associated biases -everything from ego-enhancing reporting to simple problems remembering. Education is
typically measured in years attended (sometimes years completed) with few efforts to
adjust for the quality or type of education received except in some cases where the type
of degree completed is included. Job titles often differ across organizations for similar
positions, especially for managerial jobs. Efforts to generate consistent job titles, such as
those used by the Census Bureau, confront the same type of matching analysis performed
by Hay, but with far fewer quality checks than Hay has.
IV. The Sample
Our data set examines over 50,000 managerial positions per year in 39 companies in
1986 and 1992 with the number of managers employed per company ranging between
129 and 5813. The data captures the population of managerial-level jobs in each company
and includes the characteristics of the jobs rather than of the incumbents. For each job,
we can identify its level in the organization chart or hierarchy and the firm to which it
belongs: CEO or division president; other senior executives with company or divisionwide responsibilities; middle management (that is, managing other managers or
supervisors); supervisors; and exempt, non-supervisors, generally professional jobs such
as accountants. We also know the functional area of each job, such as marketing or
finance, location (zip codes), base salary, total salary, mid-point on the salary scale for
each job class, and skill points (total, and broken out into the three subscores for knowhow, problem solving, and accountability skills).
The 39 companies are headquartered throughout the U.S., and the employees in each
company are often dispersed throughout the country. About 200 of the locations have at
least 10 managerial employees. We analyze pay data for two years for each company -1986 and 1992. In 1989, the midpoint in that period, the companies ranged in size from
584 to over 60,000 employees, with a mean of 16,604 and a median of roughly 9,500.
We first analyze the log of annual base wages because base wages are the component of
compensation that should be most closely linked to the Hay points measures of skills and
responsibility. We then present the analyses on total pay, defined as base pay plus annual
bonuses. We merge into our data set information on total company employment taken
from Compustat.
The dataset does not have information on stock options and other forms of long-term
incentive pay. Moreover, it lacks information on stock ownership, a form of implicit

12
incentive that can be very important for many top executives [Hall and Leibman, 1997].
Thus, our results for the very highest levels of executives may not be representative,
given that stock ownership is an important part of their total compensation. We replicate
all results on a sample without top executives, however, creating a sample where stock
ownership and long-term financial incentives are much less important, to produce results
that can be generalized to employees for whom base and bonus payments constitute the
bulk of their compensation.
V. Methods
We use an OLS regression to test the model developed above and to examine wage
inequality across and within firms. We regress the log of base wages against a set of firm
dummies and a composite indicator of Hay points. To control for unmeasured aspects of
the jobs, we include each job=s occupational level in the hierarchy (five levels) and 16
indicators of the functional area within which each job is located -- finance, marketing,
engineering, and so forth.
Several analyses examine inequality within a job title. We do not directly observe job
titles. To identify employees with the same job titles, we match on employer, function,
level, and Hay points. In 1986, for example, there were 11,641 distinct jobs in the
sample.
We used a bootstrap technique to compute the statistical significance of the changes by
running the regression models 200 times on random halves of each sample and retaining
the estimated returns to Hay points and/or the estimated standard deviation of the firm
effects for each regression. To test for differences in a coefficient over time or across
specifications, we tested whether the distributions of the 200 coefficients in each
specification differed. We performed a nonparametric Wilcoxon rank test on the two
distributions of coefficients and/or standard deviations. (Using a more powerful but
parametric t-test produced the same results.)
Especially because many of the wage equations involve sample sizes with over 50,000
observations, even differences that are unimportant substantively can be statistically
significant. In the discussion below, therefore, we emphasize those results that are large
and substantive. The large sample size also implies that correcting for measurement error
when, for example, computing the standard deviation of employer wage effects does not
meaningfully affect our results [Haisken-DeNew and Schmidt, 1996]. As a result, we
forego that extra set of computations in the results reported here.

VI. Describing Wage Structures at Large U.S. Employers
We present summary statistics and checks for representativeness of the sample as well as
other descriptive decompositions of the data which may be of interest because so little
few multi-employer datasets are available with measures of both skills and wages.

13

A. Summary Statistics.
Table I contains summary statistics about the changes in jobs in this sample between
1986 and 1992. Both base and total wages were higher in real terms in 1992 than in 1986
with most of the increase in total wages being attributable to the rise in base wages.
Average skill points were slightly lower in 1992 than in 1986, a potentially interesting
result given the interest in whether skill requirements in the workforce are rising. The
differences in wages and in skill points are statistically significant. The standard
deviation of both base and total wages increased (for example, the standard deviation of
the log of base wages rose from 31.6 percent in 1986 to 34.3 percent in 1992) while the
standard deviation of skill points fell slightly during this period. In results not shown,
other measures of dispersion such as the Theil and Gini coefficients also indicate a
similar increase in wage inequality. (These measures capture different aspects of the
distribution than does the standard deviation. Amartya Sen discusses the strengths and
weaknesses of these measures [1973].) Tables IF and IG present the industry breakdown
of companies and the distribution of the positions by functional area.
Table I Here

B. Checks for representativeness.
An important issue in datasets such as this one is the question of sample self-selection. To
test whether the firms in this sample were distinctive from employers of similar size in
their industry, we used Compustat data to match each firm in the Hay dataset to the firm
closest in 1986 sales within its 2-digit SIC industry. Using a Wilcoxon signed rank tests,
we found no statistically significant difference between the firms in the Hay dataset and
the matched firms in the level of sales, employment, or debt to equity ratios in 1992, or
rate of change in sales, employment, or debt to equity ratios from 1986 to 1992. We also
found no statistically significant difference in profitability (return on assets) in 1986 or
1992. Using the acquisitions line on Compustat we found no significant difference
between the mean size of acquisitions over this time period and no difference in the
number of acquisitions per year. In short, there is no evidence that these employers are in
any way non-representative of the population of large industrial firms. (This population,
of course, is not representative of all employers.)
C. Describing Wage Structures:
The employers in the Hay dataset are relatively homogeneous in terms of size and sector
(they are all industrial). Because the employers in this data set pay tens of thousands of
dollars to Hay to find comparable employers and use data from those comparable firms to
set their own pay levels, we might expect between-employer pay variability to be much
lower in this dataset than in most others. Nevertheless, the employers appear to have

14
distinctive approaches to setting their wage structures. For example, wage levels do differ
across employers for similar jobs. Controlling for 5 job levels and 16 job functions, the
standard deviation of employer effects was 12 percent in 1986 (Table III, model 1). This
is somewhat lower than the standard deviation of employer effects estimated in other
datasets, which range from 14 to 21 percent. (See, for example, the papers in U.S. Bureau
of the Census, [1998].)
Employers also pay systematically different amounts for units of skill as measured by
Hay points. In results available on request, we estimated wage equations which permitted
each employer to have its own intercept and its own coefficient on Hay points. The
standard deviation across employers of the return to Hay points was 0.057 in 1986, which
is a substantial fraction of its mean of .239. Again, the fact that pay structures differ
among employers accords qualitatively with what other researchers have found (e.g.,
Groshen and Levine [1998]; Leonard and van Audenrode, [1996]).
D. Persistence of Wage Structures. Also, as others have found (e.g., Levine [1991];
Groshen [1991b], these employer wage effects persist over time. Controlling for level and
function, the correlation of firm effects in 1986 with those estimated in 1992 is .79. Firmspecific levels of the Hay measures of skills are almost as persistent. The correlation
between employer effects in 1986 and 1992 in an equation predicting skills (controlling
for level and function) is .74.
Finally, other aspects of the employer wage structures besides the average are correlated
over time. We permitted each employer to have its own coefficient on Hay points as well
as its own intercept. The correlation between firm-specific returns to Hay points
estimated in 1986 and 1992 is .69. This is somewhat higher than the autocorrelation that
Groshen and Levine [1998] identify with their measure of firm-specific wage structure;
they estimated 5-year autocorrelations near .45 during that time period. (Their measure is
for all aspects of the firm-specific wage structure, which may include many transitory and
person-specific features, while the single Hay measure may capture more about company
policy.)
E. Base Pay vs. Base Pay + Bonus.
As expected, the total inequality of base+bonus is somewhat higher than that of base pay
alone. In Table IV, the RMSE of an equation with only job level and function controls
was 25.9 percent for base+bonus, somewhat larger than the 24.7 percent for base pay in
1986 seen in Table III. We can also conclude that virtually none of the difference in
inequality between employers appears to be due to bonuses that are shared company-wide
among managers and professionals. Company-wide sharing of bonuses would lead the
standard deviation of firm effects to be larger for base+bonus than for base pay alone. But
in fact, the reverse was true: the standard deviation of firm effects for base pay was 12.0
percent in 1986 and 11.7. percent for base+bonus.
Perhaps surprisingly, base+bonus is more closely related to Hay points than base alone.
When regressing Hay points against base+bonus in 1986 the estimated coefficient was

15
.220, on base alone the coefficient was only .203. (The regressions included controls for
level and function.) This result is perhaps not surprising when comparing compensation
between levels. That is, top executives have on average both more bonus pay and a
higher proportion bonus pay than their vice presidents. What is somewhat more
surprising is that the result still holds when we include controls for job level, as in Table
IV. It would be difficult to imagine that we could have this result if bonus payments were
largely dependent on individual worker performance as that should vary considerably
across individuals in jobs with the same Hay points. It would appear, therefore, that
bonuses have at least as much to do to with one=s position as does base pay.
F. Employer Wage Effects by Level.
It is also interesting to know how consistent wage policies are within a firm. Dickens and
Katz, for example, present evidence that high-wage industries pay high wages to all
occupations [1987]. In this data set, the firm-specific intercept estimated for each level
alone are correlated .89 and above with overall employer wage effect, controlling for job
function and Hay points. This suggests that these employers pursue consistent policies
toward wages across different jobs, setting wages for different positions at more or less
the same point in the distribution of wages for similar jobs across other employers.
VII. Results
Table III presents the main analyses. Wage inequality in this sample has increased, as
indicated in the first row of Table III: the standard deviation of log (wages) has risen
from 31.6 percent to 34.3 percent, that is, by about 10 percent. (For ease of exposition we
refer to 100 times logs as “percent.”) Inequality is lower controlling for a job level and
function (RMSE = 24.7 percent in 1986). The rise in inequality between 1986 and 1992 is
again almost ten percent. Controlling for job level and function ensures that the increase
cannot be attributed to any changes in the composition of jobs across that period. (The R2
of the regression with just the controls is almost unchanged between 1986 and 1992.)
Table III Here
A. Are Differences in Mean Wages between Firms Primarily Due to Differences in
Skill?
The first hypothesis asserted that differences in average wages across employers were
attributable to differences in average skill levels across employers. Model 1 in Table III
examines base wages using only firm effects and controls for job level and function,
without Hay points. The increment to the R2 due to adding firm effects is 7.9 percent, and
the standard deviation of firm effects is 12.0 percent, reinforcing the descriptive
observation earlier that wages differ substantially among employers for employees with
similar job titles and skills. The second model shows the results of regressing log wages
against the composite Hay points score. This single measure of skill and responsibility is
correlated .80 with base wages, corresponding to an R2 of 64 percent from this single
measure alone (regression not shown). By way of comparison, a standard wage equation

16
controlling for age, education, experience, tenure, gender, race, region and various
nonlinear combinations rarely achieves an R2 over 30 percent: A wage regression with
three-digit occupational classifications -- a typical proxy for job requirements and skill in
other studies -- and the above controls using the 1992 Current Population Survey
produces an R2 of only 31 percent. The impressive explanatory power of Hay points
implies that it is a far more complete measure of skill and job requirements than those
used in the past to explain wage outcomes.
The third model includes both firm wage effects and the composite Hay points score. The
standard deviation of the firm effects declines to 11.2 percent when Hay points are
included, slightly less than its value of 12.0 percent when it is calculated without
controlling for Hay points. The incremental R2 of adding Hay points and controls to firm
effects is 7.8 percentage points, which is almost identical to the incremental R2 of adding
firm effects and controls alone, without Hay points ( 7.9 percentage points). The fact that
the standard deviation of the firm effects and the incremental R2 of adding firm effects to
the equation are hardly diminished when controlling for the very detailed measures of
skill represented by Hay points suggests that relatively little of between-firm inequality is
due to differences in mean skill levels between firms, providing little evidence in favor of
hypothesis 1. Another implication of Model 3 is that Hay points are, in fact, being used
consistently across firms: If they were not, then the adding firm effects should produce
estimates that are substantially better than using Hay points alone. Yet the improvement
is relatively modest (last row in Table III).
These results do not imply that mean wages at an employer and mean Hay points are
completely uncorrelated. When we regress the mean wage residual at each firm (that is,
the firm effects from Model 1 in Table III including the controls) and the mean Hay
points residual at each firm (that is, the firm effects from model 2 in Table III including
the controls), the R2 is .12 in 1986 (regression not shown). This R2 is only one-fifth as
large as that obtained when we perform the regression at the individual level. Together,
these results suggest that skill as measured by Hay points is a powerful predictor of
wages within enterprises but a weak predictor of which employers pay high wages.
The inability of detailed skill measures to reduce the variances of employer wage effects
was surprising but not entirely without precedent. Similar results were found in 1982-83
surveys that compared manufacturing establishments in the Indianapolis area in the U.S.
to those in the Kanagawa prefecture in Japan (an industrial district outside of Tokyo).
These surveys provided one of the few datasets in addition to our Hay data that contain
both detailed measures of job characteristics and sufficient observations per employer to
estimate employer wage effects. (James Lincoln and Arne Kalleberg [1990] discuss the
data in detail.)
In addition to standard measures such as age, race, education, tenure, and experience, the
surveys included questions on 12 (in Japan) or 13 (in the U.S.) job characteristics such as
training, autonomy, complexity, and supervision that offered proxies for job and skill
requirements. The job characteristics were important predictors of wages. In both
countries, increasing each measure of OJT and complexity and lowering each measure of

17
supervision by one point each (on a four point scale) has about the same effect as raising
education by four years. (Complete results are in Levine [1991], tables 2 and 3.)
As with other datasets, employers paid very different wages to employees in the same
broad occupation with similar demographic characteristics and human capital. The
standard deviation of employer wage effects was 18.5 percent in the U.S. and 13.7
percent in Japan. These employer effects are very large; in both countries, moving from
the average plant to one paying one standard deviation above average increases wages by
as much as increasing education from grade school to college.
In spite of their importance in predicting wages, however, the adding the many job
characteristics to the wage equation with standard controls plus plant effects did not
reduce the dispersion of establishment wages. Specifically, the standard deviation of
plant wage effects in the U.S. actually rose slightly from 18.5 percent in the baseline
equation to 19.0 percent when job characteristics are added to the regression while the
Japanese figure declined only slightly from 13.7 percent to 13.5 percent. The plant effects
with and without job characteristics were correlated at or above the 0.98 level in both
countries.
These results are hardly definitive, but replication of this key and surprising result in the
Indiana and Japanese datasets as well as the very different Hay data set raises our
confidence that measures of skill and job characteristics do not, in fact, explain much of
the differences in wages among employers.
B. Changes over Time .
Firm wage effects have grown over time in the Hay sample. The standard deviation of the
firm effects alone (model 1) grew from 12.0 percent in 1986 to 14.6 percent in 1992, and
the incremental R2 of adding firm effects given the controls increased from 7.9 to 9.0
percentage points. These results support H:2, that wage inequality between employers has
risen. Davis and Haltiwanger [1991] and Groshen and Levine [1998] also find rising
inequality between employers during this time period. And the rise in inequality was not
due to increased sorting of skills among employers.
The rise in inequality was greater between employers than within employers. Within-firm
inequality of log wages (measured by the root mean square error [RMSE] of an equation
including controls and firm effects) rose from 23.1 to 24.7 percentage points between
1986 and 1992, about 9 percent. In contrast, inequality between employers (the standard
deviation of the firm effects) rose from 12.0 to 14.6 percentage points over the same
period, a 21 percent increase that is about twice as fast as the growth of overall inequality
(Table III, model 1). This result contradicts hypothesis 2, which notes that if inequality
within and between firms are both proxies for human capital, then their returns should
grow in tandem.
Within-firm inequality might have increased more rapidly between managers and lowerlevel employees, however. For example, Davis and Haltiwanger [1991] calculate that

18
wage inequality between manufacturing plants measured in an establishment survey (the
LEED) grew more slowly than total wage inequality measured in a household survey (the
CPS). Assuming the two sets of inequality measures are comparable, they then estimate
that 25-40 PERCENT of the increase in wage inequality is within plants for
nonproduction workers.
C. Do Higher Returns to Skill Explain Most of the Rise in Wage Inequality?
Model 2 in Table III regresses the composite measure of Hay points and job-level
controls against wages in order to test H:3, that the increase in inequality between firms
can be accounted for by changes in returns to skill. Consistent with the assumption that
returns to human capital have risen over this period, the coefficient on Hay points rises
about 15 percent (from 20.3 to 23.3) between 1986 and 1992.
Rising returns to this measure of skill explains only a portion of the rise in inequality
between firms, however. The incremental R2 from including Hay points (given the
controls) rises from 31.4 to 32.7 percent from 1986 to 1992 while the RMSE of the
regression rises from 17.3 to 18.2 percent. (In regressions not shown, without the
presence of the controls, the R2 of the equation including only Hay points actually
declines slightly, from .64 in 1986 to .60 in 1992.) These increases in the inequality
explained by Hay points are not significant, however, based on the bootstrap test. In
model 3 we add firm effects and Hay points to a model with the standard job controls.
The standard deviation of the firm effects in fact rises 2.7 percentage points, about 20%,
suggesting that rising inequality between employers cannot be due to rising returns to the
skills measured by Hay points and refuting H:3.
D. Robustness Checks.
Robustness checks (available from the first author) found the results essentially
unchanged when we analyzed base pay plus bonus instead of base pay alone (Table IV);
omitted the detailed controls for functions and levels within the organization; replaced
average Hay points with the know-how, accountability, and problem solving subscores of
Hay points along with their squares; included those employers who dropped from the
sample in 1992 to perform the cross-section tests on a larger sample; added measures for
SMSA mean wages and unemployment rates; corrected roughly for heteroskedasticity by
weighting by 1/Hay points; ran the regression separately for each job level and for the
larger job functions; and dropped the 1% of the sample with the highest and lowest Hay
points and wages.
Table IV Here
VIII. Changes in Internal Labor Markets over Time
While the previous section tested results of a deductive model, this section provides
evidence for hypotheses derived from more descriptive and inductive theories about the
decline of internal labor markets.

19

A. Changes in Correlations with Local Labor Market Conditions.
If the compensation structures of firms over time resemble internal labor markets less and
their wage setting mechanisms are more closely tied to external labor market forces, we
should expect to see a stronger relationship between wages and local market
characteristics over time. We test this notion by examining the differential paid to
incumbents in similar jobs (same job class and skill points) across locations within the
same firm in the two time periods. First we examine the variance in wages across
locations. In 1986 the mean standard deviation of base salary for similar work at different
locations was $3,302. This declined slightly to $3,230 in 1992 (change not statistically
significant), suggesting that the geography differential has remained relatively stable over
this time period.
We then calculated the percentage difference between the mean wage for each job at each
company location and the overall mean wage for that job across the company and
regressed it on local market wages and unemployment. In contrast to hypothesis 4A, local
labor market conditions were not significant predictors of wage differentials in either
1986 or 1992. Hypothesis 4B suggests that while the overall relationship should have
increased, that rise should have become most pronounced for professionals and first-line
supervisors, as opposed to top managers. In fact, results were not significant for these
groups, either, although the number of limitations to our analysis suggests that the lack of
significant results can only be considered suggestive.
Table V here
B. Has Merit Pay Become More Important?
To the extent that individual-level rewards for performance have become more important,
we should see an increase in inequality for base pay for employees in the same job title
has risen as H:5A predicts. Consistent with that hypothesis, the typical (median) standard
deviation in total cash compensation within job titles for jobs with four or more
incumbents had a standard deviation of total pay of 7.0 percent in 1986 and 7.5 percent in
1992. All job levels experienced an increase in the standard deviation of total
compensation, but it was larger for first-line supervisors (7.3 to 8.0 percent) and smaller
for professionals (6.9 to 7.0 percent). The rise in inequality within a job title averaged
about 8.0 percent, slightly less than the 11 percent rise in total inequality in base wages in
this sample. This increase in pay inequality within jobs is consistent with the concept of
Abroad banding@ in the practice of compensation whereby the upper and lower bounds of
acceptable pay levels for any given job title are widened presumably to give more
opportunity to differentiate pay according to individual performance. (Groshen and
Levine [1998] also find a small but statistically significant increase in pay variation
within a job title during the 1980s and 1990s.)

20
A second aspect of the rising importance of individualized incentives is the increased use
of bonuses. Thirty-two percent of employees in our sample received a positive bonus in
1992, up from 19.6 percent in 1986, a calculation that no doubt understates the extent of
bonuses because not all who were eligible for bonuses necessarily received payment. If
we instead estimate the percentage of job titles (that is, positions sharing job level, job
function, and Hay points) where bonuses were received, the percentage rises from 27 to
47 percent over the same period. In 1986, bonus variation within job titles was on
average a small part of total pay. Considering jobs with four or more incumbents in the
same firm (eliminating by definition all top executives), we calculated the variation in the
percentage of bonus within job title: specifically, the standard deviation of
bonus/(base+bonus) for employees with the same employer, job level, function, and Hay
points. Over the entire sample, the mean standard deviations of this measure within a job
cell was 0.75 percent in 1986. That is, bonuses increased pay variation only modestly
among people in the same job title.
At the same time, we find some evidence for hypotheses 5B and 5C that inequality rose
faster for bonus than for base pay within job titles and within firms. These hypotheses are
based on arguments popular in the compensation literature that employers make greater
use of bonuses to reward individual performance than in the past. The proportion of pay
at risk in our data set as measured by the size of the bonus payments rose from .75
percent in 1986 to 1.03 percent in 1992. While the absolute level of these payments is
low, the increase in level is particularly impressive given that 1992 was a year of low
corporate profits. Assuming that bonus pools are related to corporate performance, the
1992 figures are an understatement of the true rise in the importance of bonuses.
C. Have Rentsharing / Company-wide Incentives Become More Important?
If bonuses have risen in importance, because of rent sharing or other motives, then we
should expect that any increase in the standard deviation of firm effects would be larger
for base+bonus than for base pay alone (Hypothesis 6). There is modest support for this
hypothesis. The standard deviation of firm effects for base pay increased by 2.6
percentage points (Table III, model 1) but by 3.0 percentage points for base+bonus
(Table IV, model 1). But business cycle effects that influence the level of profits of all
firms, causing profits and bonuses to decline in 1992, e.g., confound this comparison.
The increase in the standard deviation for base+bonus might be much greater in a more
typical year.
If rent sharing with employees through incentive-based pay linked to company
performance has increased, then we would expect to see a higher correlation between past
financial performance and current pay in 1992 than in 1986 (Hypothesis 7). In our
sample, employer wage levels are not correlated with past financial performance. We
estimated the relationship using several measures of “financial performance,” including a
one-year lag of return on invested capital, a three-year average of lagged ROIC, and
market-to-book ratio. None had a significant correlation with wage effects either in 1986
or in 1992 (Table VI).

21
Table VI Here
D. Have Pay Structures Converged?
Finally, if market forces have reduced an employers= ability to execute distinctive
approaches to compensation, then the returns to Hay points should have become more
similar over time (Hypothesis 8). The data do not support this hypothesis. The estimated
standard deviation across employers of the return to Hay points was 0.057 in 1986 and
0.066 in 1992. The average coefficients were .239 in 1986 and .257 in 1992, so the
coefficient of variation of the firms-specific returns to Hay points rose about 8 percent
over this time period.
VIII. Discussion
Some of the results presented here are consistent with traditional human capital theory
where higher skill requirements lead to higher wages. Most importantly, our single
measure of skills and responsibility explains 64 percent of wage variation in the base year
of the sample. It is interesting to see that even for management jobs, the elaborate
compensation structures of large corporations are based in large measure on human
capital requirements as illustrated by the fact that the correlation between wages and Hay
points is even higher within firms than between them.
We find that wage inequality has risen quite substantially between 1986 and 1992. Even
in this short span, inequality of log(wages) rose by about 9 percent. Inequality between
firms rose faster than within firms, by 20 percent versus 8 percent. Almost all of the
increase in inequality within firms in our data can be attributed to rising returns to Hay
points. Numerous authors have found that some of the rise in inequality is due to higher
returns to education, but a substantial portion of the increased inequality typically
remains unexplained. Our better measure of skill and job requirements accounts for more
of the rise of inequality than have other studies, consistent with the claim that omitted
human capital explains the rise in inequality among people at the same employer with
similar observable skills.
With respect to inequality across firms, we found first that companies pay workers in
similar jobs quite different wages, as have previous studies. Human capital theory does
poorly in explaining between-firm differences in wages. In 1986, for example, the
standard deviation of firm effects was almost the same with and without controlling for
Hay points. That is, very little of the differences in mean wages between high- and lowwage firms was due to differences in mean levels of skills and responsibility. This result
is both strong and surprising and is replicated in similar data with information on
employees, job characteristics, and employers in Indiana and Japan.
A possible explanation for the lack of effect of Hay points in explaining between-plant
inequality is that high-wage employers may pay more in order to attract and retain more
qualified employees than the jobs require. That is, while Hay points measure the
requirements of jobs, some employers may systematically hire “over-qualified”

22
employees to ensure above average performance. Although this hypothesis cannot be
examined with this dataset, it is worth noting that in other research, traditional measures
of human capital such as tenure and education have little incremental ability to predict
wages after controlling for firm and occupation-specific factors, as we have done in this
study. More generally, these results echo past studies where individual-level job
characteristics that might proxy human capital have had limited success in “knocking
out” what appear to be wage anomalies (e.g., Krueger and Summers [1988] on industry
wage effects; Groshen [1991b] on establishment wage effects; and Brown and Medoff
[1989] and Kruse [1992] on size-wage effects).
While rising returns to Hay points account for out most of the rise in within-firm
inequality, Hay points explain none of the rise in inequality between firms. Davis and
Haltiwanger [1991] infer that the increases over time in inequality for production wages
they observe between manufacturing plants, coupled with other evidence of increasing
returns to measurable skills such as education, “are consistent with explanations for the
gap that stress sorting by worker ability.” They assert that the rise in inequality suggests
that Athe sorting by worker ability across plants of different size probably increased over
time.” Our direct test of increased sorting does not support their conclusion, at least with
our sample of managerial employees. We find no consistent pattern of increased sorting
of skills between employers.
Proponents of human capital theory may not be swayed by the lack of evidence in our
analyses that skills are behind the rise in inequality between firms. Despite the fact that
our skill measure is correlated at .80 with wages, it is possible, for example, that some
aspect of skill that Hay does not measure may be increasing in importance over time and
may not be evenly distributed across firms. Nevertheless, these results should give pause
to researchers who are confident that differences in mean levels or increases in the
differences in mean pay between employers are due to unmeasured skills.
Our results suggest mixed evidence that the administrated wage structures that
characterize classic internal labor markets are giving way to arrangements where the
labor market has a greater role. We find no evidence that local labor markets have much
effect on the wages of these large employers, even for professional and first-line
supervisory jobs which are closer to the outside labor market, either in 1986 or 1992. We
do observe a small increases in pay variation within job titles, however, that would be
consistent with the hypothesis that merit pay has become more important as well as large
increases in the use of bonuses. We also find that the dispersion of employer-specific
returns to Hay points rose slightly over this period, contradicting the hypothesis that
competitive pressures are equalizing wages across otherwise similar jobs.
In considering these results, it is important to recall the limitations of the dataset B most
notably, its modest number of employers and limited span of years. The sample is also
fairly homogeneous in that the employers are large and relatively old. Importantly,
because the employees are restricted to managers and professionals; inequality between
these occupations and hourly employees cannot be examined. The sample studied by
Davis and Haltiwanger [1991] examines a broader range of firm sizes and employee

23
occupations, workers, and some of the changes they observe may not be visible in the
smaller slice of firms and employees in this sample. More recent data might also reveal
greater changes in internal labor markets given that other studies are finding changes only
in the mid-1990s (e.g., Neumark, Polsy, and Hansen [1998]).
Finally, these results raise new questions for future research. Perhaps the most obvious
question is why do skills provide a reasonably good explanation for rising wage
inequality within firms but not for the increase in inequality across firms? Perhaps
individual employers are able to adjust wages to skill requirements inside their operations
but firm-level wage strategies, such as efficiency wages, still differ across firms and
override the tendency for wages to equalize for jobs with similar skill requirements.
Although few datasets will have better measures of skills and responsibility, future
research will want to examine larger samples of both employees and employers coupled
with more characteristics of each in order to address questions like these.

24
Bibliography

Annable, James, [Chief economist of First Chicago NBD], cited in Wall St. Journal,
AInsecure Executives Make the Economy Grow,@ April 28, 1997.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, Alan B. Krueger., “Computing inequality : have
computers changed the labor market?” National Bureau of Economic Research
working paper 5956, Cambridge MA 1997.
Baker, George, Michael Gibbs and Bengt Holmstrom, “The Wage Policy of a Firm,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIX, 4, Nov. 1994, 921-55.
Bellak, Alvin O., “Specific Job Evaluation Systems: The Hay Guide Chart-Profile
Method.” The Handbook of Wage and Salary Administration, ed. Milton Rock (
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984).
Belman, Dale and David I. Levine, AHave Internal Labor Market Wage Structures
Declined in Large Employers?@ mimeo, U.C. Berkeley, 1998.
Bertrand, Marianne, AFrom the Invisible Handshake to the Invisible Hand? How Product
Market Competition Changes the Employment Relationship.@ Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Department of Economics manuscript, 1997.
Blackburn, McKinley and David Neumark., “Omitted-Ability Bias and the Increase in the
Returns to Schooling,” Journal of Labor Economics, XI (1993) No. 3, 521-544.
Blanchflower, David G; Oswald, Andrew J; Sanfey, Peter, AWages, profits, and rentsharing,@ Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI (1996):227-251.
Brown, Charles and James Medoff, “The Employer Size-Wage Effect,” Journal of
Political Economy, 97, (1989) No. 5: 1027-1059.
Bound, John, and George Johnson, “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980=s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations,” American Economic Review, LXXII, n.
3 (June 1992), 371-392.
Burack, Elmer H; Singh, Robert P., “The new employment relations compact,” Human
Resource Planning , XVIII, n. 1 (1995): 12-19.
Cappelli, Peter, “Are Skill Requirements Rising? Evidence for Production and Clerical
Workers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XLVI no. 3 (1993) 515-530.

25
Cappelli, Peter, and others, Change at Work, Oxford University, New York, 1997.
Cashman, Kevin; Feldman, Janet. “Reengineering the employment contract,” Executive
Excellence, XII, n. 2 (Feb 1995)15-16.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and David S. Lee, “Changes in Relative Wages in the 1980s: Returns
to Observed and Unobserved Skills and Black-White Wage Differentials.”
Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #372, December
(1996).
Davis, Steve J. and John Haltiwanger. “Wage Dispersion Between and Within US
Manufacturing Plants: 1963-86,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1991)
115-180.
Dickens, William, and Lawrence Katz, “Interindustry Wage Differences and Industry
Characteristics,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan Leonard, eds., Unemployment and
the Structure of Labor Markets, Basil-Blackwell, 1987.
Doeringer, Peter B. and Piore, Michael, Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis
(Lexington MA: Heath, 1971).
Foulkes, Fred, Personnel Practices of Large Nonunion Companies (Englewood Cliffs NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1980).
Gibbs, Michael and Wallace Hendricks, “Are Administrative Pay Systems A Veil?
Evidence from Within-firm Data,” mimeo, University of Chicago (1995).
Groshen, Erica L. “Five Reasons Why Wages Vary Among Employers,” Industrial
Relations, 30, 3 (Fall 1991a), 350-381.
Groshen, Erica L. “Sources of Intra-Industry Wage Dispersion: How Much Do
Employers Matter?” Quarterly Journal of Economics (August 1991b), 869-884.
Groshen, Erica, and David I. Levine, AThe Rise and Decline (?) of U.S. Internal Labor
Markets,@ working paper, NY Federal Reserve, 1998.
Hall, Brian J., and Jeffrey B. Liebman, AAre CEOs really paid like bureaucrats?@
(Cambridge, MA. : National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no.
6213, 1997).
HayGroup (no date). “The Hay Guide Chart-Profile Method of Position Evaluation.”
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, “Wage Inequality and the Rise in
the Returns to Skill,” Journal of Political Economy, CI, no.3 (1993), 410-442.

26
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, AFrom Status to Contribution: Some Organizational Implications
of the Changing Basis for Pay,@ Personnel, LXIV (1987), 12-37.
Katz, Lawrence F., comment on “Wage Dispersion Between and Within US
Manufacturing Plants: 1963-86,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1991)
181-189.
Kiechel, Walter III, AYour New Employment Contract,@ Fortune, CXVI (1987), 109110.
Kissler, Gary D., AThe New Employment Contract,@ Human Resource Management,
XXXIII (1994), 335-352.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, AChanges in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors,@ Quarterly Journal of Economics. CIV, n1 (Feb
1992):35-78.
Kremer, Michael, and Eric Maskin, “Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill,” mimeo,
Harvard, Cambridge MA, 1996.
Krueger, Alan B., “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
Micro Data, 1984-1989,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVIII (1993). 33-60.
Krueger, Alan B., ALabor Market Developments, Trade, and Trade Agreements,@ in
Incomes and Productivity in North America (Commission for Labor Cooperation,
Dallas TX: 1997).
Krueger, Alan B., and Lawrence Summers, “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry
Wage Structure,” Econometrica, 56, 2, March 1988: 259-293.
Kruse, Douglas, “Supervision and the Size-Wage Effect,@ Industrial Relations, XXXI
(1992) No. 2: 229-249.
Labich, Kenneth, AThe New Pay Game . . . And How You Measure Up,@ Fortune,
CXXVI, no. 8 (October 19, 1992), 116-119.
Leonard, Jonathan, AWage Structure and Dynamics in the Electronics Industry,@
Industrial Relations, XXVIII (1989), 251-275.
Leonard, Jonathan, and Marc Van Audenrode AWorker=s Limited Liability, Turnover, and
Employment Contracts,@Annales d=Economie et de Statistique, 1996.
Levine, David I., “Job Characteristics and Wage Anomalies,” W.P. OB/IR-56, Haas
School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, 1991.

27
Levine, David I. AFairness, Markets, and Ability to Pay: Evidence From Compensation
Executives.@ The American Economic Review, LXXXIII no. 5 (December, 1993),
1241-1259.
Levine, David I, AThe US Labor Market: ‘Institutions’ … Rigid and ‘Unregulated’ …
Market-Clearing,” Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research Association,
1994.
Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane, “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A
Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations.” Journal of Economic
Literature, XXX, no.3, September (1992), 1333-1381.
Lincoln, James and Arne Kalleberg, Culture, Control and Commitment, (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1990).
Manicatide, Mircea; Pennell, Virginia. Key Developments in Compensation
Management, HR Focus, Oct 1992, LXIX (10):3-4.
Miller, A.D.J. Tremain, P.S. Cain, and P.A. Roos, Work, Jobs, and Occupations: A
Critical Review of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (Washington, D.C.:
National Academy of Sciences Press, 1980).
Mincer, Jacob, “Human Capital, Technology, and the Wage Structure: What Do Time
Series Data Show?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No.3581 (1991).
Mishel, Lawrence and Jared Bernstein, “Did Technology=s Impact Accelerate in the
1980s?” Paper presented at the Industrial Relations Research Association
meetings, San Francisco CA, January 1996.
Neumark, David, Daniel Polsky, and Daniel Hansen, AHas Job Stability Declined Yet?
New Evidence for the 1990s.@ Paper presented at the Russell Sage Foundation
Conference on Employment Stability and Security, February, New York, NY
(1998).
Sen, Amartya K., On Economic Inequality (Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, 1973).
Smith, Robert and Ronald Ehrenberg, “Estimating wage/fringe tradeoffs: Some data
problems,” NBER working paper 827, Dec. 1981.
Stiles, Philip, Lynda Gratton, Catherine Truss, Veronica Hope-Hailey, and Patrick
McGovern, “Performance management and the psychological contract,” Human
Resource Management Journal, VII (1) (1997) 57-66.

28
Taber, Christopher R. “The Rising College Premium in the Eighties: Returns to College
or Returns to Ability?” Northwestern University Department of Economics, April
1996.
Useem, Michael, Investor Capitalism: How Money Managers are Changing the Face of
Corporate America (New York: Basic Books, 1996).

29

Table I: Summary Statistics

Table IA: Overview

1986

1992

Mean S.D.

Mean S.D.

Base Pay ($s)

41607

17649

43361

19593

Total Compensation ($s)

42837

21760

45277

25230

Hay points

206.6

119.9

201.4

112.4

Sample size

54,080

55,298

30
Table IB: Hay Skill Points

Mgt. Level

1986

1992

1986

1992

Difference
of Means

n

n

Mean S.D.

Mean S.D.
T-Stat

M=0

39

39

1352

838

1340

950

1.12

M=1

496

479

661

307

580

450

4.36*

M=2

4762

4102

363

127

356

116

2.36*

M=3

22695

19297

198

71

204

72

7.07**

M=4

26088

31308

171

56

168

51

7.17**

All

54080

55225

206.6

119.9

201.4

112.4

7.3***

31
Table IC: Base Pay

1986

1992

Difference of Means

Mean S.D.

Mean S.D.

T-Stat

M=0

220000

141982

231150

158205

2.09*

M=1

119682

58175

116369

55062

0.89

M=2

62722

18026

67884

22493

11.49***

M=3

41610

10422

44531

13183

24.23***

M=4

35970

9379

38039

11105

23.34***

All

41607

17649

43361

19593

15.5***

32

Table ID: Total Compensation (Base Pay + Bonus)

1986

1992

Difference of
Means

Mean S.D.

Mean S.D.
T-Stat

M=0

268235

194394

310526

256258

2.17*

M=1

141669

81657

141498

85027

0.03

M=2

67242

23450

74557

29925

12.3***

M=3

42315

11424

46107

14875

28.2***

M=4

36552

9720

38969

11418

26.72***

All

42837

21760

45277

25230

17.1***

Notes: All figures expressed in 1986 dollars.
M = 0 is CEO or Division president, 1 is other senior executives with company or
division-wide responsibilities, 2 is division managers (managing other managers or
supervisors), 3 is supervisor, and 4 is exempt, non-supervisory positions, generally
professional jobs.

33
Table IE: Industry breakdown of respondents
SIC

DESCRIPTION

N

SIC

DESCRIPTION

N

20

Food and Kindred Products

4

35

Industrial & Commercial
Machinery & Computer
Equipment

4

26

Paper and Allied Products

3

36

Electronic & Other Electric

3

27

Printing, Publishing & Allied
Inds

1

37

Transportation Equipment

1

28

Chemicals & Allied Inds

2

38

Measuring, Analysis &
Controlling Inst

1

29

Petroleum Refining & Related
Inds

3

40

Railroad Transport

2

30

Rubber & Misc Plastics

1

49

Electric, Gas & Sanitary
Services

6

32

Stone, Clay, Glass etc.

2

50

Durable Goods Trade

2

33

Primary Metals

2

51

Non-durable Goods Trade

1

34

Fabricated Metal Products

1

34
Table IF: Functional breakdown of respondents

Job Function

Number of
Incumbents

Mean Skill Points

1986

1986

1992

1992

Mean Base Salary
1986

1992

General
Mgmt/Multifield

630

415 690.638 661.665 105370.5 112063.2

Strategic/Corporate
Planning

128

104 339.945

313.75 61921.54 65260.56

Finance/Acctg

3768

3954 211.476 207.482

Info Sys/ DP

3259

4995 190.122 185.256 38803.74 39827.39

HR

2185

2331

Legal

41023.2

44167.9

208.05 203.616 41523.28 44421.57

504

426 305.821 303.857 55680.49 60438.94

8604

9638 214.176 204.039 39585.22 39808.25

Public Relations

286

327 234.804 222.419 47261.31 48819.96

Facility Services

1409

1554

R&D

1756

1878 236.203 231.952 44202.21 50116.17

Engineering

7691

8125 203.966 195.092 42156.84 45317.06

Materials Mgmt

1979

2175 177.155 175.845 36024.76

Marketing

Purchasing/Contracting

177.51 155.693 38711.61 37431.81

38458.5

906

938 207.422 192.788 41049.23 42737.76

Plant Engr

2015

1814 198.984 196.135 42775.41 46094.92

Mfg or Prod Engr

1314

1445 200.524 198.531 39373.31 44038.31

Quality Assurance

964

1000

194.01 191.762 39269.54 42441.18

Prod/Mfg Operations

6222

4644 184.834 191.496 38986.15 42989.94

Rail Transport
Operations

2942

2197 181.673 181.675 44526.31 39645.18

Power Generation

854

525 193.987 195.796 45438.89 47716.31

Power Transmission

630

555 179.438 180.975 42661.45 43458.86

Gas Transmission

200

152

Utility Customer Service

503

495 159.823 153.556 36356.89 36533.89

All Others

5331
54080

172.25 172.316 45670.52 47869.42

5538 203.934
55225

224.96 40479.98 42957.59

35

Table II: Are Skills Increasingly Sorted between Firms?
Dependent variable is log(Hay points)
RMSE = Root means square error
1986

1992

Change
(1992-1986)

s.d.(log(Hay points))

0.398

0.394

-.004

Model 1: Only firm
effects.

s.d.(firm effects) =
.113

s.d.(firm effects) =
.121

.008

RMSE= .388

RMSE = .384

R2 = .053

R2 = .049

s.d.(firm effects) =
.137

s.d.(firm effects) =
.127

-.004

Model 2: Firm effects
and controls for job level
and function.

-.004
-.010
.014

RMSE = 0.288
2

R = .477

RMSE = 0.302
2

R = .409

-.068

36

Table III: Predicting Base Wages
Dependent variable is log(base wage)
RMSE = Root means square error, a measure of within-firm inequality
1986

Change
(1992-1986)
1992

Total wage inequality

s.d(log wage) = 0.316

s.d(log wage) = 0.343

.033

Controls Alone: Job
Level and Job Function

RMSE= .247

RMSE= .268

.021

R2 = .386

R2 = .391

.005

s.d.(firm effects) =
.120

s.d.(firm effects) =
.146

.026 **

Model 1: Only firm
effects & controls.

.016
RMSE= .231
2

RMSE = .247
2

R = .467

R = .481

.014

Effect of Adding Firm
Effects (Model 1 Controls Alone)

∆RMSE = -.016

∆RMSE = -.021

-.005

∆R2 = .079

∆R2 = .090

.011

Model 2: Only Hay
points & controls

b = .203 (SE = .0008)
**

b = .233 (SE = .0009)
**

.030 **
.009

RMSE = 0.173
2

RMSE = 0.182
2

R = . 700

R = .718

.018

Effect of Adding Hay
points (Model 2 Controls Alone)

∆RMSE = -.058

∆RMSE = -.065

-.007

∆R2 = .314

∆R2 = .327

.013

Model 3: Firm effects,
Hay points, and controls

s.d.(firm effects) =
.112 **

s.d.(firm effects) =
.139 **

.027 **

37

b = .211 (SE =
.0007)**

b = .239 (SE = .0008)**

.029

RMSE = .152

.003

R2 = .804

.026

∆s.d.(FE) = -.008 **

∆s.d.(FE) = -.007 **

-.001 (n.s.)

∆RMSE = -.082

∆RMSE = -.095

.013

∆R2 = .311

∆R2 = .323

.012

∆b = .008 **

∆b = .006 **

-.002 (n.s.)

∆RMSE = -.024

∆RMSE = -.030

-.006

∆R2 = .078

∆R2 = .086

.008

RMSE = .149
2

R = .778
Effect of Adding Hay
points, given Firm
Effects, (Model 3 Model 1)
Effect of Adding Firm
Effects, given Hay
points (Model 3 - Model
2)

Note: All tests are noted as ** or (n.s.). ** implies the change is significant at the 1%
level. (n.s.) implies not statistically significant at the 5% level. Tests of the statistical
significance of coefficient estimates (b) and changes in coefficients (∆b) are t tests. Tests
of the joint statistical significance of firm effects are F tests. Tests of changes over time
(the final column) are bootstrapped, as described in the text.

38

Table IV: Predicting Base Pay + Bonus
Dependent variable is log(Base Pay + Bonus)
RMSE = Root means square error, a measure of within-firm inequality
1986

1992

*Change
(1992-1986)

Total wage inequality

s.d(log base+bonus) =
0.333

s.d(log base+bonus) =
0.363

.033

Controls Alone: Job
Level and Job Function

RMSE= .259

RMSE= .284

.025

R2 =.369

R2 = .386

.017

s.d.(firm effects) =
.117

s.d.(firm effects) =
.148

.030

Model 1: Only firm
effects & controls.

.022
RMSE= .243
2

Effect of Adding Firm
Effects (Model 1 Controls Alone)
Model 2: Only Hay
points & controls

RMSE = .265
2

-.003

R =.469

R =.466

∆RMSE = -.016

∆RMSE = -.021

-.005

∆R2 = .079

∆R2 = .090

.011

b = .220 (.0008)

b = .255 (.0009)

.025

RMSE =.175

RMSE = .185

.010

R2 = .724

R2 = .735;

.011

Effect of Adding Hay
points (Model 2 Controls Alone)

∆RMSE = -.058

∆RMSE = -.065

-.007

∆R2 = .314

∆R2 = .327

.013

Model 3: Firm effects,
Hay points and controls

s.d.(firm effects) =
.108

s.d.(firm effects) =
.140

.022

b = .227 (SE = .0007)

b = .261 (SE=.0008)

.034
.007

39

Effect of Adding Hay
points, given Firm
Effects, (Model 3 Model 1)
Effect of Adding Firm
Effects, given Hay
points (Model 3 - Model
2)

RMSE =.152

RMSE = .159

R2 = .793

R2 =.808; .804

∆s.d.(FE) = -.008

∆s.d.(FE) = -.008

0

∆RMSE = -.082

∆RMSE = -.095

.013

∆R2 = .311

∆R2 = .323

.012

∆b = .008

∆b = .006

-.002

∆RMSE = -.024

∆RMSE = -.030

-.006

∆R2 = .078

∆R2 = .086

.008

.015

Table V: Effects of Local Labor Market Conditions on Wages
Dependent variable is mean wage per job for each
location/mean wage per job across company

Entire sample

Professionals and first-line
supervisors, as opposed to top

1986

1992

1986

1992

Local
unemployment
rate

0.048

-0.080

0.050

-0.051

(0.114)

(-0.053)

(0.072)

(-0.055)

Local wages

.111

0.211

0.112

0.205

(0.114)

(0.060)

(0.125)

(0.062)

R2

0.000

0.001

0.000

0.002

F statistic

0.96

5.31

0.94

6.49

n

11818

12458

10548

11502

40

Table VI: Above-Market Wages and Corporate Performance
Dependent variable is the estimated employer wage effect from Table 3, model 1.

Independent
variables

1986

1992

Coefficient
(SE)

R2

Coefficient
(SE)

R2

One-year lag
of return on
invested capital

0.068

-0.035

0.561

-0.016

Three-year
average of
lagged ROIC

-0.41

Lagged
market-to-book
ratio

0.907

(1.838)

(0.754)

-0.031

(3.741)

(1.73)

0.098

0.0095

(0.087)
-0.024

1.65

0.010

(1.45)

Note: For each regression, the regression=s F statistic was not statistically significant.

41
Appendix 1: An Illustrative Model of Unmeasured Skills and Firm Wage Effects
This section outlines a simple human capital model of wage determination. Although we
do not expect any such simple model to be literally true, it provides a useful benchmark
when we move to the data. We have designated several propositions as testable
assumptions and several as testable implications from the model. While we recognize that
even the testable assumptions are implications of underlying assumptions, they are
sufficiently close to each other to treat them as equivalent.
Assume the true model is completely neoclassical where log(wages), w, are purely a
reward for general skills (S) with a rate of return B:
w=B

S.

Assume further that some employers have higher average returns to skills than do other
employers. Thus, employers will sort employees, leading employers to differ in their
average skill levels. If we regress wages against a vector of firm-specific dummies, then
the estimated coefficients on the dummies will capture the amount of sorting by skills.
(We will refer to the coefficients on the dummies as the firm wage effects, or as the
between-firm variation in wages.) Combined with the assumption that wages measure
skills we have our first testable assumption:
TA1: Mean wages differ by firm:
1) w = f1

firm effects + e1.

The standard deviation of the coefficients on the firm wage effects (f1) indicate how much
employers differ in their average skill levels. The standard deviation of the estimated
residual e1 measures wage and skill variation within each firm.
Assume we now have an imperfect but fairly accurate measure of skills,
s = S + u,
where u is a well-behaved error term uncorrelated with skill or firm. In this case, we can
decompose the variance of the skill measure into a component due to the variance of
skills, and a component due to the error:
V(s) = V(S) + V(u).
We can now correlate our measure of skills with wages, yielding a testable assumption:
TA2: The measure of skills is correlated with wages.
An important debate focuses on why we see employers paying such different wages for
apparently similar workers and jobs. (Groshen, 1991a, reviews these theories and the

42
evidence concerning them.) We can address this debate by adding our measure of skills
to the regression in equation (1), yielding:
2) w = b2 * s + f2 * firm effects + e2
Now the standard deviation of the firm wage effects indicate how much employers differ
in their average skill levels for those skills not measured by s. That is, the imperfect
measures of skills, s, picks up some of the sorting of skills that was captured by the firm
effects in equation (1). This yields hypothesis 1:
H1: The standard deviation of the coefficients on the firm effects (f2) will
be smaller when controlling for skills in equation (2) than in equation (1)
with no such controls.
To the extent that the measure of skills s is highly correlated with wages, we know the
measurement error on skills (u) must be low. We will now make two further testable
assumptions:
Consider the case with data from two time periods, “early” and “late.” Assume similar
amounts of sorting of both measured (s) and unmeasured (u) skills between employers
both early and late. We can test for similar sorting of measured skills by noting that if we
estimate how skills vary between employers,
s = f3

firm effects,
TA3: The estimate of V(f3) should be similar early and late.

Assume further that the returns to skill (B) has increased over time. Together these imply
that the variance of firm wage effects with no controls for skills (as in equation (1)) has
increased proportional to the variance of log(wages).
H2: Thus, the standard deviation of the coefficients on the firm effects in
equation (1) should be proportionally larger in the later periods, and the R2
should remain constant.
With constant measurement error of true skills, u, we have
TA5: The estimated coefficient from
3) w = b

s + e3

should have risen over time. The error term in this regression, e3, measures
the returns on unmeasured skills times the amount of unmeasured skills, u.
Assume further that the measurement error in our imperfect measure of skills is constant;
that is, the ratio of true variance V(S) to measured variance V(s) is constant.

43
(Alternatively, assume that the returns to both the measured and unmeasured components
of skill both increase equally.) This yields a further testable implication that the higher
estimated returns to skill explain most of the rise in the variance of log wages.
Specifically, the estimated R2 of equation (3) should not have increased over time. The
standard error of the equation should have increased proportionately with the square root
of the increase in the estimated returns to skill, b.
Finally, to the extent that differences in mean wages between employers (firm wage
effects) are due to differences in mean human capital, controlling for observable skill (s)
should eliminate most of the increase in the standard deviation of the estimated firm.
H3: The variance of firm effects in an equation which controls for skill
should have risen much less over time than the variance of firm effects in
an equation with no such controls.
As discussed in the text, all of the testable assumptions (marked “TA” in this appendix)
hold in this dataset.
Appendix 2: Correlations of employer effects by level

Correlations of employer effects by level

Correlation of employer effect at this level with
mean employer effect of the other four levels.

0.31 0.39
Top executive at employer

44

Senior executives

0.58 0.72

Middle managers

0.89 0.91

0.95 0.98
Supervisors

0.99 0.99
Professionals

45

Notes: Regressions that estimate
employer effects include controls for
function and Hay points. Mean
employer effect of the other four levels
are weighted by employment.
Authors:

