                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          LANGUAGE-SKILL COMPLEMENTARITY:
                      RETURNS TO IMMIGRANT LANGUAGE ACQUISITION


                                                    Eli Berman
                                                    Kevin Lang
                                                    Erez Siniver


                                              Working Paper 7737
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w7737



                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 2000




Lang acknowledges the support of NSF grant SBR-9515052. We thank the Falk Institute for editorial support. We
benefited from the comments of Dan Ackerberg, Michael Beenstock, Peter Doeringer, Maggie Eisenstaedt and
participants in seminars at the Institute for Race and Social Division and a labor lunch at Boston University. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2000 by Eli Berman, Kevin Lang, and Erez Siniver. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Language-Skill Complementarity: Returns to Immigrant Language Acquisition
Eli Berman, Kevin Lang, and Erez Siniver
NBER Working Paper No. 7737
June 2000
JEL No. C81, F22, J15, J31, N35

                                           ABSTRACT

       We examine the effect of language acquisition on the growth of immigrants’ earnings. We
gathered data on recent Soviet immigrants to Israel that include retrospective questions on earnings
and language ability on entry into their current job. Language acquisition is found to interact
positively with occupation level. Immigrant programmers and computer technicians have a return
to tenure about three percentage points higher than that of natives; improved Hebrew language skills
account for between 2/3 and 3/4 of that differential wage growth. In contrast, construction workers
and gas station attendants have no convergence of wages to those of natives and language acquisition
has no discernible effect on their wages. For these less skilled workers the estimated “return” to
Hebrew proficiency in the cross-section is entirely due to ability bias. This finding may invite a
reinterpretation of other studies on the returns to language acquisition for low wage immigrants.


Eli Berman                                                   Kevin Lang
Department of Economics                                      Department of Ecnomics
Boston University                                            Boston University
270 Bay State Road                                           270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215                                             Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
eli@bu.edu

Erez Siniver
Management Institute
Tel Aviv
LANGUAGE-SKILL COMPLEMENTARITY:
RETURNS TO IMMIGRANT LANGUAGE ACQUISITION




1. Introduction

There is general agreement that immigrants experience faster wage growth than do native
workers. One explanation for this finding is that over time immigrants learn the host country
language and thereby become more productive in the labor market. Considerable research
supports the view that in a cross-section regression language fluency can account for a
significant portion of the rate of wage convergence.
   However, the cross-sectional evidence is subject to several problems. On the one hand, both
the correlation between fluency and earnings and the correlation between time in the host
country and fluency may be partly or totally spurious, thereby generating upwards-biased
estimates of the importance of fluency for wage convergence. On the other hand, measures of
fluency are very noisy, biasing estimated coefficients downwards.
   The major alternative explanation for convergence is that recent immigrants, like young
natives, engage in considerable job shopping. Immigrants exhibit considerable job mobility
(Lalonde and Topel, 1991; Eckstein and Weiss, 1998). (They may be engaged in Burdett–
Jovanovic job-matching, which is productive, or simply pursuing rents.) Except for recent labor
market entrants, native workers will have had more time to shop for jobs than otherwise
comparable immigrants and will therefore have a smaller marginal return to job search. Of
course, job shopping and language may be complementary — knowledge of the native
language may facilitate job search; similarly, the type of/selection of jobs with which workers
are best matched may change rapidly as they acquire fluency in the language of the host
country.
2

    It is important to measure accurately the effect of language acquisition on wages. If growing
fluency accounts for a significant portion of wage, receiving countries can speed up such
convergence by supporting effective language programs. On the other hand, if language is
relatively unimportant, language programs may be economically wasteful or merely a disguised
form of welfare.
    In this paper we use a unique data set collected by one of the authors to cast light on the role
of language acquisition in wage convergence within jobs. The data set contains measures of
fluency and wages, both currently and when the individual started the job, thereby allowing us
to measure the effect of changing fluency on the change in wage. Moreover, since we follow
workers within jobs, we can distinguish wage growth within jobs from wage growth due to job
changes.
    We study immigrants from the former Soviet Union (henceforth referred to as Russians) to
Israel, who were employed in one of four occupations in Israel (gas station attendant,
construction worker, computer technician, programmer). We find that Hebrew fluency had
almost no effect on wage growth in the low-skill occupations (gas station attendant,
construction worker). Moreover, these occupations show no evidence of wage convergence. In
contrast, computer technicians and programmers show evidence of considerable wage
convergence, much of which can be accounted for by their increasing Hebrew fluency.
    We interpret our findings as strong evidence for an effect of language on earnings, as it is
free of a heterogeneity bias in levels. The contrast between the lack of estimated returns to
language for low-skill workers and high returns for high-skill workers is interesting for two
reasons. First, it provides some evidence against a heterogeneity bias in ability to learn quickly.
More importantly, it establishes evidence for an intuitively plausible result: that language
complements occupational skills.
    Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 provides an overview of immigration to Israel
                                                                                                  3

from the former Soviet Union. Section 4 describes the data; Section 5 describes the meth-
odology. Section 6 provides results and Section 7 concludes.


2. Literature Review
Since the pioneering work of Chiswick (1978) and related work by Carliner (1980) it has been
widely recognized that the earnings of immigrants increase more rapidly than those of natives.
Subsequent work by Borjas (1985) engendered a lively debate regarding whether immigrants
tend to surpass equivalent natives and about the extent of bias in cross-sectional estimates of
catch-up (see, for example, Friedberg, 1992; Duleep and Regets, 1996). Nevertheless,
researchers generally agree that immigrant wages rise relative to native wages as the time spent
by the immigrant in the receiving country increases (Borjas, 1994).
   Borjas (1994) argues that we know relatively little about why wages of immigrants and
natives converge. Although there are a number of plausible hypotheses, the only one that has
been extensively studied is the view that immigrants’ relative wages rise as they master the
language in the receiving country. There is considerable evidence that knowledge of the host
country language is correlated with higher wages with years since migration.1
   However, Borjas argues that this evidence is not entirely convincing because English
proficiency and earnings might be correlated simply because the more able workers are more
likely to speak English and to earn more. He goes on to recognize that some researchers (e.g.
Chiswick and Miller, 1992) have tried to correct for the potential endogeneity of language
knowledge by using instrumental variables techniques, but he questions the exogeneity of the
identifying instruments. More recent work (Dustmann and van Soest, 1998a uses father’s
education as an instrument for language. The authors argue that immigrants do not obtain


   1
       See Chiswick (1998) and the references therein as well as Carliner (1995, 1996), Chiswick and
Miller (1999), and Hayfron (1997).
4

networks through their parents and thus education is exogenous to wages. However, to the
extent that parental education is correlated both with unobserved investments in children’s
human capital other than language and with unmeasured ability, the exogeneity assumption is
questionable.
    There is also reason for concern that estimates of the effect of years since migration on
language knowledge are biased. Dustmann (forthcoming) finds that individuals who intend to
spend less time in the host country are less likely to know the host country language. If
immigrants who fail to master the host language return to their home country, or if those whose
immigration is temporary fail to learn the language, the estimated effect of time spent in
country on language facility will be biased.
    Finally, if the type of immigrants admitted to a country changes over time, differences in
language knowledge may reflect cohort rather than time-in-country effects. Carliner (2000)
addresses this problem by using synthetic cohorts. He establishes that within a cohort, language
fluency increases with time spent in the United States. However, synthetic cohorts cannot be
used to control for the effect of presumably selective return migration on the estimates.
    So far we have concentrated on reasons why estimates of the effect of language acquisition
on the convergence of immigrant and native earnings may be biased upwards. It is important,
however, to note that the estimates might also be biased downwards owing to measurement
error. Language knowledge is virtually always measured on the basis of self-reported fluency
grouped into a small number of crude categories. Individuals may vary in their assessment of
what constitutes “good” or “very good” knowledge of the native language. In addition,
individuals may themselves give inconsistent answers. Dustmann and van Soest (1998a,b)
analyze knowledge of German in the GSOEP (German Socio-Economic Panel). Most of the
immigrants in the GSOEP survey had been in Germany 15 years or more, so that, not
surprisingly, the sample shows little or no improvement in German fluency over time. This
                                                                                                          5

feature of their sample makes it particularly useful for studying the effect of measurement error
on the estimated return to fluency.
    Dustmann and van Soest show that for this sample, reported knowledge of German is
unchanged from one survey to the next in 58% of the cases, and is as likely to decline from one
survey to the next as it is to improve. They also show that within-individual variation accounts
for 28% of the variation in reported fluency. Since some of the between-individual variation in
reported fluency is also due to measurement error, the fluency variable is very noisy. Using
reported fluency from other years to instrument for current reported fluency almost triples the
estimated affect of fluency on earnings and reduces the estimated effect of years since
migration on earnings to close to zero.2
    While our discussion so far has treated the effect of language as constant across individuals,
it is plausible that the return to language differs across individuals. Those studies that allow the
return to vary across education or occupation groups confirm this (see for example Dustmann
and van Soest, 1998b; Carliner, 1996; Hayfron, 1997).
    In the Israeli context, Eckstein and Weiss (1998) find faster wage growth among more
skilled immigrants than among the less skilled. They term this “rising prices of imported
skills,” though they remain agnostic as to whether this is an increase in demand for imported
skill or an increase in its quality.3 Beenstock (1993) reports that both education and working in
an occupation which requires post-secondary education are predictors of Hebrew ability for
previous cohorts of immigrants. He also reports that Hebrew ability is a predictor of
employment. Thus it is plausible that increasing fluency raises the relative productivity of
skilled workers by making their human capital more usable. The combination of faster wage

    2
        Note that since within-individual variation in fluency appears to be almost entirely due to measure-
ment error, Dustmann and van Soest cannot use the panel nature of the data to correct for the other biases
we discuss here.
    3
        Eckstein and Weiss (1998), p. 7.
6

growth and quicker improvement of Hebrew among more skilled workers does not necessarily
imply that language complements skill. There is evidence of considerable job turnover among
immigrants. Skilled workers may take more time to acquire information about appropriate
matches in the labor market. Matching takes time. Learning a language also takes time.
Therefore, fluency and match quality may well be correlated, but the relation need not be
causal.
    To summarize, an ideal study of the effect of language on the assimilation of immigrants
would address at least the following four issues: (i) Correlation between unobserved ability and
fluency, (ii) spurious correlation between fluency and time in host country, (iii) measurement
error, and (iv) inter-individual variation in the return to language fluency. Moreover, it would
distinguish between the returns to job-shopping and to language.
    The data and approach we use in the following sections do not allow us to fully address all
these issues. Nevertheless, we are able largely to mitigate their effects by using retrospective
information on wages and linguistic proficiency within the same job. We will argue that our
data are relatively (although not completely) free of the sorts of bias discussed above. Before
discussing our data and approach in detail, we provide a brief discussion of Russian
immigration to Israel.


3. Russian Immigration to Israel
In 1989 the Soviet Union, in a major policy shift, removed restrictions on and allowed free
migration of Jews to Israel, while the U.S. reduced access to Soviet immigrants through the
mechanism of refugee status. As a result, a large wave of immigrants began arriving in Israel in
the Fall of 1989. By 1995 about six hundred thousand immigrants had arrived, increasing the
Israeli population by 12%.
    It is worth stressing that, in contrast to the high cost of migration for earlier waves, who
                                                                                                 7

faced confiscation of property and often lost their jobs when applying for exit permits,
migration to Israel since 1989 has been much easier. Recent immigrants face virtually no exit
restrictions in the former Soviet Union, have enjoyed surprisingly positive economic outcomes
in Israel and arrived in a country with a significant Russian subculture. Immigrants from the
former Soviet Union have been able to improve their standards of living fairly quickly with
relatively little culture shock (Beenstock and ben Menahem, 1995; Friedberg, 1997). The low
cost of and high return to migration for the current wave make them an unusual group of
immigrants in the sense that self-selection is probably much less important for this group than
for other immigrants studied in the literature (Chiswick 1978; Borjas 1987).




4. The Data
Our primary data source is the Occupation Survey (OS), a survey of male workers in
workplaces with a high proportion of immigrants in 1994, 5 years into the large wave of
migration from the former Soviet Union to Israel.4 The survey covered 348 immigrants who
had arrived since 1989, and 603 natives working in the same occupations and workplaces.
   The most valuable features of these data are retrospective questions on earnings and
language ability on entry into the current job. This method is consistent with recent insights
from survey design (Belli et al., 1999) which stress the importance of focusing on significant
events in minimizing measurement error in responses. The idea is that in a retrospective
question, earnings and language ability will be much easier to recall for the date of hire than for
an arbitrary date, such as January 1 of last year.
   For comparison, we draw on the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics’ Income Survey (IS), a
long form applied to outgoing rotations of the Labour Force Survey. This is a household survey


   4
       For details see Siniver (1998).
8

which currently samples about 7,000 households per year, reporting detailed information on

individuals aged 15 and older.5
    Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the OS, with a sample of immigrants from the IS
included for comparison. Male immigrants in the OS are surveyed in four occupation groups:
programmers, computer technicians, construction workers and gas station attendants.6 This
grouping was designed to cover both high- and low-skill ends of the occupational distribution
of immigrants. For comparison, about 22% of recent male Soviet immigrants are scientists,
academics, professionals and technicians, the equivalent high-skill occupation groups; about
12% are unskilled workers in services or production workers in manufacturing. which are
roughly equivalent low-skill occupations. The OS tended to survey younger workers, with a
mean age of 30, almost ten years younger than the IS mean. OS workers average 0.8 years less
education and 14% lower earnings. All these differences seem to be mainly due to the
occupations chosen. Natives in the OS averaged 31.4 years of age and 12.4 years of education
(not shown). The mean Soviet immigrant in both data sets had been in Israel for 3 years.
    Job tenure in the OS is short, averaging 1.3 years. This is due both to the short interval since
migration and to high turnover in construction and gas stations. (See Table 5 for descriptive
statistics for each of the four OS occupation groups.) Proficiency in spoken Hebrew is self-


    5
        The LFS population is Israel’s permanent population aged 15+, including potential immigrants and
permanent residents residing abroad for up to one year. Sampling is conducted in two phases: In phase 1,
localities are sampled; in phase 2, households are sampled within localities. Probability of inclusion for
each household in the population is approximately 1%. The sample is drawn once a year and divided into
four “panels.” Panels are interviewed for two consecutive quarters, not interviewed for the next two, and
then interviewed for another two consecutive quarters. The sample in each quarter is composed of 4
panels spanning two or three sampling years. See Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (various years) for
details.
    6
        Computer technicians were surveyed in 8 different companies, programmers in 9. Twenty gas
stations and 18 construction sites were surveyed.
                                                                                                             9

assessed and measured on a scale of 1 to 5 corresponding to the classifications: “not at all,” “a
little bit,” “not so well,” “well,” and “very well.” The average score was 2.96 on entry into the
current job and was 3.32 when interviewed.


5. Methods

The now standard approach to measuring wage convergence and the effect of fluency on
earnings is to estimate an equation of the form:


           ln( w it ) = αi + β′ zi + γ xit + δ1 yit + δ2 yit2 + ρ1 vit + ρ2 vit2 + ω h it + εit ,      (1)


for i = 1, ..., N persons and t = 1, ..., T periods. Here w is monthly earnings, x is laborhrEE
market experience, y is years since migration and v is current job tenure. The variable h
measures Hebrew language proficiency. The individual effect αi represents a time-invariant
influence on earnings, which we label “ability.”
   The coefficients we seek to estimate in (1) are the causal effects of the covariates on wages,
that is, those we would recover from the population regression with random assignment. Cross-
sectional estimates of coefficients will be biased if unobserved ability is correlated with the
covariates. The coefficient on Hebrew is especially suspect, since the ability to learn a language
will be reflected in h but may also be correlated with unobserved to ability to earn, αi .
   This ability bias can be addressed by estimating


           ∆ ln( w it ) = γ ∆ xit + δ1 ∆ yit + δ2 ∆ yit2 + ρ1 ∆ vit + ρ2 ∆ vit2 + ω ∆ h it + ∆ εit ,   (2)


for i = 1, ..., N persons and t = 1, ..., T periods. These coefficients can be consistently
estimated if ∆ε, as defined in (2), is uncorrelated with the covariates. That condition implies,
in particular, that there is no unobserved individual effect in earnings growth which is
correlated with improvements in Hebrew. In other words, we make the strong assumption that
10

αi is time-invariant. This would not apply if, for example, match quality and Hebrew
knowledge both increased more rapidly for skilled workers.
     The unique feature of our data, which makes estimation of (2) feasible, is longitudinal
observation of proficiency in Hebrew. We use a retrospective question regarding Hebrew
proficiency upon entry into the current job, along with information about entry wage. In this
case we can estimate the coefficients of


            ∆ ln( w i ) = + δ1 ∆ yi + δ2 ∆ yi2 + ( γ + ρ1) ∆ vi + ρ2 ∆ vi2 + ω ∆ h i + ∆ εi ,   (3)


where: (a) the difference operator ∆q indicates the difference between the current level of q
and its level on entry into the current job; and (b) ∆x = ∆v, since the change in experience and
tenure are identical within the current job; (c) the return to years since migration, δ1 and δ2,
are identified by the assumption that returns to experience and tenure are identical for
immigrants and natives. Alternatively, δ1 can be viewed as the difference in the return to
within-job tenure received by immigrants.
     Several important points should be recognized about (3). First, in contrast with most panel
estimation, the time between observations varies across individuals in our sample. Thus, the
change in tenure/experience varies across individuals, and it is possible to identify their joint
effect: (γ + δ1).
     Secondly, in many cases differencing noisy data generates considerable bias, because it
increases the noise-to-signal ratio. Hebrew proficiency is especially subject to measurement
error, because proficiency is graded on a scale with only five values. In Dustmann and van
Soest (1998a,b) differencing would have resulted in a ∆h variable that was almost completely
noise. In our case, information about present and previous Hebrew ability is collected
simultaneously. Measurement error in the two variables is likely to be highly correlated so that
differencing may actually reduce the noise-to-signal ratio.
                                                                                                11

   Finally, note that all variation in years since migration, y, in this differenced sample comes
from work years within a job. Thus, δ1 estimates a differential return to tenure between
immigrants and natives, excluding the possibility of increasing earnings or accumulating
human capital by switching jobs or by residing in the country without working. On the one
hand, this rules out investigating the returns to a potentially important role of language skill in
job search. On the other hand, it eliminates the possibility of spurious correlation between
language skill and quality of job match due to the fact that they both may increase with search
time.


6. Results
Table 2 reports estimates of the standard cross-sectional human capital earnings function. The
first function of the table is to check whether the wage growth of the OS immigrants is
comparable to those in the IS, conditional on covariates. Column (1) reports the typical
specification in the IS, including both linear and quadratic terms in YSM (years since
migration) to allow for a concave profile of earnings. Column (2) reports the same specification
estimated in the OS. The coefficient estimates on YSM and YSM squared are statistically the
same across the two datasets. While the IS YSM profile is steeper and has less curvature, this
difference is largely due to unusually low coefficients in the IS for schooling and labor force
experience (including a negative return to experience abroad in the older IS sample). Except for
the puzzling contrast in marriage premia between the OS and the IS, and the low OS returns to
experience, which may be due to the occupations chosen, the other coefficients are statistically
the same in columns (1) and (2). Both sources indicate rapid and concave wage growth with
time in Israel, at rates higher than those reported for other immigrant cohorts to Israel
(Chiswick, 1998, Friedberg, 1995), but consistent with the findings of Eckstein and Weiss
(1998) for the 1990s arrival cohort.
12

     The remaining columns of Table 2 use the OS to address issues relating to cross-section
estimates of wage convergence. Column (3) reports the result of adding 3 occupation indicators
to the estimating equation, which greatly increases the precision of estimates. However, it has
little effect on estimated wage growth due to years since migration. Based on this cross-
sectional evidence (in this sample, at least), job mobility does not seem to be a major source of
wage convergence.
     Columns (4) and (5) add linear and quadratic terms in tenure, respectively. These indicate
that about half of the estimated return to YSM is actually due to increasing tenure.
     Table 3 uses the standard cross-section approach to investigate how much of those gains in
earnings are due to increased proficiency in Hebrew. Column (1) reproduces column (5) of
Table 2 for comparison, with linear and quadratic terms in both YSM and tenure. Column (2)
reports the results of adding Hebrew proficiency to the equation. The Hebrew variable has a
large, positive and precisely estimated coefficient of 0.065 — predicting a 26% higher wage for
an immigrant with a the maximum score (of 5) over a comparable immigrant with the
minimum score (of 1). Including Hebrew in the regression reduces the estimated return to
tenure by about 1/3, evaluated at the mean, but has no appreciable effect on the estimated effect
of years since migration.
     As discussed above, the estimated effect of Hebrew fluency on wages may be biased if
more able workers are more likely to know Hebrew. To address this issue in column (4) of
Table 3 we exploit the availability of longitudinal information about language proficiency for
immigrants. These data allow us to estimate equation (3), the differenced version of the human-
capital earnings function, reported here for immigrants only. We estimate a large, statistically
significant return to Hebrew even after allowing for an individual “ability” effect in earnings.
The coefficient is 0.057, or a predicted 5.7% increase in wages for each unit of Hebrew
proficiency on the 4-step scale. This coefficient predicts a 23% increase in earnings associated
                                                                                                         13

with fluency in Hebrew. The size of this coefficient on Hebrew is striking, considering that we
have allowed for ability bias.
    Though large, the estimated coefficient on Hebrew in the differenced equation is somewhat
smaller than that in the cross-section, suggesting either ability bias in the cross-sectional
estimate or an exacerbation of classical measurement error in differences. The retrospective
setup argues against the latter explanation, since measurement error in self-reported Hebrew
proficiency is probably fairly constant over time for the same individual, making attenuation
bias smaller in the differenced equation than in the cross-section.7
    We return to an analysis of the potential effects of measurement errors in the discussion of
occupation-specific estimates below.
    Since we cannot identify the normal return to tenure/experience, Table 3 does not allow us
to address the role of Hebrew fluency in explaining faster wage growth among immigrants than
among natives. In Table 4 we examine both natives and immigrants. We report estimates of
equation (3), allowing differential tenure profiles for immigrants and natives. The key questions
addressed here are (i) the rate at which immigrants’ wages rise compared with natives on the
same job and (ii) how much of that wage convergence is due to language acquisition in the first
few years after arrival. To emphasize that we are examining differential wage growth within a
job, we label our key variable as a tenure-immigrant interaction rather than as YSM. The two
variables are, of course, perfectly collinear.




    7
        There is a form of measurement error in language ability that would bias the differenced coefficient
upwards and the cross-sectional coefficient downwards. Since the scale of language ability is bounded at
both ends, measurement error could be asymmetric, causing differences in Hebrew to be underestimated
and the differenced regression coefficient to be overestimated. This is unlikely as only 4% of immigrants
in the sample report their Hebrew at the lowest level when hired and only 6% of the sample report their
current level of Hebrew as fluent.
14

     As a starting point, column (1) reports cross-sectional estimates of returns to tenure and
experience for natives in the OS sample. Column (2) reports that when the same equation is
estimated in differences the coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from those in column
(1). [Note that ∆tenure = ∆experience in our sample, so that the coefficient on tenure in
column (2) estimates the sum γ + ρ1 in equation (3).] We conclude that heterogeneous ability
and measurement error are not significant sources of bias in estimating these coefficients for
natives.
     Columns (3) through (6) report estimates of separate tenure profiles for immigrants and
natives. These estimates are from the differenced earnings equation [equation (3)] for a pooled
sample of immigrants and natives. The linear specification in column (3) reports a 4.3%
increase in earnings for each year of job tenure for natives. (Recall that this combines both
tenure and experience effects.)
     Immigrants have an additional 2.2% increase in earnings per year of job tenure, which
reflects the rate at which immigrant wages converge to those of natives, within occupations.
This is a relatively fast rate of wage convergence compared to other countries.8 How much of
that catch-up can be attributed to Hebrew language acquisition? Column (4) reports that adding
the linear Hebrew coefficient accounts for most of wage convergence, reducing the differential
tenure profile from 2.2% to 0.9% per annum, a large and statistically significant decrease.
Generalizing the functional form by adding quadratic terms does not change this conclusion, as
reported in the bottom row of columns (5) and (6). Language acquisition, estimated here net of
a linear ability effect, appears to account for more than half of the wage convergence of recent
immigrants within occupations, in our sample.
     It is worth noting that our analysis cannot address the contribution of language fluency to
wage convergence through occupational change. Weiss and Gotlibovski (1995) examine this

     8
         The implied within-occupation rate of wage growth in our sample is 6.5% per year, which
                                                                                               15

question, finding no significant effect of Hebrew proficiency on the probability of receiving a
job offer.9 Weiss, Sauer and Gotlibovski (1999) find that most wage growth in the initial years
in Israel occurs within (three) broad occupational categories. While language skills plausibly
complement occupational upgrading, we can only speculate on whether they are more
important within or between occupations.


Language-skill complementarity
It seems plausible that language complements some types of human capital more than others,
so that the wage gains associated with learning Hebrew will be greater in some jobs. Our
survey includes four occupation groups, drawn at opposite ends of the skill distribution:
programmers, computer technicians, construction workers and gasoline station attendants.
Table 5 reports descriptive statistics for immigrants in each group. Note that the programmers
and computer technicians average 15 and 14 years of schooling, respectively, while the lower-
skill occupations average less than 12. Job tenure is shorter for the less-skilled workers, though
they average about the same amount of time since arrival in Israel, indicating greater turnover
in these occupations. Computer technicians’ self-reported Hebrew is clearly best, programmers
and construction workers have almost the same level, and gas station attendants have the
lowest level. The averages for all groups fall between a 3 (“not so well”) and a 4 (“well”).
Strikingly, Hebrew fluency at entry is not noticeably higher in high-skill occupations.
   We estimate equations (1) and (3) separately for each of the four different occupations.
Tables 6 and 7 reveal sharp differences among occupations in both the effects of Hebrew and
their importance in explaining wage convergence. Table 6 repeats the cross-sectional and
differenced results in Tables 2 and 3 for immigrants in each occupation separately. The first
two rows in the left column of Table 6 report those cross-sectional results for programmers and

consistent with the 6.4% found by Eckstein and Weiss (1998, p. 4) for Israel.
16

computer technicians, showing that the aggregate patterns are even stronger in these high-skill
occupations: the return to “years since migration” is large; and it is almost entirely due to
returns to tenure on the current job. The cross-sectional coefficient on Hebrew is quite large:
8.1% in programmers and 11.2% for computer technicians. The right hand column reports the
coefficient on the change in Hebrew in equation (3), in a differenced specification of the same
equation designed to eliminate ability bias. For both programmers and computer technicians the
cross-sectional coefficients on Hebrew are statistically indistinguishable from the differenced
coefficients.
     In contrast, the bottom two rows report that proficiency in Hebrew has little if any effect on
the wages of construction workers and gas station attendants. While the cross-sectional
coefficients on Hebrew are 3.2 and 3.0 percent, respectively, these coefficients disappear in the
differenced specification, indicating that the apparent return to Hebrew language proficiency in
the cross-section was due to heterogeneity bias for these two occupations.
     The contrast between the high- and low-skill returns to language acquisition is illustrated in
the two panels of Figure 1, which plot changes in log wages against changes in Hebrew
proficiency once the effects of changes in tenure and years since migration have been removed.
(That is, these are plots of residuals from a regression of each differenced variable on the
difference in tenure; the slope of a linear regression line for the residuals is the partial
regression coefficient by the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem.) Our interpretation of this contrast
is that language complements skills in increasing earnings but has no effect on the earnings of
less-skilled workers.
     Can the estimates from the differenced equation in the right hand column of Table 6 really
be interpreted as the effect of Hebrew on earnings and can the contrast between those and the
cross-sectional estimates really be interpreted as ability bias? To answer these questions


     9
         Weiss and Gotlibovski (1995), p. 22.
                                                                                               17

requires a more complete discussion of two issues pertaining to retrospective measurement of
dichotomous variables.
   The first issue concerns the bias due to nonclassical measurement error in reporting a
continuous variable in a small number of discrete categories. To illustrate the problem, assume
that Hebrew proficiency, h, takes on continuous values from .5 to 5.5 and that the answers on
the questionnaire are simply rounded to the nearest unit so that for reported Hebrew, hR,


           hR = round(h) = h + u ,

where u is measurement error. This is nonclassical measurement error, as u and h are not
independent. Ignoring the other covariates for simplicity,


           ln( w it ) = αi + ω h it + εit = αi + ω h itR - ω u it + εit .                (4)


   The bias in least squares regression depends on the correlation of hR and u, which, in
turn, depends on the distribution of h. For example, if h is uniformly distributed on the [0.5 ,
5.5] interval, hR and u are uncorrelated and there will be no bias due to measurement error. If
h has a symmetric central tendency (a lump in the middle), then hR and u tend to be
positively correlated since there is more “rounding up” than “rounding down” above the mean
and more “rounding down” than “rounding up” below the mean. A positive correlation implies
bias towards zero in the estimation of ω. The distribution of h in our data seems to have that
central tendency. The distribution of current reported Hebrew by level is (2%, 13%, 41%, 38%,
6%). Fitting that distribution to a normal yields a downward bias of 7.5% on the estimated
coefficient in simulation.
   In the differenced equation, on the other hand, the sign of the measurement error bias is
ambiguous. The distribution of h could well have a mass point at zero and is skewed to the
right. The distribution of reported change in Hebrew is (no change — 66%, increase of one
18

level — 32%, increase of two levels — 2%). It is plausible that for “no change” rounding is, on
average, downward, and that for improved Hebrew rounding is, on average, upward. If so, the
measured change understates the true change and the bias in the differenced regression is away
from zero, in our case — upwards.
     This form of measurement error provides a possible alternative explanation for the pattern
reported in Table 6 for the high-skill occupations, since the bias in the cross-sectional estimates
is likely toward zero and the bias in the differenced equation is possibly upwards. But if that
were the case, we would expect to see the same pattern of estimates for the low-skill
occupations as well. The low-skill occupations have similar distributions of changes in Hebrew
proficiency,10 yet they yield positive estimated coefficients in the cross-section and zeros in
first differences. We conclude that bias due to this type of measurement error is unlikely to
undermine the central conclusion, that true returns to Hebrew are much higher in high-skill
occupations.
     A second, related, measurement issue concerns how discrete answers are given in retro-
spective questions. Assume again that the latent variable is continuous on the [0.5, 5.5] interval
and that the answer to “current Hebrew” is given according to the rounding formula above.
Immediately after answering that question, the respondent is asked to evaluate his Hebrew
when he entered the current job. If his current level is h = 3.6, which he reported as hR = 4,
and the entry level was 3.4, would he report hR = 3 following the rule above or hR = 4 since
the change in Hebrew proficiency was only 0.2? It is plausible that in this example he reports
hR = 4, implying ∆hR = 0 and generally following a rule that rounds ∆h to the nearest integer
in reporting ∆hR. That practice has two implications for measurement. First, as noted above,
changes in Hebrew proficiency are probably measured more precisely than levels (because


     10
          Low-skill occupations have 70% no change and 30% increase by one level, as opposed to 60% no
change, 35% increase by one level and 4% increase by two levels for high-skill occupations.
                                                                                                19

levels involve cross-sectional variation in subjective self-reporting). More broadly, changes and
levels are measured in metrics that may be monotone tranforms of one another, but are
probably not identical, so that the coefficients of regressions in changes and in levels are not
directly comparable. For that reason we are reluctant to interpret the difference between cross-
sectional and differenced estimates of the return to Hebrew as a precise measure of “ability
bias.” The data do suggest a positive ability bias in cross-sectional estimates for the low-skill
occupations and an absence of such bias in the high-skill occupations, but the precise
magnitudes of these biases are indeterminate.
   Given our conclusion that improved Hebrew only affects wages for high-skill workers, we
return to re-examine differential returns to tenure in each high-skill occupation and evaluate the
effect of improved Hebrew. In Table 4 above we saw that on average immigrants had higher
returns to tenure than natives, and that over half of the differential was attributable to improved
Hebrew, but this estimate combined the impact of Hebrew in high- and low-skill occupations.
Table 7a looks at programmers. As in Table 4, equation (3) is estimated allowing a differential
slope in the tenure-earnings profile for immigrants. In software earnings growth is 2.6
percentage points higher per year for immigrants [column (1)]. That coefficient is reduced to
0.6 percentage points when changes in Hebrew are included [column (2)] indicating that about
3/4 of that differential in returns to tenure is attributable to improved Hebrew.
   Maintaining that this estimated return to Hebrew is free of ability bias requires that the rate
at which individuals acquire fluency in Hebrew be uncorrelated with the rate at which other
skills appreciate. If fast learners simultaneously learn both programming and Hebrew quickly,
we may incorrectly attribute their faster wage growth to their growing Hebrew fluency. We can
offer only a partial check on this hypothesis. If more skilled workers learn job-related skills and
Hebrew more rapidly, we would expect this to be reflected in faster wage growth within jobs
for better educated workers. We therefore tried including education as an explanatory regressor
in column (3). The coefficient on education is insignificant, and the remaining coefficients are
20

essentially unchanged. The final two columns check robustness to adding a quadratic in tenure
and years since migration. In this case Hebrew accounts for 62% of the differential in returns to
tenure, evaluated at the mean.
     Table 7b reports the same analysis for computer technicians, who have a differential return
to tenure of 3.8 percentage points for immigrants, of which between one-half and three-fifths is
attributable to improved Hebrew, depending on the specification. Adding years of education
has little effect on these results. Taken together, the results for programmers and computer
technicians indicate that most of the earnings’ convergence by recent immigrants in high-skill
occupations is due to language acquisition.
     Table 7c repeats this analysis for the low-skill occupations. For construction workers and
gas station attendants the stark finding is that there is no earnings convergence to explain.
While returns to tenure are high, they occur at the same rate for recent immigrants and natives.
This is true with or without Hebrew proficiency in the equation.
     This contrast in wage convergence between high- and low-skill occupations has been noted
by Eckstein and Weiss (1998), who attributed it to an increased price (or quality) of imported
skill. Our interpretation of that finding is that the faster wage convergence of skilled workers is
due not to a secular increase in demand for imported skill, but rather the result of improved
language proficiency of skilled workers, since Table 7 reports that skilled workers who did not
improve their Hebrew had much slower wage convergence. Language seems to increase the
quality or usefulness of foreign human capital.
                                                                                                                 21

7. Conclusions
Previous research on the role of host-country-language fluency on the growth of immigrant
earnings has been suspect because of possible biases related to the correlation between fluency
and unmeasured ability, spurious correlation between duration in the host country and fluency,
and measurement error in fluency. Because we observe both wage growth and changes in
fluency, the first two biases do not arise in our work. Because our data set asks questions about
present and past fluency simultaneously, it is likely to be subject to less measurement error in
individual assessments of what constitutes a “good” knowledge of a language. Finally, because
we examine wage growth within jobs, our findings do not confound the effects of job-shopping
with those of increased fluency.
       Our results are nevertheless subject to caveats. First, language should be understood as a
proxy for a range of host-country skills.11 As individuals master the language, they also master
social rules and local customs. Second, language may play an important role in determining the
type of occupation immigrants can enter. Since we have shown that language plays a more
important role in some occupations than in others, we would expect individuals who are fluent
in the host country language to select into occupations that are more language-intensive.
Moreover, since language and skill level are complementary, increasing fluency should help
individuals obtain higher paying jobs. In the cross-section, this effect appears to be small. The
coefficient on Hebrew falls from 0.080 to 0.065 when we include occupation dummies.
Nevertheless, our estimates almost certainly underestimate the full value of Hebrew knowledge
for immigrants.
       While not focused on the debate over whether immigrants’ earnings overtake those of
natives, our two main results nevertheless cast light on this debate. We find significantly
greater wage growth for immigrants in certain occupations and a mechanism that supports this

11
     The results in Weiss, Sauer and Gotlibovski (1999) suggest that one of these local skills may be English.
22

faster wage growth. On the other hand, at least for our sample, the faster wage growth and
mechanism are confined to relatively high-skill workers. The prevalence of catch-up and
surpassing of native workers may depend on the skill level. Skilled workers may be more likely
to surpass otherwise comparable natives with similar skills, while unskilled workers may be
less likely to do so.
     Finally, the results serve to remind us of the economic importance of language. Language
may well be the most important public good/infrastructure in a society. It is nonrivalrous and
provides network externalities. If so, there may be underinvestment in language skills in
competitive equilibrium, especially by immigrants. Supporting language classes for immigrants
may not only speed their economic assimilation but may also provide a social benefit.




They find that estimated returns to English language proficiency increase in occupational level.
                                                                                          23

References
Beenstock, Michael (1993). Learning Hebrew and Finding a Job: An Econometric Analysis of
      Immigrant Absorption in Israel. Jerusalem: The Maurice Falk Institute for Economic
      Research in Israel, Discussion Paper No. 93.05.
—— and Yitzhak ben Menahem (1995). The Labor Market Absorption of CIS Immigrants to
      Israel: 1989-94. Jerusalem: The Maurice Falk Institute for Economic Research in Israel,
      Discussion Paper No. 95.06.
Belli, Robert F., William Shay, and Frank Stafford (1999). “Event History Calendar Methods
      Study: Experimental Design, Analytical and Operational Results.” University of
      Michigan, mimeo.
Borjas, George J. (1985). “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of
      Immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics, 3 (4): 463–89.
—— (1987). "Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants," American Economic Review,
      77(No. 4, September): 531–53.
—— (1994). "The Economics of Immigration," Journal of Economic Literature, 32(4):1667-
      1717.
Carliner, Geoffrey (1980). “Wages, Earnings and Hours of First, Second and Third Generation
      American Males,” Economic Inquiry, 18 (January): 87–102.
—— (1996). “The Wages and Language Skills of U.S. Immigrants,” NBER Working Paper
No.      5763.
—— (2000). “The Language Ability of U.S. Immigrants: Assimilation and Cohort Effects,”
 International Migration Review, 34(1) (Spring): 158-182.
Chiswick, Barry R. (1978). “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Born
      Men,” Journal of Political Economy, 86: 897–921.
—— (1998). “Hebrew Language Usage: Determinants and Effects on Earnings Among
      Immigrants to Israel,” Population Economics, 11: 253–271.
24

—— and Paul W. Miller (1992). “Language in the Labor Market: The Immigrant Experience in
     Canada and the United States.” In Barry R. Chiswick (ed.), Immigration, Language and
     Ethnic Issues: Canada and the United States. Washington, DC: American Enterprise
     Institute, pp. 229–96.
—— and —— (1999). “Language Skills and Earnings Among Legalized Aliens.” Journal of
     Population Economics 12: (1) (February) 63-89.
Duleep, Harriet Orcutt and Mark C. Regets (1996). “The Elusive Concept of Immigrant
     Quality.” Urban Institute, unpublished.
Dustmann, Christian (1999). “Temporary Migration, Human Capital and Language Fluency of
     Migrants,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 101: (2) 297-314.
—— and Arthur van Soest (1998a). “Language Fluency and Earnings Estimation with
     Misclassified Language Indicators.” Tilburg: CER Discussion Paper.
—— and —— (1998b). “Language and the Earnings of Immigrants.” CEPR Discussion Paper.
Eckstein, Zvi and Yoram Weiss (1998). “The Absorption of Highly Skilled Immigrants: Israel
     1990-1995,” Tel Aviv University, unpublished.
Friedberg, Rachel (1992). “The Labor Market Assimilation of Immigrants in the United States:
     The Role of Age at Arrival.” Brown University, unpublished.
——(1997). “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.” Brown University,
     Population Studies and Training Center Working Paper No. 97-11.
—— (2000). “You Can’t Take it With You? Immigrant Assimilation and the Portability of
     Human Capital: Evidence from Israel.” Journal of Labor Economics 18 (2) (April) pp.
     221-251.
Hayfron, John E. (1997). “Language Training, Language Proficiency and Earnings of
     Immigrants in Norway.” University of Bergen, unpublished.
Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (various years). Income Survey. Jerusalem.
                                                                                        25

LaLonde R. and R. Topel (1991). “Immigrants in the American Labor Market: Quality,
     Assimilation and Distributional Effects,” American Economic Review, 81: 297–302.
Siniver, Erez (1998). “Russian Immigration to Israel.” PhD thesis, Boston University.
Weiss, Yoram and Menachem Gotlibovski (1995). “Immigration, Search and Loss of Skill.”
     Tel Aviv: Foerder Institute Working Paper 34–95.
___________, Robert M. Sauer and Menachem Gotlibovski (1999). “Immigration, Search and
     Loss of Skill.” Tel Aviv: Foerder Institute Working Paper 26-99.
26

Table 1. Male Immigrants from the former Soviet Union to Israel: Occupation and
           Income Surveys
                              Occupation Survey         Israel Income Survey
                              Mean          Std.        Mean           Std.
                                         deviation                  deviation
Age                          29.8          4.8         39.4          11.8
Years of education           12.9          2.5         13.7            3.1
Labor force experience       10.9          4.9         19.8          11.5
Years since migration         3.1          1.3           3.0           1.3
                       2
(Years since migration)      11.0          7.7         11.0            8.1
Currently married             0.79         0.41          0.80          0.40
Job tenure                    1.3          1.1         —             —
             2
(Job tenure)                  3.0          4.0         —             —
Current Hebrewa               3.32         0.87        —             —
               a
Entry Hebrew                  2.96         0.87        —             —
                  b
Monthly earnings              2,168         587         2,838         1,665
Log earnings                  7.649        0.250        7.793         0.605
Occupation (OS)
  Programmers                 0.22
  Technician                  0.25
  Construction                0.24
  Gasoline station            0.29
Occupation (IS)
  Scientist/Academic                                     0.13
  Professional/Technician                                0.09
  Manager                                                0.004
  Clerical                                               0.03
  Sales                                                  0.03
  Service                                                0.10
  Agricultural                                           0.12
  Skilled in Industry                                    0.25
  Skilled in Services                                    0.11
  Unskilled & Production                                 0.12
Survey Year                           1994              0           1994.1           0.81
No. of observations                            348                           1430
a
  Hebrew knowledge is measured on a scale of 1 to 5. Entry level Hebrew is the Hebrew score on entry
into the current job, as reported retrospectively.
b
  1994 New Israeli Shekel (about US$ 0.30).

Source: Occupation Survey data collected by Siniver in 1994. Israel Income Survey microdata.
                                                                                                      27

                Table 2. Returns to Tenure, in Israel and in Current Job,
           Evidence from Occupation and Income Surveys — Recent Immigrants

                              Israel Income                          Occupation Survey
                                 Surveya
Left-hand variable: Logarithm       (1)                     (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)
of monthly earnings
Years since migration (YSM)        0.130                   0.090       0.114      0.086     0.067
                                          (0.052)          (0.046)    (0.021)     (0.019)   (0.020)
(YSM)2                                    -0.009           -0.011     -0.014      -0.012    -0.009
                                          (0.009)          (0.008)    (0.004)     (0.003)   (0.003)
Tenure                                                                            0.055     0.097
                                                                                  (0.006)   (0.015)
Tenure2                                                                                     -0.012
                                                                                            (0.004)
Years of schooling                         0.023           0.050      -0.001      -0.001    -0.0005
                                          (0.006)          (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)
Labor force experience                    -0.007           0.007       0.002      0.002     0.001
                                          (0.002)          (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.001)
Married                                    0.446           -0.033     -0.005      -0.006    -0.008
                                          (0.050)          (0.026)    (0.015)     (0.013)   (0.013)
Programmers                                                            0.620      0.593     0.593
                                                                      (0.021)     (0.018)   (0.018)
Technician                                                             0.231      0.187     0.189
                                                                      (0.019)     (0.017)   (0.018)
Constructionb                                                          0.187      0.194     0.189
                                                                      (0.015)     (0.014)   (0.014)
Constant                                   6.95            6.802       7.208      7.227     7.227
                                          (0.107)          (0.093)    (0.056)     (0.052)   (0.050)

Root mean sq. error                         0.56              0.22       0.12        0.10      0.10
R2                                         0.15               0.25       0.79        0.83      0.84
No. of observations                        1,430                            348

Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.
a
    Income Survey regressions include 2 year indicators.
b
    Omitted occupation is gas station attendants.
Sources: Workplace Occupation Survey conducted in 1994; Israel Income Survey micro data, 1993–
1995.
                                                                                        31

      Table 6. Returns to Hebrew and Ability Bias by Occupation:
                   Occupation Survey — Recent Immigrantsa

    Left-hand variable: Log                Coefficients on Hebrew
    (earnings)                         Cross-section     First difference

    Programmers                             0.081                  0.083
                                           (0.009)                 (0.012)
    Computer technicians                    0.112                  0.104
                                           (0.013)                 (0.009)
    Construction workers                    0.032                 -0.002
                                           (0.011)                 (0.010)
    Gas stations                            0.030                 -0.0002
                                           (0.015)                 (0.013)

Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.
a
 Cross-section specifications include linear and quadratic terms in tenure and YSM,
schooling, LF experience and an indicator for currently married as in column (2) of
Table 3. First difference specifications include linear and quadratic terms in tenure
and a quadratic term in YSM as in column (6) of Table 4.

Sources: Workplace Occupation Survey, 1994.
32

                  Table 7a. Tenure Profiles and Hebrew — Programmers:
                   Occupation Survey — Recent Immigrants and Natives

  Left-hand variable: ∆Earnings                 (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)
  ∆Hebrew                                                 0.090         0.093               0.083
                                                         (0.011)    (0.011)                 (0.012)
  ∆Tenure × Immigrant                          0.026      0.006         0.006     0.074     0.038
                                              (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.005)       (0.015)   (0.015)
              2
  ∆Tenure × Immigrant                                                             -0.003    0.001
                                                                                  (0.004)   (0.002)
  ∆Tenure                                      0.032      0.033         0.031     0.056     0.056
                                              (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.003)       (0.004)   (0.004)
  ∆Tenure2                                                                        -0.009    -0.008
                                                                                  (0.002)   (0.002)
          2
  ∆YSM                                                                            -0.006    -0.005
                                                                                  (0.002)   (0.002)
  Yrs. of schooling                                                 -0.010
                                                                    (0.005)
  Yrs. of schooling × Immigrant                                     -0.0003
                                                                    (0.0005)
  Constant                                     0.022      0.020         0.176     -0.002    -0.001
                                              (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.071)       (0.003)   (0.003)

  Root MSE                                      0.06       0.06          0.05      0.06      0.05
  R2                                            0.61       0.67          0.68      0.67      0.71
  No. of observations                           233        233           233       233       233
  Derivatives evaluated at the mean
  Immigrant × (Tenure, experience,             0.026      0.006         0.006      0.032     0.012
    YSM)                                      (0.005)     (0.004)       (0.005)   (0.007)   (0.006)

Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.
Source: Workplace Occupation Survey, 1994.
                                                                                                   33

                  Table 7b. Tenure Profiles and Hebrew – Computer Technicians:
                       Occupation Survey — Recent Immigrants and Natives

 Left-hand variable: ∆Earnings              (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)
 ∆Hebrew                                             0.102        0.104                 0.104
                                                     (0.009)     (0.009)                (0.009)
 ∆Tenure × Immigrant                     0.038       0.017        0.022      0.033      -0.007
                                        (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.016)    (0.011)
              2
 ∆Tenure × Immigrant                                                         -0.009     -0.002
                                                                             (0.007)    (0.004)
 ∆Tenure                                 0.037       0.038        0.037      0.043      0.044
                                        (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.004)    (0.004)
 ∆Tenure2                                                                    0.004      0.003
                                                                             (0.002)    (0.002)
          2
 ∆YSM                                                                        0.004      0.004
                                                                             (0.003)    (0.002)
 Yrs. of schooling                                               -0.001
                                                                 (0.004)
 Yrs. of schooling × Immigrant                                   -0.001
                                                                 (0.001)
 Constant                                0.018       0.013        0.037      0.008      0.006
                                        (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.060)     (0.007)    (0.006)

 Root MSE                           0.07               0.06        0.06        0.07       0.06
   2
 R                                  0.68               0.76        0.77        0.69       0.77
 No. of observations                 252               252         252         252        252
 Derivatives evaluated at the mean
 Immigrant × (Tenure, experience, 0.038               0.017        0.022      0.025      0.010
   YSM)                            (0.004)             (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.008)    (0.006)
Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.
Source: Workplace Occupation Survey, 1994.
34

 Table 7c. Tenure Profiles and Hebrew — Construction and Gas Station Attendants:
               Occupation Survey — Recent Immigrants and Natives

                                        Construction             Gas station attendants
 Left-hand variable: ∆Earnings         (1)           (2)           (1)             (2)
 ∆Hebrew                                            0.001                        -0.004
                                                   (0.010)                      (0.011)
 ∆Tenure × Immigrant                -0.004         -0.004         -0.007        -0.006
                                     (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.005)       (0.006)
 ∆Tenure                             0.073          0.073          0.055         0.055
                                     (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.002)       (0.002)

 Constant                            0.005          0.005          0.002         0.002
                                     (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.006)       (0.006)

 Root MSE                             0.04           0.04          0.07           0.07
 R2                                   0.61           0.61          0.82           0.82
 No. of observations                  181            181           285            285

Figures in parentheses are heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.
Sources: Workplace Occupation Survey conducted in 1994; Israel Income Survey microdata, 1993–
1995.
                                                                                                        35

                                   Figure 1a. Changes in Earnings and Hebrew:
                                     Programmers and Computer Technicians
                                                 (Leverage Plot)
                           0.25

                           0.20

                           0.15
Change in log earnings




                           0.10

                           0.05

                           0.00

                           -0.05

                           -0.10                                                   Software
                           -0.15                                                   Technicians
                           -0.20
                               -0.75   -0.50   -0.25   0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00   1.25   1.50
                                                          Change in Hebrew



                               Figure 1b. Changes in Earnings and Hebrew:
                             Gas Station Attendants and Construction Workers
                                              (Leverage Plot)
                           0.25

                           0.20
                                                                        Construction workers
                                                                        Gas station attendants
                           0.15
  Change in log earnings




                           0.10

                           0.05

                           0.00

                           -0.05

                           -0.10

                           -0.15
                               -0.75   -0.50   -0.25   0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00   1.25   1.50
                                                          Change in Hebrew
