                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MARKET VALUE AND PATENT CITATIONS:
                                      A FIRST LOOK


                                               Bronwyn H. Hall
                                                 Adam Jaffe
                                              Manuel Trajtenberg


                                             Working Paper 7741
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w7741


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 2000


This is a revision of a paper prepared for the Conference in Commemoration of Zvi Griliches' 20 Years as Director of
the NBER Program on Productivity and Technological Progress, Cambridge, Massachusetts, March 5 and 6, 1999. As
should be clear from the discussion in Section 2, this paper represents but one further step in the research agenda
sketched in Zvi's 1979 Bell Journal paper, reported on in the 1984 NBER volume Zvi edited, and continued by Zvi, his
students and associates in the ensuing decade. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Conference on
Intangibles and Capital Markets, New York University, May 15-16, 1998 and the Conference on the Economics of
Science and Technology, University of Urbino, Italy, June 5-6, 1998. We have benefited from comments at these
conferences and by seminar participants at Keele University, the University of Paris I, the University of Reading, the
University of Manchester, and University College London. The data construction effort described in this paper was
partially supported by the National Science Foundation, via grants SBR-9413099 and SBR-9320973. We are extremely
grateful to Meg Fernando of REI, Case Western Reserve University for excellent assistance in matching the patenting
data to Compustat. Responsibility for anything anyone doesn't like about the paper lies with the authors. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2000 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Market Value and Patent Citations: A First Look
Bronwyn H. Hall, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 7741
June 2000
JEL No. O31, O38

                                           ABSTRACT

       As patent data become more available in machine-readable form, an increasing number of
researchers have begun to use measures based on patents and their citations as indicators of
technological output and information flow. This paper explores the economic meaning of these
citation-based patent measures using the financial market valuation of the firms that own the patents.
Using a new and comprehensive dataset containing over 4800 U. S. Manufacturing firms and their
patenting activity for the past 30 years, we explore the contributions of R&D spending, patents, and
citation-weighted patents to measures of Tobin's Q for the firms. We find that citation-weighted
patent stocks are more highly correlated with market value than patent stocks themselves and that
this fact is due mainly to the high valuation placed on firms that hold very highly cited patents.


Bronwyn H. Hall                                               Adam B. Jaffe
Department of Economics                                       MS 021
University of California at Berkeley                          Brandeis University
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                       Waltham, MA 02454
and NBER                                                      ajaffe@brandeis.edu
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu

Manuel Trajtenberg
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
manuel@ccsg.tau.ac.il
