                                                    




                              
                           


                                                


                                           ! ""#$
                                  %&''((() *)!'+'(""#$



                          , ,   
                                -./.++0%1++ 2 1
                                  3*4!5 .$-67
                                       81 $...




                       
              !         
     "      #$$           %  
& "    ' $     & "      
  #$$(   " )   "   *    & 
    + ,   *  $    % !                  
       &    "     $

-.///+    $0    $     !   ! % 
1  %   !           -         $
Examining the Incidence of Downsizing and Its Effect
on Establishment Performance
Peter Cappelli
NBER Working Paper No. 7742
June 2000
JEL No. J2


                                               ABSTRACT

       The interest in examining job security and job stability has been driven in part by the
phenomenon of downsizing. The distinctiveness of downsizing, as opposed to more traditional
layoffs, is that the job cuts do not necessarily appear to be driven by shortfalls in demand but instead
appear to be driven by the search for operating efficiencies. Despite the interest in downsizing, there
has been essentially no serious investigation into its causes. I distinguish downsizing from job cuts
associated with shortfalls in demand and find that employment and management practices over
which employers have control, such as severance pay and profit sharing, are important predictors of
subsequent downsizing and more general job losses. Surprisingly, excess operating capacity is not
necessarily related to more general job losses at the establishment level. I also examine the
relationship between both job losses associated with shortfalls in demand and downsizing and
subsequent financial performance. The results suggest, among other things, that downsizing reduces
labor costs per employee but also sales per employee. Job cuts associated with excess capacity
appear to be somewhat more successful at improving sales per employee than is downsizing.



Peter Cappelli
Department of Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
FAX: 215-898-0401
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                                                                                        3


Introduction

          “Downsizing” is a term that was introduced to describe the contemporary development of permanent job cuts motivated

by an effort to improve operating efficiency, not necessarily because of declines in business.1 Downsizing has received a great

deal of attention, especially in the business press, in part because it appears to represent something of an enigma. Academic

research and casual observation before the early 1980s suggested that employment levels, and reductions in jobs, were derived in

a straightforward way from the demand for a firm’s product or services. Most layoffs were seen as driven by business cycles,

they were temporary in that employees were rehired when product demand returned, and they concentrated on production

workers. The exceptions were typically limited to industry-specific market changes; the long-term decline of an industry, such

as coal mining, or the movement of industries overseas, such as textiles. Virtually all of the public policy attention given to

unemployment centered on the view that job losses are driven by cyclical or structural declines in product demand.

          After the 1980s, however, the above description no longer seemed complete. Layoffs were more likely to be

permanent. And while business cycles still drove unemployment rates, they did not neatly explain corporate layoff

announcements, now labeled as downsizing. As noted below, the companies having downsizings did not necessarily appear to be

in financial distress. The perception that even successful companies could improve their financial performance by downsizing

led to a series of studies of the financial consequences of downsizing decisions (see below).

          The main empirical question about downsizing, and the focus of this paper, is to examine the factors that cause it.

There have been no prior studies of the determinants of downsizing and only a handful on related topics such as plant closings.

The most important empirical challenge facing such investigations is how to define and then measure downsizing. The studies of

the consequences of downsizing either rely on firms to self-identify when they have had a downsizing or on announcements in

the media. I take a different approach and define downsizing as reductions in jobs driven by the desire for operating efficiencies

and distinguish it from more typical layoffs associated with shortfalls in demand. One might think of downsizing, therefore, as

being driven by developments inside the firm, in its production function, as distinguished from changes in the product market

and product demand. I can identify such situations indirectly by controlling for cases where establishments experienced a

shortfall in demand as well as for other unrelated sources of job loss such as outsourcing. Job losses in the remaining cases are

defined as downsizing. I examine the factors that explain both general job losses and downsizing across a national probability

sample of establishments using hypotheses associated with management practices, most commonly as they relate to incentives to

cut the use of labor. Finally, I relate job losses and downsizing to the subsequent performance of the establishments, contributing

to the growing literature on the consequences of job losses for firms.

The Downsizing Construct

          Downsizing represents for many the most obvious manifestation of a perceived decline in the nature of the employment

relationship as it relates to job security. In particular, the perception that even profitable companies can raise the price of their
                                                                                                                                    4


stock by making downsizing announcements seems to have stood on its head the conventional wisdom that layoffs were a sign of

trouble for firms, something that happened when their businesses were failing. As Hallock (1998) observes, the belief that

companies reward those CEOs who downsize their operations fed the perception that downsizing is good for companies.

(Whether these perceptions are justified is another matter, as discussed below.)

           Much of the concern and interest in downsizing has focused on large corporations where the perception had been until

relatively recently that most employees, especially managers, could have expected lifetime jobs, subject to adequate performance

(see, e.g., Kanter 1977). Finding systematic evidence of the change in practice can be difficult, however. The job security that

existed in most companies was an implicit policy that was never written in employee handbooks. It is difficult, therefore, to use

changes in explicit policies as a measure of the change in job security. But there are anecdotes describing changes in policies

associated with employment security. The authors of the book “The 100 Best Companies to Work for in America,” for example,

found ten of those companies with explicit no layoff policies in the previous decade but only two of them still had such policies

in 1997, one of which was privately held (Levering and Moskowitz, 1993; Mother Jones 1997). A bench marking study of

leading companies conducted by the Corporate Leadership Council found an important change in their expectations about career

development as compared to the previous decade. They found that companies were now planning explicitly on managerial jobs

having on average a three-to-four year lifetime with the expectation that the incumbents would leave in that time period, as

opposed to what had been the expectation that employees would, on average, remain until they retired (Corporate Leadership

Council 1995). A recent survey of large employers conducted by the Conference Board reported that 69 percent of those

companies had abandoned policies of job security for their employees; only three percent said that they still had such policies

(Conference Board 1997). This result in particular seems suggestive of important change, but in the absence of a representative

sample, it is difficult to interpret its significance.

           The appearance of the concept of downsizing began after the recession in 1981-83. The layoffs were initially driven by

sharp declines in business and were seen as traditional, temporary layoffs. Sixty-one percent of the human resource executives

surveyed by The Conference Board thought that by 1984, the downsizing trend was losing its momentum (Gorlin 1985). By

1991, in contrast, a similar Conference Board survey found more than half of the executives believing that downsizing would

continue to be necessary indefinitely to maintain competitive firms (Johnson and Linden 1992). That year, other surveys

reported that 22 percent of the companies were planning to make cuts in their workforce. In fact, 46 percent of those companies,

twice as many, ended up cutting workers (Ehrbar 1993).

           The American Management Association (AMA) has surveyed approximately 1,000 of its member companies about

downsizing every year since 1990. Although the AMA membership is no doubt different from the population of all employers,

even from the average large employer by virtue of their membership in that organization, the trends in their experience over time

may be instructive. The AMA surveys found that the incidence of downsizing increased every year until 1996 when 48.9 percent
                                                                                                                                   5


of companies reported having at least one downsizing wave that year, only a trivial decline from 50 percent the year before. (The

AMA survey essentially counts every incidence of a layoff as a downsizing and in that sense is more a measure of occurrence

than of the intensity of job loss.) Downsizing therefore increased across companies even as the economy expanded following the

1991 recession. Hallock’s (1998) calculations of layoff announcements (not necessarily downsizing per se) finds that they

increased in the 1990s as compared to the 1980s.

          And the causes of downsizing as reported in the AMA annual surveys also changed. In the early 1990s, virtually all

respondents cite overall economic conditions as an important cause of downsizing. By 1996, however, most cite restructuring

(66 percent) as the cause, and most of the companies reporting cuts are now profitable in the year they are cutting (American

Management Association 1996). In more recent years, firms are hiring at the same time that they are downsizing. The AMA

survey indicates that 31 percent of firms in their survey were adding workers at the same time as reporting job cuts in 1996 while

the average firm reporting that they had a downsizing in fact was growing by 6 percent.



Evidence from Data on Individuals

          The firm-level data above are suggestive of interesting and potentially new relationships with job loss. But because the

surveys from which they are derived are proprietary and typically use non-representative sampling frames, it is difficult to use

them as the basis for conclusions about the economy as a whole. In contrast, a considerable literature has developed on the labor

market experience of individuals to examine questions related to downsizing. Although it is only suggestive of employer

practices, this literature has the advantage of being based on representative samples. Many studies find increases in job losses of

a kind associated with changes in the nature of employment security and in the factors shaping it. Medoff (1993) finds that the

proportion of prime-age male workers (age 35-54) who were permanently (as opposed to temporarily) displaced from their jobs

almost doubled between the 1970s and the early 1990s. Farber (1997; 1998) concludes that the overall rate at which workers

have been permanently displaced backed down a bit during the late 1980s from the peak of the 1981-’82 recession period but

then rose again -- despite the economic recovery -- and jumped sharply through 1995 (Farber 1997; but see Polivka 1998 for

concerns about data problems that may have inflated more recent figures). The rate at which workers were thrown out of their

jobs was almost as great in 1993-'95, a period of significant economic expansion and prosperity in the economy as a whole, as

compared to 1981-'83, the worst recession since the Depression. And the cause of the job losses has shifted away from economy

or company-wide reasons, such as downturns in business or plant closings, toward eliminating particular positions associated

with.

          The downsizing of white-collar and management employees whose jobs were traditionally the most protected is another

aspect of changing practices with respect to layoffs. The data on the experience of individual workers suggests that the rate of

displacement was actually higher for managers and white-collar workers in the 1980s than for other occupations, controlling for
                                                                                                                                   6


other characteristics (Cappelli 1992; Kletzer 1997). It rose sharply through the early 1990's but appears to have declined

somewhat from 1993-95 (Farber 1997). Older and more educated workers, the kind one would expect to find in “better” jobs

and more buffered by the organization from market pressures, seem more likely to be displaced in the early 1990s as compared to

earlier periods (Gustman et al. 1995; Farber 1996), with the reasons for the increase in job losses for these groups also attributed

more to internal restructuring (e.g., “position abolished”) as opposed to external economic conditions (Farber 1997).

          Another body of research that may add to an understanding of changing employment relationships are the studies of

changes in average employee tenure, a measure driven by the combination of voluntary and involuntary employee turnover.

Turnover for the average employee seems quite stable over time (although not for all demographic groups) as estimated by data

from both the Current Population Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (see, e.g., Jaeger and Stevens 1998).

Neumark and Polsky (1998) find that overall turnover, while stable in the 1980s, appears to have risen somewhat in the mid-

1990s, even for managerial employees who have traditionally been seen as having significant job security. The more relevant

question for downsizing and job security more generally, though, is whether involuntary or employer-initiated turnover has

increased. The answer appears to be yes. Polsky (1999) examines whether there has been an increase in employer-initiated job

loss, such as layoffs, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). He compares 1976-1981 and 1986-1991 and finds that

while the overall rate of employee turnover was similar, involuntary job loses were greater, especially for older employees and

those with more tenure with the employer, the group traditionally associated with internal labor markets. Boisjoly, Duncan, and

Smeeding (1998) find similar results with the same data. Valletta (1996) reports that the proportion of the unemployed

accounted for by permanent dismissals (technically, non-layoff job losers) rose through the 1980s and early 1990s.

          Together, both the limited descriptive data on employer layoff decisions and the more representative studies of

employee job loss and turnover suggest that the factors driving contemporary job loss may be different than in the past. They

appear to relate less to downturns in product demand and more to internal factors associated with management decisions.

Research on Downsizing

          Despite the popular attention given to downsizing and the continuing stream of studies about job security for individual

workers, there has been essentially no research directed at the causes of downsizing. A growing body of research on the

consequences of downsizing developed to address the perception that firms could improve their financial performance by

downsizing. Although these studies do not relate to the central question here – what explains employer downsizing – they may

shed light on how to conceptualize and measure downsizing. These studies include Abowd et al. (1990), Caves and Krepps

(1993), and Worrell, Davidson, and Sharma (1991), all of which find that, on average, financial performance as measured by

stock prices seems to decline following downsizing (for similar results see also DeMeuse et al. 1994 and Iqbal and Shetty 1995,

and Gunderson, Verma, and Verma 1997 for Canadian firms). At least some part of the negative performance of the firms can be

traced to a wide range of adverse effects on the workforce (see, e.g., Brockner 1992 and Cameron 1995 for surveys).
                                                                                                                                       7


          But some studies also find that performance improves after downsizing for firms with certain characteristics. Worrell

et al. (1991) find that firms with restructuring plans as part of their downsizing effort show an improvement in stock prices

following downsizings. Cascio, Young, and Morris (1997) take a longer time horizon, examine several different model

specifications, and find some positive relationships between reductions in employment and financial performance although the

relationship was generally negative. A study of the positive effects on performance associated with downsizing at General

Dynamics suggests that the restructuring of firm operations and management that presumably drove much of that company’s

improved performance both led to and was facilitated by downsizing (Dial and Murphy 1995).

          The central analytic problem facing studies of downsizing is to define it and differentiate situations where employers

are cutting jobs because they already have financial problems from those where they are cutting jobs in order to seek new

efficiencies. The data outlined below make it possible to address this issue and to contribute to the literature on the relationship

between downsizing and performance effects.

          There is also a body of research on plant closing decisions and firm financial performance, decisions not identical to

downsizing but perhaps similar enough to shed some light on how to conceptualize downsizing. Blackwell, Marr, and Spivey

(1990) observed early on that negative relationships between plant closings and firm financial performance may be spurious

because such decisions are associated with and difficult to untangle from the overall competitiveness of firms. Gombola and

Tsetsekos (1992) find that while plant closing decisions in general hurt share prices, they do not do so for firms that are

financially secure. These results appear to be consistent with the view in the downsizing studies that cuts in struggling firms help

identify those firms that are already declining while cuts in more successful firms may proxy efforts to restructure and reposition

their operations. Kalra, Henderson, and Walker (1994) find a similar result, that plant closings may be associated with improved

performance when firms are restructuring.

          One of the drawbacks with the above studies is that, because they use stock prices as a dependent variable, they are

limited to publicly-held companies. And the unit of analysis must be the entire corporate entity, often far-removed from where

employment decisions are made; a massive company like General Electric with hundreds of divisions and facilities is counted as

a single observation because it has a single stock price. Baily, Bartelsman, and Haltiwanger (1996) take a different approach and

examine the effects of job reductions on plant productivity using plant-level data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census. They find

a range of results, concluding that downsizing plants had only slightly more productivity growth than did plants that were

increasing employment.

          The more fundamental complication illustrated by all of these studies is the problem of defining and then measuring

what counts as a downsizing. The studies of downsizing announcements rely on firms to self-identify through their public

announcements that they are having a downsizing and to define it consistently.2 Not all reductions in employment merit public

announcements, exactly what type of job cuts get labeled as downsizing will differ across firms, and, as noted above, actual cuts
                                                                                                                                         8


do not seem closely related to planned cuts. In that sense, studies of downsizing announcements appear to be measuring

something that may differ systematically from actual job losses, perhaps in part something about the effects of public statements

or about unobserved characteristics associated with the type of changes that merit such announcements. To illustrate, Hallock’s

(1998) study of layoff announcements finds that the initial positive relationship between layoffs and CEO pay (presumably

motivated by the perception that layoffs improve firm performance) in fact appears to be driven by firm characteristics that are

associated both with CEO pay and with the layoff decision. When one controls for those characteristics, the relationship between

layoff announcements and pay disappears.

          The Baily et al. (1996) study takes the simpler approach of examining actual employment changes while the Cascio et

al. (1997) study defines “employment downsizers” as companies that cut employment more than they cut plant and equipment.

The Cascio study is an attempt to differentiate job cuts associated with declines in business activity from what might be thought

of as “true” downsizing, job cuts designed to increase efficiency by operating with proportionately fewer employees.



Modeling the Downsizing Decision

          The research above suggests the importance first of defining downsizing clearly and consistently. I define downsizing

as job cuts driven by pressures for increased efficiency in the use of labor, as opposed to declines in demand. The way to begin

conceptualizing downsizing, therefore, is to think about the factors that drive reductions in jobs – essentially reductions in labor

demand – and then to differentiate which of those factors are consistent with the drive for improved efficiency. The demand for

labor is typically seen as derived from the demand for the final product or service produced by the firm through a production

function that represents how labor and capital are combined to produce final products (see, e.g., Hamermesh 1993). Reductions

in the level of demand for that product or service lead to reductions in the demand for labor of the kind traditionally associated

with layoffs: Especially if the firm is a price taker in its factor markets and cannot cut wages and other factor prices, then it will

respond to a decline in product demand by attempting to reduce inputs and lay off employees. There are a wide range of forces

and developments that might cause the demand for a firm’s final products to decline, such as general business cycle conditions,

changes in import penetration, or other industry and firm-specific effects. For the purposes of estimation, they operate by

reducing effective product demand and creating excess capacity.

          Factor Prices: Changes in the input mix within a given production function represent the other main cause of

reductions in the demand for labor, the kind associated with the concept of downsizing as I define it. Changes in the input mix,

within a given production function, represent perhaps the best-known conceptual illustration of developments within a given

production functions that would lead to reductions in the demand for labor: employers substitute other, cheaper factors for labor

and reduce their use of labor in the process. Wage rates and changes in the price of various factors that substitute for labor such
                                                                                                                                       9


as technology or even management practices that might economize on the use of labor are examples of these factor prices. (Of

course, changes in factor prices may also affect product prices and, in turn, product demand and the derived demand for labor.)

          Employment practices may affect the ability to substitute other factors for labor by changing the costs of laying off

employees. Severance payments and employer pension obligations may be the clearest examples. The presence of unions and

collective bargaining agreements can also restrict management’s ability to adjust employment. The use of part-time and

temporary employees, in contrast, may provide a substitute for downsizing by making it easier to adjust the total hours of work

by reducing contract work without cutting employees.

          Efficiency Parameter: The other explanation for downsizing relates to the general efficiency parameters in production

function models. They represent the technology, broadly defined, for combining labor and other factors into final products. The

typical assumption is that efficiency parameters are fixed in a given production function, although no doubt employers have some

choice of practices within a given production function (see below). Firms may have choices among production functions,

however, and essentially among different efficiency parameters.

          One basic choice firms have that no doubt affects their basic operation and their production function is business

strategy. The traditional concept of business strategy is competitive strategy, how a firm positions itself against competitors in a

given product market. The notion behind competitive strategy is that firms have choices and discretion in selecting niches within

markets. Porter’s (1985) framework describing the competitive strategy choices that firms have is the best-known. He argues

that each strategy choice has implications for the internal structure of the firm, including employment practices. These practices,

in turn, have implications for job security and downsizing.

          Practices and Incentives: The distinction between substitution of other factors for labor within a given production

functions and the shift to different production functions that use less labor is easier to establish in theory than in practice. For

example, whether the automation of a production operation represents only substitution of capital for labor within a production

function or a move to a new production function altogether may be difficult to distinguish empirically. Doing so would require,

among other things, estimates of the firm’s production frontier.

          It is possible to identify some changes in practices that are directly associated with shifts within or between production

functions. It may be easier to identify the different incentives that managers have to pursue more efficient operations that reduce

the use of labor and relate them to downsizing. The classic argument about the operation of modern, publicly held firms is that

managers pursue their own interests and do not necessarily maximize efficiency because their interests are not aligned with those

of the shareholders (Berle and Means 1932). Arrangements that align the interests of the managers who operate the companies

with those of the shareholders are thought to change the operation of firms in fundamental ways, such as reducing excess jobs

(Lichtenberg and Siegel 1992; Matsusaka 1993). Programs like stock options for managers are perhaps the most obvious
                                                                                                                                          10


attempts to create these incentives for managers to act like stockholders in their execution of managerial responsibilities,

changing the way firms operate.

          In a typical production function like the well-know Cobb-Douglas form where Y = AKδL 1-δδ , then the arguments

above about the practices that may affect overall efficiency of the function relate to the general efficiency parameter A. Changes

in the distribution parameter δ reflect general technological changes, as well as changes in employment practices that affect the

ability to substitute other factors for labor. The general cost of labor, and the employment practices that influence these costs,

relate directly to the incentives to substitute capital (as well as other factors) for labor. The cost of labor relates directly to the

incentives to substitute capital and other factors for labor. Changes in the demand for the output Y are the basis of the derived

demand for labor. Reductions in that demand are behind traditional capacity-related layoffs. Changes in factor prices, the

distribution parameter, and the efficiency parameter, in contrast, are associated with the more contemporary phenomenon of

downsizing as defined above.

           The analyses that follow examine the extent to which variables associated with the potential substitution of other

factors for labor and with the shift to more efficient production regimes explain the incidence of more general job reductions and

then the specific case of downsizing.

Data And Analyses

          The EQW National Employer Survey: In order to examine the causes of downsizing, we need data about changes in

employment, about product demand and related firm characteristics, and about management practices at the establishment level

where downsizing decisions take place, a combination that has been difficult to find in the same data set. A recent establishment-

level survey of employment practices conducted by the Bureau of the Census for the National Center on the Educational Quality

of the Workforce (EQW) contains such data and allows us to address some of the above questions.

          The EQW National Employers Survey was administered by the U.S. Bureau of the Census as a telephone survey in

August and September 1994 to a nationally representative sample of private establishments with more than 20 employees. It is

structured to provide information on all categories of incumbent workers, not just new hires or those in core occupations.

          The survey over sampled establishments in the manufacturing sector and establishments with more than 100

employees. Public sector employees, non-profit institutions, and corporate headquarters were excluded from the sample.

Although the survey excluded establishments with less than 20 employees (which represent approximately 85 percent of all

establishments in the U.S.) the sampling frame represents establishments that employ approximately 75 percent of all workers.

This is because while most establishments are small (fewer than five employees), most workers are employed in larger

establishments. The survey concentrates on those establishments with the most employees. The target respondent in the

manufacturing sector was the plant manager and, in the non-manufacturing sector, the local business site manager.
                                                                                                                                      11


            The sampling frame for the survey was the Bureau of the Census SSEL file, one of the most comprehensive and up to

date listings of establishments in the United States. Of the 4,633 eligible establishments who were contacted by Census, 1,275

refused to participate in the survey. This represents a 72 percent response rate, which is substantially higher than similar

establishment surveys.3 The usual reason given by employers about why they would not participate in the survey was that they

did not participate in voluntary surveys or were too busy to participate. Probit analysis conducted by Lynch and Black (1995) of

the characteristics of nonrespondents indicates that there was no significant pattern at the two digit industry level in the

likelihood of participating in the survey. The only differentiating characteristic of establishments less likely to participate was

that manufacturing establishments with more than 1000 employees, 0.1 percent of the sample, were less likely to do so. Of the

3,358 establishments who participated in the survey, not all respondents completed all parts of the survey by the interview cutoff

date of October 1, 1994. The final number of surveys in which all parts of the survey were completed was 1,621 establishments

in the manufacturing sector and 1,324 establishments in the non-manufacturing sector. This represents a 64 percent overall

'completed' survey response rate. For the analyses below, we restricted the sample to establishments reporting useable data for all

questions used in any of the regressions to ensure that differences across specifications or across different dependent variables do

not reflect changes in the sample.

            The questionnaire was designed to allow for multiple respondents. Establishments that kept financial information in a

separate office, such as corporate headquarters for multi-establishment enterprises, could have that information reported directly.

Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI) was used to administer each survey, which took approximately 28 minutes to

complete.

            The survey was repeated again in August of 1997 (NES II) and administered by the U.S. Bureau of the Census via

CATI. The sampling frame was again drawn from the SSEL, targeting business establishments throughout the United States and

excluding those with fewer than 20 employees. The survey over-sampled the nation's largest establishments and those in the

manufacturing sector. The sample for the NES II has three components including; an over sampling of states involved in

particular educational reform efforts (2,000 completed interviews in California, Kentucky, Michigan, Maryland, and

Pennsylvania); approximately 2,500 completed interviews that comprise a representative sample of the rest of the United States

(45 states plus the District of Columbia); and a longitudinal component of about 900 completed interviews with business

establishments that had participated in the initial National Employer Survey, the component of interest for this paper. A total of

5,465 establishments responded to NES II for a response rate of 78 percent. Nine hundred and fifteen responded to the

longitudinal component for a response rate of 88 percent. Excluding partial responses brought the sample down to 766 and a

completed response rate of 74 percent. The data became available for use at the Bureau of the Census in January 1998.

Variables and Specific Hypotheses
                                                                                                                                   12


          In contrast to prior studies that used the corporate entity as the unit of analysis, this study examines the establishment

where actual job reductions can more reliably be tallied and linked to practices. The NES survey measures downsizing with a

variable that reports the change in employment at each establishment from 1991 to 1994, from 1994 to 1997 in the NES II, and if

so, by what percentage. The Table 1-A presents first the average employment change by establishment (reported as well only for

establishments that were decreasing and then increasing employment) for two digit industry and size category and according to

their level of operating capacity for the period 1991-1994 for the full sample of observations. Table 1-B presents similar statistics

for those establishments that were operating at or above capacity in 1991-1994. Table 1-D repeats the descriptions presented in

1-A using data for the period 1994-1997, and Table 1-E repeats the descriptions offered in Table 1-B for establishments

operating at or below capacity in 1994 using employment change data for 1994-1997, again for the full sample.

                                         [Table 1 Here]

          Job loss and Downsizing Variables: The creation of the downsizing variable begins with the more general measure of

employment change over time, from 1991-1994 in the NES and from 1994-1997 in the NES II. This measure is then converted

into a measure of job reduction: 0= if employment was unchanged or increased; the percentage change if it decreased. The

variable that results contains more information than would a simple dummy variable for whether jobs declined. But the variable

is truncated at zero, suggesting the need for estimation techniques associated with limited variables such as Tobit procedures.

          The measure of downsizing needs to differentiate reductions in employment that are associated with declines in

business -- more traditional layoffs -- from those associated with production function changes that correspond to the notion of

downsizing. The NES 1994 includes a question that captures whether the establishment is experiencing a shortfall in demand. It

asks whether the establishment is operating below capacity (=1 if operating below capacity; 0 if at or above capacity).

Establishments operating below capacity may not have enough business to keep the current workforce employed and might be

expected to have layoffs of the traditional kind. Establishments that cut jobs even when they are at or above their normal

operating capacity, in contrast, fit the notion of downsizing defined as job cuts driven by the changes in the production function

in pursuit of improved efficiency.

          The most straightforward way to incorporate this measure of excess capacity into a measure of downsizing is to include

in the analysis of downsizing only those establishments that are operating at or above capacity. The middle column in Tables 1-

B (for 1991-1994) and 1-D (for 1994-1997) present statistics for those establishments that meet the definition set out here for

downsizing -- operating at or above capacity and have decreased employment during the period. Establishments that fit the

downsizing definition tend to be somewhat larger and less concentrated in manufacturing than the average establishment for the

1991-1994. These differences are less pronounced for the 1994-1997 period.

          It is also important to distinguish job reductions associated with outsourcing from downsizing. For example, an

employer who contracts out some function such as janitorial service to an outside vendor would experience a reduction in their
                                                                                                                                   13


total “employment” even though the total number of workers performing tasks for the enterprise has not changed. The variable

measuring the total value of goods and services other than labor used in production includes contracts for materials and services

that have been outsourced and should help control for these situations.4

          The decision to examine employment declines per se, as opposed to looking more generally at all changes in

employment, may seem obvious given the interest in understanding the factors driving downsizing and not job change more

generally. But to do so requires the assumption that the factors driving reductions in employment are different from those that

drive employment increases, that downsizing is more than just a special case of job change. If one thought that increases in jobs

were explained by the same factors as decreases, then it could be difficult to argue that downsizing merited examination on its

own. If, on the other hand, one believes that the factors driving downsizing are different from those behind job growth, then a

separate examination of downsizing is warranted. The suggestion that management practices, such as those that increase fixed

labor costs, have distinctive effects on downsizing suggests that the causes are different. There is also empirical evidence for that

view. Studies like Davis and Haltiwanger (1992), for example, find that the factors driving job loss in their sample are different

from those driving job creation. The analyses that follow test whether reductions in employment should be examined separately

from increases in jobs.

Independent Variables

          The independent variables used in the analyses are described in Table 2. The basic model predicting job loss and

downsizing includes control variables describing important aspects of establishments such as their size, age, and capital structure.

Including controls for industry presumably helps control for some of the industry-specific product market conditions that drive

demand-related job reductions, but excluding industry controls makes it possible to identify the effects of sources of downsizing

associated with variation across industries. Additional analyses, available on request, indicate that industry control variables are

jointly insignificant predictors of both employment losses and downsizing as defined here. In virtually all cases, they are

individually insignificant as well and have little substantive effect on any of the results examined by the hypotheses. They are

therefore not included in the analyses presented here.

                                                           [Table 2 Here]

          The analysis begins with variables that might capture factor price changes that create incentives to reduce the use of

labor. The first of these is compensation levels. An important issue with wages is the extent to which they are above market

levels, a calculation that requires standardizing for job requirements, worker characteristics, and local labor markets. The

alternative used in these data is simply to ask respondents whether they believe that their establishment’s compensation for each

of five different occupational groups is high or low (with on level the omitted category) compared to their competitors. The

associated share of the workforce accounted for by each occupation is included to differentiate the effect of having higher

compensated employees from greater use of more expensive employees such as managers.
                                                                                                                                     14


          The next set of variables examining possible substitution effects includes the presence of a union, associated with wage

premiums and work rule restrictions that raise labor costs. Union contracts may contain restrictions on layoffs that raise the costs

of downsizing (e.g., Allen 1986; Rees 1989) that may mitigate the incentive to cut jobs that the higher costs create. Severance

pay obviously raises the costs of downsizing (Lazear 1990) as do pensions on the assumption that at least some pensions are

defined benefit plans where the employer’s obligations to vested employees do not end when employment is terminated. (Even if

the pension plan is fully funded for vested employees, the employer nevertheless loses in this scenario by having to pay out the

pension benefits for the former employee while not having their productive work and at some point possibly replacing them with

a new hire whose pension must be funded. The data unfortunately do not provide information on the type of pension plan.) The

presence of temporary help may also reduce the extent of downsizing by providing a substitute for it: Employers can easily

reduce hours of work by cutting back on temps without having to downsize. Part-time workers may also be easier to cut than

other workers as they may have a more casual relationship with the employer and fewer severance-related benefits. But because

they count as part of the workforce in calculating downsizing in these data, they should be associated with increased use of

downsizing.

          The final set of variables relates more directly to changes in the efficiency of production functions or shifts to new

production functions that use less labor. Some management practices may reduce the need for employees. The variables

measuring efforts to restructure the firm include whether the number of levels in the organizational hierarchy or chart have

changed in the past three years. Flattening the organizational chart does not automatically imply a reduction in jobs, as positions

are typically retitled in the process. But they may well go together, and reducing the organizational chart may also proxy other

changes that eliminate jobs such as decentralizing authority. The percentage of employees in self-managed teams, for example,

reduces the need for supervisors and associated management support. Ideally, we would want to know when this practice was

introduced (information that is not available) because potential reductions in employment presumably occur as a result of their

introduction. There is some evidence that these practices are a relatively recent innovation, not likely to be in place before the

1990s, however (see Osterman 1994, e.g.). And it may take some time for their effects to play out even well after they are

originally introduced.

          Other variables help capture both the incentives and opportunities to shift toward more efficient operations using less

labor. Competitive strategy is measured by four questions representing Porter’s (1985) generic strategies: “competing on price,”

“competing on innovation,” and “competing by tailoring products to customer needs” with “competing on quality” as the omitted

variable. Each strategy choice, as noted above, has been associated with distinctive employment policies. Miles and Snow

(1978), among others, have articulated how different employment practices are associated with different business strategies, how

those strategies create continuing incentives to change employment levels. In particular, the “competing on quality” dimension

(the omitted category) is thought to require long-term, stable employment relationships first because secure, committed workers
                                                                                                                                     15


are more likely to care about quality and second because long tenure may be required to understand jobs and products well

enough to improve quality continuously. The “competing on price” dimension requires low cost, creating incentives to cut jobs

and costs where possible. “Competing on innovative products” and “tailoring products to specific customer needs, “ the other

two dimensions, are somewhat more ambiguous in their relationship with downsizing. They may demand flexibility that requires

firms to restructure, possibly shedding workers in the process. Innovative firms in particular may find better methods that use

less labor.

           Total quality management programs (TQM) involve employees and the entire organization in problem solving

exercises that are designed to reveal opportunities for improvements in quality and efficiency. Most of the formal TQM

programs require that employees be protected from any layoffs that new efficiencies might produce (see, e.g., Walton 1986) even

though the process may well reveal opportunities for cutting jobs. Whether the establishment has a research and development

(R&D) function and, if so, how important it is to the organization may indicate something about the level of continuing

technological innovation in the establishment. Innovation may suggest a greater use of new methods and efficiencies. But

establishments with important R&D priorities may also be ones where seeking cost efficiencies in production are less important

than other goals. The use of computers may proxy the extent to which the establishment is involved in substituting capital for

labor. Again, it would be useful to know about the introduction of computers as well as the level of use. As with the self-

managed team variable above, it may also reduce the need for labor not only after it was introduced but sometime thereafter.

           Variables measuring the compensation structure for managers and employees help capture the incentives for the

employers to secure improvements in efficiency that might lead to reductions in employment. Stock options, for example, creates

incentives for managers to act like stockholders, cutting costs -- including excess employees -- in order to increase the value of

their shares. Profit sharing may do something similar, especially for managers who have the ability to make decisions about the

use of labor. Profit sharing for other employee groups may be associated with participative programs that empower employees,

creating both the incentive and the ability to reduce jobs (possibly through attrition) in order to increase profits. Variables

measure whether or not the establishment offers stock options and profit sharing, the latter measured for each of the five

occupational categories. Here again, it would be interesting to have data on the introduction of these practices, information that

is unfortunately not available. But these practices clearly create incentives to seek efficiencies in the use of labor that continue as

long as they are in place.

           It may be helpful to outline the source and time period of the data that will be used in the analyses to help understand

both its strengths and its limitations:



VARIABLES                                 1994 NES – Year Measured                   1997 NES II – Year Measured

Job Loss                                  1991-1994                                  1994-1997
                                                                                                                                     16


Operating Capacity                        1994                                      Not available

Independent Variables and                 1993-‘94                                  1996-‘97

Performance Measures



          Job losses are measured over a period of time while the other variables, especially operating capacity, are measured

only at a point in time.5 It is arguably better to have the measure of operating capacity at the beginning of the period over which

job loss is measured rather than at the end. It is certainly possible that the characteristics measured by the independent variables

were the same at the end of the period measuring employment changes as at the beginning. But the causal relationship is

obviously easier to establish if the independent variables precede the dependent variables in time.6 Particularly with the capacity

measure, the ideal situation might be to have measures of capacity throughout the period and also to have measures of job

reductions in each period as well. Similar arguments could be made about relationships with the other independent variables in

that they should be measured at the beginning of the period, not the end, in order to assess their effects on subsequent job loss.

These arguments suggest that the best design is to relate 1994 practices as measured by the NES to reductions in employment and

downsizing from 1994-1997. Again, the downsizing variable is created by measuring job loss over that period and operating

capacity at the beginning of the period, in 1994. For comparison purposes and robustness, I also present the results of an

analysis using the 1994 independent variables to predict employment losses and downsizing from 1991-1994, recognizing the

conceptual limitations of that design.

          To summarize, I examine the factors associated with substitution within and shifts in the efficiency of production

functions for job losses and for downsizing where the latter is defined as job cuts not driven by shortfalls in product demand.

Because both job losses and downsizing are measured as reductions in employment, negative coefficients suggest direct

relationships with the dependent variables (increased job losses and downsizing) and positive coefficients suggest inverse

relationships. That is, negative coefficients imply that increases in the independent variables are associated with larger

downsizing or employment losses. Relationships indicated with + are ambiguous with respect to the predictions:

Job Losses and Downsizing = a + bi(Controls) - bj(Compensation and Occupational Shares) - b1(Union) + b2(Severance) -
b3(Pensions) + b4(Percent Temp) - b5(Percent Part-time) - b6(Management Levels Down) +b7(Management Levels Up) –
b8(Compete on Price) + b9(Compete on Innovation) + b10(Compete on Needs) -b11(TQM) + b12(R&D) – b13(Stock Options)
– b14(Profit Sharing) + e


          There are many variables in the estimating equation because several proxy the same concept. Fourteen of the variables,

for example, proxy different aspects of the same concept, the relative price of labor.

          Downsizing and Performance: These data are also ideal for examining the relationship between downsizing and

establishment performance. The ability to differentiate downsizing from layoffs associated with shortfalls in demand provides
                                                                                                                                        17


the opportunity to address the selection bias issue that nags all of the prior research on downsizing; are the firms that are laying

off workers doing so because they are experiencing shortfalls in demand that would eventually lead to financial declines?

          The conceptual issue behind studies of layoffs/downsizing and performance is straight-forward. First, are any

reductions in associated labor costs offset by increases in other costs? Second, are any net cost reductions offset by declines in

business and sales that might be caused by the cuts? If the answers are both “no, ” then performance improves. If they are both

“yes,” then performance declines. If they are mixed, then it is an empirical question. Profit data are useful for addressing this

issue but are not available here because these data come from establishments that are often a part of larger firms and not

accountable for profit and loss themselves. Total sales per employee and labor costs per employee may offer something

equivalent, especially after controlling for industry and establishment size. Labor costs per employee help answer whether labor

costs fall as a result of downsizing (controlling for other material costs), and sales per employee answer whether business suffers.

Job cuts when establishments are experiencing excess capacity should improve sales per employee because employers can easily

cut employees – and capacity – without affecting existing sales. The relationship with downsizing, where the establishment is

operating at or above capacity, is less obvious because these cuts must be designed very carefully to avoid affecting production

and sales. Labor costs per employee may fall with job losses and downsizing if more expensive labor is cut. But if less

senior/less expensive labor is cut first, as in seniority-based arrangements, then labor costs per employee may rise (if wages =

productivity, of course, then cost per unit of output do not necessarily rise even if costs per worker rise).7

          The relationships examined below include job loss and downsizing from 1994 to 1997 and financial performance in

1997. For comparison purposes, job loss and downsizing are also measured from 1991-1994 and related to performance in 1994

with the caveat noted above that the downsizing measure in this period will be flawed because the capacity measure used to

define it is available only at the end of the period (1994) and not the beginning.



Results

          Table 3 reports the results of Tobit estimation techniques for explaining job loss and downsizing. It uses the log value

of the dependent variables to address outliers in the values: Change in employment is expressed in percentage terms (I take the

log of the absolute value of the percentage change and then add the sign), and small establishments in particular sometimes have

big percentage increases in jobs. The log form of the variable results in better overall fit, including larger t-statistics, although

the qualitative findings are the same as compared to using the non-log form (results available on request). Again, because the

downsizing variable is measured as a reduction in employment, negative coefficients suggest direct relationships with job loss

and downsizing.

          Table 3 begins with the panel results comparing the relationship between 1994 variables and 1994-1997 job losses and

downsizing. The results are presented first for the variables associated with factor substitution and then adding the variables
                                                                                                                                 18


associated with changes in the efficiency parameter. The panel data begin with a sample of 900 and declines sharply as

establishments are deleted because of missing information (in order to keep the sample being used consistent across estimates)

and because the downsizing restriction removes establishments operating below capacity. Given that the initial survey was

skewed to manufacturing/ away from non-manufacturing, the remaining sample of non-manufacturing establishments is too small

to estimate the model outlined above separately for them (also for two of the compensation variables for manufacturing).

Analyses with subsets of the model indicate that the relationships are significantly different for the manufacturing and non-

manufacturing sample, making it inappropriate to pool them. The results for the 1994-1997 panel, therefore, are presented only

for manufacturing.

                                                   [Table 3 Here]

          In general, the results suggest that management practices broadly defined do help explain job loss and downsizing but

not always in the directions anticipated. Among the factor price variables, unionization serves to increase downsizing but

severance pay seems to as well, perhaps suggesting that companies introduce severance pay in anticipation of job cuts, possibly

under pressure from employees. The compensation and occupational share variables suggest no simple relationship with

downsizing: Establishments with higher paid technicians and clerical employees actually downsize less than do those with lower

paid production workers. Those with a higher proportion of managers downsize more and those with a higher proportion of

production workers downsize less, consistent with the effort to move toward a “flatter” organizational structure. The

compensation variables are jointly significant (F=2.15 Prob>F=.04) as are the occupational share variables (F=2.75 Prob>F=.02).

More use of temporary help does seem to provide something of a substitute for downsizing of permanent employees while greater

use of part-time workers has the opposite effect, as expected, because they count as part of the establishment’s workforce in

calculating job loss and downsizing numbers.

          In terms of the variables associated with shifts in efficiency parameters, reductions in management levels are associated

with increased downsizing. The strategy variables are jointly significant (F=2.25 P>F=.08), but the results are not as expected.

The strongest hypothesis is that companies competing on price would have a greater incentive to cut costs as compared to those

competing on quality. The results suggest a significant relationship in the opposite direction, that companies competing on price

actually downsize less than those competing on quality. Perhaps the former have already done their downsizing and

restructuring before the period measured here, but the result is otherwise a puzzle. Both TQM and the R&D variables were

associated with reduced downsizing. The profit sharing variables tend to be among the most statistically significant set of

variables although the signs on their relationships are not always consistent. Profit sharing for managers and technicians is

associated with increased downsizing, as expected, but profit sharing for supervisors is associated with reduced downsizing. One

of the choices that firms have is how far down the organization to extend profit sharing arrangements, and those that extend them
                                                                                                                                    19


to various groups may have unique circumstances driving them. Perhaps profit sharing is introduced to supervisors after

restructuring efforts take place. The profit sharing and stock option variables are jointly significant (F=2.43 Prob>F=.03).

          A comparison with the set of equations examining job losses, of which downsizing is a subset, finds some important

differences. Severance has the same relationship as with increased downsizing, but many of the other variables that predict

downsizing – Unions, TQM, R&D – are not significant. And the strategy results are also different: Competing on the basis of

customer needs is associated with greater downsizing than competing based on quality. Competing on price has the expected sign

but is insignificant. Together, the strategy variables are jointly significant (F=2.53 P>.06) as are the occupational employment

shares (F=2.94 P>.02). The compensation variables are not. Although it is difficult to draw conclusions from insignificant

variables, one of the most surprising findings in this equation is that the two variables measuring operating capacity, included as

control variables, are neither individually nor jointly significant predictors of overall job loss in the presence of these other

management practice variables.8 Excess operating capacity has been the traditional explanation for job cuts, and the fact that it

adds little to our understanding of job loss in this period is interesting.

          Despite the fact that the relationships with several of the independent variables appear to be different in the job loss and

the downsizing equations, the two equations overall are not significantly different.9 The factors that explain why establishments

operating at or above capacity cut jobs appear similar to those that drive establishments with excess capacity to cut jobs. It may

be tempting to conclude that downsizing as defined here is in fact no different than more traditional layoffs driven by excess

demand. But it is important to remember the surprising finding that excess capacity does not predict reductions in jobs in this

period 1994-1997. Another way to think about these results, then, is that, at least in this period, all job reductions are like

downsizings in that they are better explained by management practices than excess operating capacity.

          The models estimating job loss are significantly different than models estimating increases in employment (F=24.65

P>F=.0000 for the full model and F=25.48 P>F=.0000 for the factor price model using the manufacturing sample on 1994-1997

data; F=12.33 P>F=.0000 and F=9.8 P>F=.0000 for the full and factor price models, respectively, and the non-manufacturing

sample). 10 Job losses do seem to be explained by different characteristics than job increases, suggesting that it is appropriate to

examine them separately.

          A comparison of the results for downsizing from 1991-1994 presented in Table 2 suggests roughly similar results to

those using the 1994-1997 data, despite the caveats about a temporal mismatch between the independent and dependent

variables. The larger sample size these data offer makes it possible to examine relationships for manufacturing and non-

manufacturing establishments separately. They suggest for manufacturing, less downsizing where supervisors are higher paid

and where production workers are low paid, more downsizing where technicians and clerical workers are higher paid and where

there are proportionately more managers. Unions increase downsizing as do reductions in management levels while the presence

of an R&D operation reduces it. In this sample, the strategy variable competing on innovation is associated with greater
                                                                                                                                    20


downsizing than competing on quality. The relationships in non-manufacturing are not as strong but are broadly consistent.

Two that are now significant are pensions, which are associated with reduced downsizing in non-manufacturing, and stock

ownership, which is associated with increased downsizing. As with the 1994-1997 results, the equations estimating relationships

with job losses are significantly different from those estimating relationships with increases in employment (F=13.03 P>F=.0000

for manufacturing and F=11.15 P>F=.0000 for non-manufacturing using the full model). But, again, the overall relationships

between the models estimating job loss and downsizing are not significantly different.

          Job Losses, Downsizing and Performance: Equations designed to examine the effects of downsizing on firm

performance should look much like other production function equations: Controls for industry, for capital structure, for the

quality of labor in the establishment (education levels, average compensation, occupational mixes). The model used includes

further controls -- union status, computer use, part-time and temporary help measures described above, and the capacity variables

to control further for the initial financial condition of the establishments.

          Table 4 summarizes the relevant results for both job loss and downsizing for 1991-1994 on performance in 1994 and

1994-1997 on performance in 1997. (The complete results are available on request.) The 1994 survey asked about labor costs as

a percentage of total costs, which were then converted into a measure of labor costs per employee.11 Results for 1994 are

therefore presented both for labor costs as a percentage of total costs, the original variable, and for the labor cost per worker

calculation. The small sample size in the panel noted above made it impossible to examine the relationship with sales per

employee with the 1997 data for non-manufacturing establishments. Median regression was used to address the issue of outliers

with the dependent variables, some of which is driven by the employment data that forms their denominators.

                                                                   Table 4 Here

          The model includes the job loss and downsize variables and the operating capacity variable, which is used to generate

the downsize variable, in the same equation. The way to interpret the downsizing variable, therefore, is the marginal effect of

downsizing given job loss. Estimating the average effects for both job loss and downsizing requires including the coefficient for

operating capacity because all the job loss observations, controlling for downsizing, by definition are operating below capacity

while all the downsizing observations, controlling for job loss, are operating at or above capacity. Again, job loss and

downsizing are expressed in percentage terms (i.e., larger job losses and downsizing equal more negative values on the

dependent variables). Positive coefficients, therefore, imply that bigger job losses and downsizing are associated with decreased

sales per employee and decreased labor costs per worker.

          The most reliable data are for the 1994-1997 changes on 1997 performance. Those results indicate that job loss is

associated with increased sales per worker, as one might expect where establishments have excess capacity that can be cut and

still meet current demand. The marginal effect of downsizing given those cuts, however, is to reduce sales per employee. No

doubt it is difficult to cut employees when there is no slack capacity and not suffer shortfalls in operations. The 1991-1994
                                                                                                                                    21


changes on 1994 performance suggest similar pattern for sales per employee and are stronger for non-manufacturing, perhaps

because labor is more directly tied to performance outcomes in the service sector where labor is the dominant factor. The results

for the labor cost measures raise labor costs for job losses but lower them for downsizing. The 1994-1997 non-manufacturing

results for labor costs per employee are the important exception in that they reverse the pattern – positive relations with job loss

and negative with downsizing. (Note that raising sales per employee is a good outcome while raising labor costs per employee is

a bad outcome.)

          I examined other relationships between job losses, downsizing, and performance as well. The relationship between

1991-1994 job loss and downsizing and performance measures in 1997 explores whether the effects persist after a three-year lag.

While the signs of the coefficients are in the same direction as those reported above -- negative relationships between sales per

worker and job loss (increasing performance) and positive between sales per worker and downsizing (decreasing performance);

negative between labor costs per worker and job loss (decreasing performance) and positive between labor costs and downsizing

(increasing performance), none of the relationships are significant. (The relationships could not be estimated for non-

manufacturing because of small sample sizes and missing observations.) Job losses and downsizing between 1991 and 1994 can

also be related to the change in performance measures between 1994 and 1997. These results, again only for manufacturing,

come closer to acceptable significance levels, especially for the downsizing variable. They suggest negative relationships

between job loss and change in sales (-.03 t=1.23) and positive between downsizing and change in sales (.005 t=1.24). The

relationship with change in labor costs per employee is similar, negative for job loss (-.002 t=.82) and positive for downsizing

(.007 t=1.45). The full results are available on request.12

          What is more difficult to tell from these results is the combined, net effect of the sales per employee and labor cost per

employee measures. Any calculations using these results are ambiguous at best because no single equation has significant

coefficients for both of the dependent variables. Assuming that problem away for the moment, the signs of the coefficients alone

could suggest clear conclusions even when the actual coefficients are in doubt. For example, if one assumes that the signs on the

coefficients are correct, then the results for downsizing in 1997 and job loss for non-manufacturing in 1994 are unambiguous:

Sales per employee are falling while labor costs per employee are rising, leading to a clear reduction in performance. The other

results are more ambiguous. One conclusion from these overall results is sales per worker and labor costs per employee tend to

move in opposite directions. Another is that estimating the effects of practices like downsizing depends very much on the

measures one chooses. An accurate picture may require multiple measures.

Conclusions

          The analyses above examine issues associated with job loss and downsizing of an establishment’s workforce. Excess

operating capacity associated with shortfalls in demand has been seen as the main cause of layoffs. What is different about

downsizing is the perception that companies are cutting jobs even when they are not experiencing shortfalls in product demand.
                                                                                                                                      22


While a few studies explore the growth and decline of firms and many examine the financial effects of job reductions, none have

examined the causes of downsizing.

          A brief summary of the results suggests that management practices that are within the control of the establishment have

important relationships with both job losses and downsizing. Variables associated with factor prices, such as compensation

levels, unions, and severance pay, were associated with downsizing as were other variables that proxied incentives to pursue

more efficient production functions, such as business strategy and profit sharing. Management and employment practices seem

predictive of both overall job loss and downsizing. Several of the results were the reverse of the expected relationship, however.

One explanation for this is the possibility of reverse causation, that firms adjust some practices such as severance pay in

anticipation of forthcoming job cuts.

          Among the most interesting observation are those that stem from the “non-results,” that the factors explaining

downsizing are not as a group significantly different from those that explain overall job losses and that having excess operating

capacity at the establishment is not related to job losses in the presence of these management practice variables. At least in the

mid-1990s when these data were collected, job reduction decisions seem not to be dominated by factors associated with shortfalls

in demand. Whether this situation represents something distinct about that period, one of economic expansion when perhaps the

level of excess capacity in establishments was too small to drive job cuts, or something more fundamental is an question for

further research.

          In terms of the effects of downsizing on establishment performance, the analyses here are distinct from prior studies in

their focus on establishments and particularly in their ability to distinguish establishments that were in trouble before their job

cuts. The results are broadly consistent with the common-sense view that job cuts make more sense when establishments

experience excess capacity than when they do not. Even in such situations, however, the benefits of improvements in sales per

employee must overcome increases in labor costs per employee. Downsizing, defined as job cuts when operating at or above

capacity, appears to hurt sales per employee. In the context of this model, it is clearer why downsizing may hurt performance,

because it is difficult to cut without doing damage to organizational capabilities when there is no slack to cut. In most cases,

labor costs per employee move in the opposite direction from changes in sales per employee: When job cuts make sales per

employee rise, so do labor costs per employee, and when the former fall, so do the latter. This relationship may mitigate some of

the gains from cutting employees as well as the losses and lead to an overall moderating effect in relations with performance

outcomes.
                                                                                                                             23




References



Abowd, John M., George T. Milkovich, and John M. Hannon. “The Effects of Human Resource Management Decisions on

Shareholder Value.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43(1990): 203-236.



Allen, Stephen. “Union Work Rules and Efficiency in the Building Trades.” Journal of Labor Economics,4(1986): 212-242.



American Management Association. 1994 AMA Survey on Downsizing: Summary of Key Findings. New York: American

Management Association, 1994.



Baily, Martin Neil, Eric J. Bartelsman, and John Haltiwanger. “Downsizing and Productivity Growth: Myth or Reality?” Small

Business Economics, Vol. 8 No. 4 August (1996): 259-278.



Berle, A.A, and Gardener Means. The Modern Corporation. New York: MacMillan, 1932.



Blackwell, David, Wayne W. Marr, and Michael F. Spivey. Plant Closing Decisions and the Market Value of the Firm. Journal

of Financial Economics, 26 no.2 (1990): 277-288.



Boisjoly, Johanne, Greg J. Duncan, and Timothy Smeeding. “The Shifting Incidence of Involuntary Job Losses from 1968 to

1992.” Industrial Relations, 37 no. 2 (1998): 207-231.



Brockner, Joel. “Managing the Effects of Layoffs on Survivors.” California Management Review, 34 (1992): 9-28.



Cameron, Kim. “Strategies for Successful Organizational Downsizing.” Human Resource Management, 3 (1994): 189-211.



Cappelli, Peter. “Examining Managerial Displacement.” Academy of Management Journal, 35 (1992): 203-217.



Cappelli, Peter, Laurie Bassi, Harry C. Katz, David Knoke, Paul Osterman, and Michael Useem. Change at Work. New York:

Oxford University Press, 1997.
                                                                                                                            24


Cascio, Wayne F. “Downsizing: What Do We Know, What Have We Learned?” Academy of Management Executive, 7(1993):

95-104.



Cascio, Wayne F., Clifford E. Young, and James R. Morris. “Financial Consequences of Employment-Change Decisions in

Major U.S. Corporations.” Academy of Management Journal, 40(1997): 1175-1189.



Caves, Richard E. and Matthew B. Kreps. “ ‘Fat’: The Displacement of Nonproduction Workers from U.S. Manufacturing

Industries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 2 (1993):227-273.



The Conference Board. HR Executive Review: Implementing the New Employment Compact, 4 no.4 (1997).



Corporate Leadership Council. Perfecting Labor Markets: Redefining the Social Contract at the World's High Performance

Corporations. Washington, D.C.: The Advisory Board, 1995.



Davis, S. and John Haltiwanger. “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation.” Quarterly Journal

of Economics, 107 (1992): 819-863.



Dial, Jay and Kevin Murphy. “Incentives, Downsizing, and Value Creation at General Dynamics.” Journal of Financial

Economics, 37 (1995): 261-314.



DeMeuse, Kenneth P., Paul Vanderheiden, and Thomas J. Bergmann. “Announced Layoffs: Their Effect on Corporate Financial

Performance.” Human Resource Management, 33 (1994): 509-530.



Ehrbar, Al. “Price of Progress: Re-engineering Gives Firms New Efficiency, Workers the Pink Slip,” Wall Street Journal, March

16, 1993, A1.



EQW/National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce. First Findings: Results of the National Employer Survey.

Philadelphia, EQW, 1994.



Farber, Henry S. “The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States, 1981-1993.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:

Microeconomics (1997).
                                                                                                                            25




Farber, Henry S. “Has the Rate of Job Loss Increased in the Nineties?” Princeton University: Industrial Relations Section

Working Paper #394, 1998



Gombola, Michael J. and George P. Tsetsekos “Plant Closings for Financially Weak and Financially Strong Firms.” Quarterly

Journal of Business and Economics, 31 no.3 (1992): 69-83.



Gorlin, Harriet. Issues in Human Resource Management. New York: The Conference Board, 1985.



Gunderson, Morley, Anil Verma, and Savita Verma.”Impact of Layoff Announcements on the Market Value of the Firm.”

Relations Industrielles/Industrial Relations, Spring 52 no.2 (1997): 364-381.



Gustman, Alan, Olivia S. Mitchell and Thomas L. Steinmeyer. “Retirement Measures in the Health and Retirement Survey,”

Journal of Human Resources, 30 (1995): 557-583.



Hallock, Kevin F. “Layoffs, Top Executive Pay, and Firm Performance.” American Economic Review, September , 88 No.4

(1998): 711-723.



Hamermesh, Daniel S. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.



Hammer, Michael and James Champy. Reengineering the Corporation. New York: Harper Business, 1993.



Huselid, Mark A. and Brian E. Becker. “Methodological Issues in Cross-Sectional and Panel Estimates of the Human Resource-

Firm Performance Link.” Industrial Relations, 35 (1996): 400-422.



Iqbal, Zahid and Shekar Shetty. “Layoffs, Stock Price, and Financial Condition of the Firm.” Journal of Applied Business

Research, 11 (1995): 67-72.



Jaeger, David A. and Ann Huff Stevens. “Is Job Stability in the United States Falling? Reconciling Trends in the Current

Population Survey and Panel Study of Income Dynamics.” Paper presented at the Russell Sage Foundation Conference on Job

Security and Job Stability, January 1998.
                                                                                                                            26




Johnson, Arlene A. and Fabian Linden. Availability of a Quality Work Force. New York: The Conference Board, 1992.



Kalleberg, Arne L., David Knoke, Peter V. Marsden, and Joe L. Spath. Organizations in America: A Portrait of Their Structures

and Human Resources Practices. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 1996.



Kalra, Rajiv, Glenn V. Henderson, Jr., and Michael C. Walker. Share Price Reaction to Plant-Closing Announcements. Journal

of Economics and Business, December, 46 no. 5 (1994): 381-395.



Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. Men and Women of the Corporation. New York: Basic Books, 1977.



Kletzer, Lori. “Job Displacement: What Do We Know, What Should We Know?” Journal of Economic Perspectives (1997).



Lazear, Edward. Job Security Provisions and Employment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1989): 699-726.



Levering, Robert and Milton Moskowitz. The 100 Best Companies to Work for in America. New York: Doubleday, 1993.



Lichtenberg, Frank R. and Daniel Siegel. “Leveraged Buyouts” in F.R. Lichtenberg (ed.) Corporate Takeovers and Productivity,

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.



Lynch, Lisa and Black, Susan. Beyond the incidence of training: Evidence from the National Employer

Survey, National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce, University of Pennsylvania,

Working Paper, 1996.



Matsusaka, J.G. “Target Profits and Managerial Discipline During the Conglomerate Merger Wave,” The Journal of Industrial

Economics, 41 (1993): 179-189.



McGuckin, Robert H., Sang V. Nguyen, and Arnold P. Reznek. “The Impact of Ownership Change on Employment, Wages, and

Labor Productivity in U.S. Manufacturing, 1977-1987.” U.S. Bureau of the Census, Center for Economic Studies, CES 95-8,

April 1995.
                                                                                                                           27


Medoff, Janes. Middle-Aged and Out of Work: Growing Unemployment Due to Job Loss Among Middle-Aged Americans.

Washington, D.C.: National Study Center, 1993.



Miles, Raymond E., and Snow, Charles C. Organizational Strategy, Structure, and Process. New York: McGraw Hill, 1978.



Mother Jones, July 17, 1997, p.5.



Neumark, David, Daniel Polsky, and Daniel Hansen. “Has Job Stability Declined Yet? New Evidence for the 1990s.” Paper

Presented at the 1998 Russell Sage Conference on Job Security and Job Stability, October 1998 (Revised).



Osterman, Paul. “How Common is Workplace Transformation, and How Can we Explain Who Does It?” Industrial and Labor

Relations Review, 47(1994): 173-188.



Polivka, Anne. “Changes in the Employment Relationship and Long-Term Employment: Discussion.” Proceedings of the 50th

Annual Meeting. Madison, WI: Industrial Relations Research Association, 1998, 107-109.



Polsky, Daniel. “Changes in the Consequences of Job Separations in the United States.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,

52(1999).



Porter, Michael E. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. New York: The Free Press, 1985.



Rees, Albert. The Economics of Trade Unions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.



*Useem, Michael. Investor Capitalism: How Money Managers are Changing the face of Corporate America, New York: Basic

Books, 1996.



Valletta, Robert G. “Has Job Security in the U.S. Declined?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Weekly Letter, Number 96-

07, February 16, 1996.



Walton, M. The Deming Management Method. New York: Perigee Books, 1986.
                                                                                                                    28


Worrell, Dan L., Wallace N. Davidson III., and Varinder M. Sharma. “Layoff Announcements and Stockholder Wealth.”

Academy of Management Journal, 43 (1991): 662-678.
                                                                                                                        29


Footnotes




1
    For discussion of the downsizing phenomenon, see, e.g., Cascio (1993) and Cappelli et al. (1997).
2
    To illustrate ways in which definitions may not be applied consistently, reductions in jobs that are achieved

through attrition may count as downsizing in one firm while in another downsizing may count only terminations.

Some firms may count as downsizing jobs that have been eliminated even if the affected workers were

redeployed in other, growing operations while others may define it as reductions in total employment.
3
    For example, among the best-known employer surveys, Mark Huselid’s (Huselid and Becker 1996) achieved

about a one-third response rate while Osterman’s (1994) survey and the National Organizational Survey (Kalleberg

et al. 1996) both had about 60 percent response rates.
4
    One of the difficulties with this measure is knowing whether employers include all contracts in this measure,

especially temporary help and leased workers. The Bureau of the Census is undertaking separate surveys to

estimate the use of such workers.


5
    A related concern is whether the time period measured here is adequate to capture the true relationship with

downsizing. As noted above, it would be ideal to know when practices were introduced and then measure the

downsizing immediately after. It might be, for example, that some of these practices led to downsizing immediately

after they were introduced so that by the time the NES II survey measures job reductions, most have already

occurred. Such effects would cause an underestimate of the true relationship between practices and downsizing. On

the other hand, as noted above, most of the practices being examined create incentives for efficiency-based job

reductions that continue as long as the practices are in effect, even though diminishing returns may eventually reduce

the opportunities for continuing reductions.



6
    It is certainly possible that the causation with these employment practices might be reversed. For example, firms

that believe that they will be laying off employees might be less inclined to introduce severance plans because such

plans would end up costing them a great deal. Even in this example, however, it is the employers’ anticipation of the
                                                                                                                           30



fact that severance payments will restrict the ability to lay off employees that drives firms to adjust their use of such

plans.



7
    I am indebted to David Neumark for suggesting the importance of the unit cost measure.
8
  These capacity variables help control for the establishment’s situation when the period begins – 1994. They are not
included as controls in the 1991-1994 analysis because in that context they would be representing the situation at the
end of the period after the job cuts had occurred, not at the beginning.
9
 The job loss equations were fully interacted with a variable measuring whether the establishment is at or above
operating capacity, and the F-tests of the resulting interaction terms were insignificant for the full model, the factor
price variables alone, and for alternative specifications as well.
10
  There are several ways to test whether equations are significantly different. The one used here is to interact the at
and above capacity measure with the other variables in the model and test whether that variable and its interactions
are jointly significant.
11
  The calculation is done by taking the percentage of labor in total operating costs, applying it to total operating
costs other than labor (materials and capital investment), and then dividing by one minus the percentage of labor in
total operating costs. This process no doubt compounds a series of measurement errors, and the variable that results
should be examined with caution.
12
   The other potential relationship to examine is with changes in practices between 1994 and 1997 and downsizing
between 1994 and 1997. Such an analysis offers the possibility of examining changes in practices, but it also poses
considerable problems. Specifically, not all of the independent variables are available in both periods, some (such as
strategy) are not easily expressed as changes, and the number of establishments in the panel that changed practices is
relatively small.
