                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SAVINGS AND TIlE TERMS OF TRADE
                            UNDER BORROWING CONSTRAINTS


                                       Pierre-Richard Agenor
                                         Joshua Aizenman


                                         Working Paper 7743
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7743



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2000




Some of the ideas developed in this paper originate from background work on the 1999 Global Economic
Prospects Report of the World Bank. We would like to thank, without implication, Mustapha Nabli, William
Shaw, and Robert Keyfitz for useful discussions and Nihal Bayaktar for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of the Bank. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the World Bank.

  2000 by Pierre-Richard Agenor and Joshua Aizenman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
Savings and the Terms of Trade Under Borrowing Constraints
Pierre-Richard Agenor and Joshua Aizenman
NBER Working Paper No. 7743
June 2000
JELNo. D91, F41, 055


                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper examines the extent to which permanent terms-of-trade shocks have an
asymmetric effect on private savings. The first part uses a simple three-period model to show that,
if households expect to face binding borrowing constraints in bad states of nature, savings rates will
respond asymmetrically to favorable movements in the permanent component of the terms of
trade—in contrast to what conventional consumption-smoothing models would predict. The second
part tests for the existence of asymmetric effects of terms-of-trade disturbances using an econometric
model that controls for various standard determinants of private savings. The results, based on panel
data
for non-oil commodity exporters of sub-Saharan Africa for the period 19 80-96, indicate that
increases in the permanent component of the terms of trade (measured using three alternative
filtering techniques) tend indeed be associated with higher rates of private savings.




Pierre-Richard Agenor                                         Joshua Aizenman
The World Bank                                                Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20433                                          Dartmouth College
                                                              Hanover, NT-I 03755
                                                              and NBER
                                                              j .aizenman@dartmouth.edu
1 Introduction
It is well recognized that the macroeconomic effects of terms-of-trade shocks
can be very significant in developing countries. As documented, for instance,
by Agenor, McDermott and Prasad (1998), terms-of-trade disturbances are
highly correlated with output fluctuations and can be a major source of
aggregate economic instability. They also tend to have a large impact on
savings (both private and public) in developing economies, in part because
they tend to be associated with large income effects.
    Terms-of-trade shocks are often induced by sharp changes in world com-
modity prices. It is well recognized that such changes tend to be asymmetric:
positive shocks are more common than negative ones in the sense that the
typical pattern is often one of long troughs and sharp peaks (Collier and Gun-
rung (1994)). One reason for this, as formally analyzed in a stock-holding
model with intertemporal arbitrage by Deaton and Laroque (1992), is the
asymmetry involved in storage: stocks cannot be negative and a stock-out
will give rise to sharp movements in prices. As a result, movements in the
terms of trade of individual countries have also tended to be asymmetric.
    The macroeconomic implications of asymmetric terms-of-trade shocks
have received limited attention in open-economy macroeconomics, despite
the fact that many economists would agree with the view that the welfare loss
from a slump may be different (possibly larger) than the gain from a boom.
A key channel through which asymmetric effects can operate is through the
existence of borrowing constraints on world financial markets. Specifically,
consumers from poor countries may be able to deposit their windfall savings
on the international capital market in good times, but they may be unable to
borrow in bad times because of collateral problems or a high risk of default.
As emphasized by Deaton (1992), this asyrmnetry can create an incentive for
precautionary saving, because in the case of a negative shock consumption
can be smoothed only by running down previously accumulated assets. At
the same time, however, there is relative scant empirical evidence on potential
asymmetric effects of terms-of-trade shocks on private savings. This paper
attempts to ifil this void by using cross-section econometric regressions for a
group of countries for which movements in the terms of trade have tradition-
ally represented a key source of macroeconomic shocks, non-oil exporters of
sub-Saharan Africa. This group of countries provides indeed an interesting
sample for assessing the possibility that terms-of-trade shocks may exert an
asymmetric effect on private savings. Many of these countries derive a large

                                      2
share of their export earnings from primary commodities. More specifically,
primary commodities account on average for about three-fourths of total
exports in most of them, and the share of conmindities in some countries' ex-
ports exceeds 90 percent (see World Bank (2000, Chapter 4)). Fluctuations
in the terms of trade have also represented a major source of macroeconomic
volatility; Figure 1 for instance shows the correlation between the volatility
of real GDP and the volatility of the terms of trade (both weighted and Un-
weighted, as defined in Appendix B) for all the countries in the sample over
the estimation period. The figure does suggest a positive association between
these variables. In addition, there is also some anecdotal evidence that ac-
cess to world capital markets by many of these countries (which, to begin
with, are relatively closed financially) tends to be asymmetric; it is often in
"good times" (periods characterized in particular by high commodity prices
and improvements in the terms of trade that private capital tends to flow to
low-income countries (see World Bank (1999, Chapter 2)).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses
analytical issues. It reviews briefly the conventional, consumption-smoothing
approach to assessing the effects of terms-of-trade shocks on savings, and
considers the role of borrowing constraints in explaining an asymmetric con-
sumption and saving response by private agents to this type of shocks. It
elaborates, in particular, on the role of expected borrowing constraints in bad
states of nature. Section III discusses the specification of the econometric
model used to assess the existence of an asymmetric effect of terms-of-trade
movements and describes the estimation technique. Section IV presents the
empirical results, based on cross-sectional data covering the period 1980-96
for non-oil exporters of sub-Saharan Africa. The last section summarizes
the results, identifies some other factors that may explain an asymmetric
response to terms-of-trade shocks, and discusses some possible extensions of
the analysis.


2 Analytical Issues
Early contributions to the analysis of the effect of terms-of-trade shocks on
saving include those of Harberger (1950) and Laursen and Meltzer (1950).
The Harberger-Laursen-Meltzer (ITLM) effect predicts a positive relationship
between (transitory) changes in the terms of trade and saving, as a result


                                      3
of consumption smoothing) An adverse transitory movement in the terms
of trade, for instance, leads to a decrease in a country's current level of in-
come that is larger than the decrease in its permanent income. Consumption
smoothing behavior leads therefore to a fall in domestic saving. On the con-
trary, a permanent deterioration in the terms of trade, to the extent that it
leads to a concomitant reduction in both current and permanent income, will
have no effect on saving. Evidence supporting this view has been provided
in a variety of studies. Bevan, Collier and Gunning (1993), for instance, ana-
lyzed the impact of the 1976-77 coffee boom (caused by a frost in Brazil) on
rural saving in Kenya. They found that proceeds from this boom were fully
passed on to farmers, and that about 60 percent of the income windfall was
saved.2
    The possibility of asymmetric effects of terms-of-trade shocks has impor-
tant implications for the consumption smoothing approach and the behavior
of savings rates in the presence of borrowing constraints. To explore some
of these implications, we consider a three-period model in which consumers
(or households) are identical and live for three periods. Utility is taken to
be quadratic, and both the rate of time preference and the real interest rate
are set to zero.3 Specifically, total utility over the lifespan of the typical
    'The initial formulation by Harberger (1950) and Laursen and Meltzer (1950) relied
on a Keneysian-type open economy framework. It was later extended to an intertemporal
setting, notably by Obstfeld (1982), and Svensson and Razin (1983), and snbsequently
Edwards (1989) and Gavin (1990); see also Obstfeld and Rogoff (1997). These contribu-
tions also highlighted the distinction between permanent and transitory shocks, and the
importance of an endogenous rate of time preference for movements in the terms of trade
to generate transitory movements in savings.
    2As discussed for instance by Ostry and Reinhart (1992) and McDermott and Cashin
(1998), if households consume both tradables and nontradables, there will be both in-
tratemporal and inter-temporal substitution effects associated with a terms-of-trade shock;
these effects may be large enough to offset the conventional effect associated with consump-
tion smoothing considerations. However, Ogaki, Ostry and Reinhart (1996) found that in
low-income countries (where levels of income are near the subsistence level) both intratem-
poral and intertemporal substitution effects have a relatively limited impact on savings;
overall, their empirical results supported the view that transitory adverse movements in
the terms of trade in these countries tend to lead to a reduction in private saving—as
predicted by the Harberger-Laursen-Metlzer effect.
   3Life-cycle models with borrowing constraints include Hubbard and Judd (1986) and
Zeldes (1989). In both of these models, liquidity constraints are imposed exogenously in
the form of simple non-negative wealth constraints.




                                            4
household, V, is given by
                      V = u(c0, c1) + u(ci, c2) + u(c2, c3),                (1)

where
                  u(Ch_1,Ch) = ch — O.5ç5c     —
                                                   O.5r(ch   —
                                                                 Ch_1)2,    (2)
where Ch is consumption in period h and , r 0. We assume that is
small enough to ensure that in the relevant region, the marginal utility of
consumption is positive. Equation (2) allows for the presence of habit for-
mation — changes in the current level of consumption relative to the previous
level entails disutility, proportional to r. We assume that prior to period 1,
both income and consumption are stable, and were expected to remain such.
Hence, the initial level of assets at period 1 is zero, and consumption is equal
to income, y:
                                  Yo =   c0   = 1.
    Suppose now that, at the beginning of period 1, there is a change in the
underlying stochastic process of income. First, a permanent shock increases
income by E. Second, an adverse transitory shock (induced, for instance, by
an adverse movement in the terms of trade) may occur in the second period
with probability q, reducing second-period income by 6. Hence, the revised
income path is anticipated to be

             I    y=1+       h=1,2,3                    withprob. 1—q
                                                                            (3)
             I.   m=ya=l+E, y2=1+e—6 withprob. q
    A convenient feature of the model described by equations (1) and (2) is
that, in the absence of habit formation (r = 0), and with a well-functioning
capital market, the consumer would behave according to the permanent in-
come hypothesis. That is, if indeed consumers face an adverse transitory
shock in period 2, they will borrow in the second period in order to smooth
their consumption path. A key issue, however, is whether borrowing is at all
feasible. In what follow we evaluate the impact of credit constraints on sav-
ings by contrasting two scenarios: the first assumes that consumers have full
access to the international capital market, whereas the second considers the
case where consumers are unable to borrow, due for instance to perceptions
of country sovereign risk.


                                         5
   With full access to the capital market, consumers borrow in period 2 in
bad states of nature and repay fully in period 3. The representative con-
sumer's problem is thus, with x = 1 + e:

           I u(1;x — s)
    max
     22 q[u(xsi;x_6+si—4)+u(x_S+s1_4;x+4)].
           I            H         H    H
                                            (4)
where   4 (respectively 4') denotes second-period savings if the adverse in-
come shock is indeed positive (zero).
    The first-order conditions of the above problem provide three linear equa-
tions in s1, 44k, from which we can infer that

                       — Sq(1   + 30)(1 + 0) + E8(2 + 50)
                                                                           (5)
                                   3+140(1+8)
where 0 =      measures the relative importance of habit formation versus
the diminishing marginal utility of consumption. Note that

                                           =
                                               ,                           (6)


                                     = 3c5q + SE '                        (7)
                                               14
   Equation (6) corresponds to the case where habit formation is absent
   = 0). In these circumstances, savings in period 1 is determined simply
by the difference between endowment, given by x = 1 + e, and permanent
income, given by
                      yP= x+(x—qö)+x
                               3     =x—-i
in line with the prediction of the permanent income hypothesis. Consumption
in the first period will increase by the permanent increase in income, minus
the expected value of the transitory shock, smoothed over the 3 periods of
life. Equation (7) corresponds to the other extreme, where adjustment of
consumption is extremely costly (or the marginal utility is constant). Note
that habit formation implies that a fraction of the permanent shock is saved
in the first period, in order to smooth the cost of adjustment across time.



                                       6
Applying the first-order conditions we infer that, in the absence of habit
formation, second-period savings is4

                                 L      —       ö(3—q)
                                 2o_c             6                              (8)
   Equation (8) indicates that if an adverse transitory shock does indeed re-
duce second-period income, agents will borrow to smooth their consumption.
   In what follows, we assume that the habit formation parameter and
the permanent shock are not large enough relative to the transitory shock
so that 4 < 0. Suppose, however, that borrowing is not feasible, due (as
argued earlier) to country risk considerations. In these circumstances, the
maximization problem of the representative household becomes

            u(1;x —
                s)
    inaxj q[u(x—s1;x—8--si)--uç—5+six)]                           H       H
                                                                                 (9)
          (1—q)[u(xsi;x+sj —s2 )+u(x+s1                               ;x+s2)]
    Solving this problem, we can infer that the presence of borrowing con-
straints modifies first-period savings to
               -   —             Sq(1+38)+eO
               S1—                                            2 +5).            (10)
                       (2+69)(2+50)_(l_q)(l+40)2
   Hence,   in the absence of habit formation,
                             -                   öq
                                                                                (11)
                                        2—0.5(1—q
   Comparing (6) and (11), we find that first-periods saving are higher under
borrowing constraints, as the consumer is accumulating assets to reduce the
  41f there is no habit formation, and if the adverse shock does hit consumers in the
second period, the revised permanent income would be

                                     _______             (Sq/3)—6
                                            2                2
 Hence, savings would be

                                                         S(3—q)
                       z—--6— [+ (Sq/3)—5]

                                            7
expected hardship in the second period. It. follows from these equations that

                       —        = Sq(3—q)        3(ñi—si)
                                   3(3 + q)          00
    Hence, the higher the probability of an adverse shock to second-period
income, and the larger the magnitude of the shock, the greater will be the
gap between the savings rates with and without borrowing constraints. In
addition, greater habit formation (as measured by a higher 0) reduces the
gap between the two saving rates.
    For the issue at hand, and as noted earlier, the shock to second-period in-
come can be interpreted as a terms-of-trade shock. What the model predicts,
therefore, is that as inferred by the Harberger-Laursen-Meltzer consumption
smoothing framework, positive (negative) transitory income shocks are en-
tirely saved (dissaved). In addition, however, a fraction of permanent income
should also be set aside during "good" times. Thus, the possibility of bind-
ing borrowing constraints in "bad" states of nature implies an asymmetric
response of savings to permanent income shocks.
    It is worth noting that, in the foregoing discussion, we focused only on
the case of an adverse transitory shock in the second period to simplify the
analysis. If the transitory second-period shock is positive, the borrowing con-
straint will not bind. Hence, even if the transitory shock follows a symmetric
distribution, the qualitative features of our analysis will continue to hold. We
can illustrate this point with a simple example where the transitory shock
follow a symmetric distribution. Suppose that the second-period transitory
shock is 6 with a probability equal to one-half, and —6 with a probability
one-half; suppose also that there is no habit formation (i- = 0). All the other
assumptions continue to hold. It is easy to verify that in these conditions

                                  = 0,       si= =
   Hence, first-period saving is zero in the absence of borrowing constraints,
whereas it is positive in the presence of these constraints (in fact, proportional
to the standard deviation of the transitory shock).
    Finally, we show in Appendix A that loss aversion magnifies the increase
in saving induced by the anticipation of future binding borrowing constraints
induced by terms-of-trade shocks. The intuition underlying this result is that
under loss aversion (a particular form of asymmetric utility preferences), in-
dividuals exhibit a larger degree of risk aversion to adverse shocks to income.

                                         8
As a result, they tend to save more in good times, increasing their con-
sumption by less than the increase in income. Specifically, we follow the
specification of this type of preferences explored by Aizenman (1998). In
this setting, loss-averse agents tend to treat the future asymmetrically, as-
signing a greater probability weight to bad states of nature (compared to the
probability weights that they would assign in the conventional case) in mea-
suring expected utility. As a result, saving responds asymmetrically under
loss aversion, in contrast to the conventional expected utility framework.


3 Econometric Methodology
The econometric approach used in this paper to assess the extent to which
terms-of-trade shocks affect asymmetrically private savings dwells on time-
series, cross-country regression techniques. A key step in the estimation
is to distinguish between the transitory and permanent components of the
terms of trade. The permanent component of the terms of trade is mea-
sired by the trend series obtained with three different filters: the standard
Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter, an "optimal" version of the HP filter, and a
nonparametric method. In each case, the filtered series is used to capture
the transitory component of terms-of-trade shocks.
    The filtering techniques used here can be briefly presented as follows.
Consider a seasonally-adjusted variable Xt that can be written as the sum of
an unobserved trend component, x7, and a residual cyclical component, x:
                                  = x + x.                              (12)

    The standard HP filter (see Hodrick and Prescott (1997)) employs an
 adjustment rule whereby the trend component moves continuously and ad-
justs gradually. Formally, the unobserved trend component x is extracted
by solving the following minimization problem:

           Miii       - *)2 + A[(x1 - x) - (x - f)]2                    (13)

    Thus, the objective is to select the trend component that minimizes the
sum of the squared deviations from the observed series, subject to the con-
straint that changes in x vary gradualiy over time. The Lagrange multiplier
(or smoothing parameter) A is a positive number that penalizes changes in

                                     9
the trend component. The larger the value of A, the smoother is the resulting
trend series.
    The HP filter has been subject to various criticisms. In particular, it has
been argued that it removes potentially valuable information from time series
(King and Rebelo (1993)), and that it may impart spurious cyclical patterns
to the data (Cogley and Nason (1995)). Another important limitation is the
choice of the value of A. The usual practice in the literature is to set A to
a specific value (for instance, 100 for annual time series) derived from an
examination of the properties of U.S. output data by Hodrick and Prescott.
However, imposing this specific value in a multi-country study can be viewed
as arbitrary, and may reflect an overly stringent implicit assumption about
the degree of persistence in Xt.
    As a consequence, two alternative approaches are also used. The first, as
discussed by Agenor, McDermott and Prasad (1998) consists in choosing a
value of A for each individual series, using a data-dependent method. Specif-
ically, a method of generalized cross-validation is used. The basic principle
of cross-validation is to leave the data points out one at a time and to choose
the value of the smoothing parameter under which the missing data points
are best predicted by the remainder of the data. A priori assumptions about
the appropriate value of the smoothing parameter are not required and the
smoothing parameter does not have to be held constant across all countries.
    Another approach, also discussed by Agénor, McDermott and Prasad
(1998), is to use a nonparametric method. This technique uses a univariate
nonparametric regression estimation technique to estimate the trend and
cyclical components of a series without having to specify the functional form
of the trend component of the underlying series or the degree of smoothing
applied to the actual data. Specifically, it permits the modeling of trends that
involve higher-order polynomials without imposing a particular functional
form on the trend component.5
    The specification of the regression model uses private saving (calculated
as the difference between gross domestic saving arid government saving) in
proportion to GDP as the dependent variable. Despite the relatively limited
number of degrees of freedom available (as discussed below), the list of ex-
planatory variables involves a fairly large group of control variables that have
   5The method can also be extended to control for discontinuities or isolated change
points in the series that may be interpreted, for instance, as level shifts in the underlying
series.



                                            10
been found to matter in recent studies of the determinants of saving in devel-
oping countries.6 A brief description of the variables used in the regressions
is as follows (see Appendix B for more detailed definitions):

    • The lagged dependent variable, which aims to capture habit formation
      effects (Alessie and Lusardi (1997)) or more generally partial adjust-
      ment of the desired propensity to save to its actual value.7
    • The permanent component of the log of the terms of trade, weighted or
      not by the ratio of real exports to real GDP, calculated using the three
      different filters described above. A weighted measure is used to capture
      the fact that the higher the share of exports in output, the higher the
      impact of fluctuations in the terms of trade. This is expected to have
      a negative effect on saving.

    • The transitory component of the log of the terms of trade, weighted or
       not by the ratio of real exports to real GDP, which is expected to have
       also a positive effect on saving.
    • An index of volatility of the terms of trade (defined as the standard
      deviation of the log-difference of the terms of trade over the current
      period and two or three lagged periods), which may represent a proxy
      for income uncertainty. This is expected to have a negative effect on
      saving.
    • The log of real gross national product (GNP) per capita, which captures
      the impact of the level of income (and indirectly subsistence considera-
      tions) on consumption and saving decisions, or more generally the level
      of development. This is expected to have a positive effect on private
      saving.
    • The growth rate of real GNP per capita, which captures improvements
       in standards of living. This is expected to have also a positive effect
       on private saving.
    "See Agenor and Montiel (1999, Chapter 3) and Agenor (2000 Chapter 1) for a detailed
review of the recent evidence on the determinants of savings in developing countries.
    7Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Servén (1999) also attempt to distinguish between short-
and long-term determinants of saving rates—a distinction that appeared highly significant
in their empirical results.


                                          11
        • Inflation (as measured by the rate of change of the GDP deflator), which
           exerts a negative impact on the rate of return on saving (with sluggish
           nominal interest rates) and represents proxy for income variability and
           macroeconomic instability, it may capture a precautionary motive for
          the private sector. Through both channels inflation is expected to
          reduce the propensity to save.8
        • The ratio of broad money to GDP, which is used to capture the process
           of financial liberalization. The variable may have either a positive or
           negative effect on private savings, depending on whether financial lib-
           eralization increases the rate of return on, say, bank deposits (thereby
           increasing financial savings), or on the contrary takes the form of a re-
           laxation of domestic liquidity constraints (which would tend to increase
           consumption and thus reduce savings).
        • Foreign saving, as given by the current account surplus. This variable
           is expected to have a negative effect on the propensity to save.
        • The age dependency ratio, defined as the ratio of the population younger
          than 15 years and older than 64 years old to the population between
          15 and 64 years old. This variable is also expected to have a negative
          effect on the incentives to save.

        • Government saving, as given by the fiscal surplus. As predicted by the
          Ricardian Equivalence proposition (see, for instance, Seater (1993)), if
          agents fully internalize the effects of current budget deficits on future
          tax liabilities (and thus on future consumption), government saving
          should have a coefficient of minus unity in a regression where the de-
    •
          pendent variable is the private savings rate.

    In addition to these variables, a dummy variable is added to capture the
existence of an asymmetric effect of terms of trade on saving. Specifically, the
variable used is an interactive dummy defined in two different ways. In the
first, the dummy takes the value of 1 times the logarithm of the permanent
component of the terms of trade (weighted or not by the ratio of exports
   8Note that real interest rates are omitted from the regression model in light of the
results obtained by Ogaki, Ostry and Reinhart (1996) and Elbadawi and Mwenga (1999),
which suggest a limited impact of this variable in the countries considered here, given their
iow levels of income (see also Appendix A).


                                             12
to output, as indicated earlier) when that component increases above its
previous value, and zero otherwise. In the second, the dummy takes the
value of 1 times the logarithm of the permanent component of the terms of
trade when that variable increases above its within-sample mean value by at
least one standard deviation, and zero otherwise. A detailed explanation of
the construction of these dummy variables is provided in Appendix B.
    The estimation method used is instrumental variables with fixed effects
to correct for possible endogeneity of some of the regressors with respect
to movements in the terms of trade—namely, foreign saving, government
saving, the growth rate of per capita real GDP, and inflation. For instance,
movements in the terms of trade may have a substantial indirect impact on
the rate of economic growth, as a result of their impact on the relative price
of nontraded goods, the relative price of capital goods, and thus investment.
In the first stage of the estimation procedure, all the above variables were
regressed on the log of the terms of trade (weighted or not by the ratio
of exports to output), the index of terms-of-trade volatility, the log of per
capita real GNP, and the rate of change in the ratio of broad money to
GDP. In the second stage, the residuals from the first-stage regressions were
used as instruments, rather than the actual series themselves. Finally, fixed
effects are aimed at capturing differences across countries by introducing
differences in the constant terms of the regressions. In standard fashion (see,
for instance, Greene (1997)) they are computed by subtracting the within-
sample mean from each variable and performing the estimation using the
transformed data.


4 Evidence for sub-Saharan Africa
The regression framework described in the previous section was estimated for
the group of non-oil sub-Saharan African countries using time-series, cross-
country data covering the period 1980-96; because data were not available
for all the countries in the sample for the whole period, an unbalanced panel
data set is used.
    The regression results obtained for each of the filtering techniques de-
scribed above, using two measures of the terms of trade (weighted and un-
weighted) are summarized in Tables 1 to 12. Each table presents a series of
regressions with various sets of explanatory variables.9 Tables 1 to 6 use the
  9The age dependency ratio turned out to have systematically the wrong sign in most

                                        13
dummy variable for asymmetric shocks defined as one times the permanent
component of the terms of trade if there is a positive increase in that compo-
nent between two years and zero otherwise; Tables 7 to 12 define the dummy
variable as one times the permanent component of the terms of trade if there
is a positive increase in that variable above the mean by at least one within-
sample standard deviation and zero otherwise. In addition, Tables 1 to 3 use
an unweighted terms-of-trade index and use the three alternative methods
(standard HP, optimal HP, and nonparametric techniques) to calculate the
permanent and transitory components of the terms of trade, whereas Tables
4 to 6 use a weighted index of the terms of trade, with weights given by
the ratio of exports over output for each country. Similarly, Tables 7 to 9
(respectively 10 to 12) deal with unweighted (respectively weighted) data on
the terms of trade.
    Consider first Tables 1 to 6. Overall, the adjusted R-squared is quite
high, indicating that the regression model explains fairly well movements in
the private savings rate across countries and over time. The lagged depen-
dent variable is highly significant, indicating (as noted earlier) either gradual
adjustment to the desired level of saving or persistence effects associated
with habit formation. Per capita income is also significant and positive (as
expected), whereas the growth rate of output, while having the correct sign,
does not appear to have a discernible effect on private savings. The coef-
ficient of the inflation rate is not well determined (its sign changes across
regressions) and is never significant. This may reflect the importance of
low-inflation, CFA Franc countries in the sample. Foreign savings has a sig-
nificant and negative impact on private savings, although the results appear
to be weaker when the nonparametric filter and unweighted terms of trade are
used. Government savings has a highly significant negative effect on private
savings, as found in many recent studies on developing countries; govern-
ment dissavings and their future tax implications tend to be internalized by
private agents. The short-term coefficient of that variable is around 0.6; the
coefficient of the lagged variable is about 0.5, which gives a long-term coeffi-
cient of 1.2 that is not significantly different from unity. This suggests that
Ricardian Equivalence does hold in the long run, in contrast to the results
found by some recent studies. The index of financial development (the ratio
of the broad money stock to GDP) has a highly significant and negative effect
regressions and often tended not to be significant. It was thus omitted from the results
reported here.


                                          14
on private savings; as noted earlier, this result is consistent with the view
that financial liberalization may be accompanied by a relaxation of domestic
liquidity constraints (increased access to bank credit, for instance), which
may stimulate consumption and reduce the propensity to save.
    The index of volatility of the terms of trade measured by the standard
deviation of the actual itself performs poorly in most regressions regardless
of whether three or four lagged values are used. The index based on the
transitory component of the terms of trade only does not perform much
better, except when the standard HP ifiter and weighted terms of trade
are used (regressions (9) to (12), Table 4). In these regressions, volatility
has a positive effect on saving, as found for instance by Ohosh and Ostry
(1994). As predicted by the consumption-smoothing view, the permanent
component of the terms of trade is nowhere significant. By contrast, the
transitory (cyclical) component is everywhere significant and has the right
sign, also as predicted by consumption smoothing considerations. However,
the short-term coefficient of that variable is around 0.1 whereas the long-
term value is around 0.2; both of these values are significantly different from
unity, suggesting that the "pass-through" is less than complete—perhaps
because households are unable (even in the long run) to assess fully the
degree of persistence of terms-of-trade shocks at the moment they occur. The
durmny variable that captures the asymmetric effect of terms-of-trade shocks
is significant at a 1 percent level when the standard HP filter is used, with
both weighted and unweighted measures of the terms of trade. By contrast,
with the optimal HP filter, the variable is not significant with unweighted
terms of trade and is significant at only a 10 percent level when weighted
terms of trade are used. With the nonparametric filter, the variable is also
significant at a 10 percent level and has the correct sign, regardless of whether
the terms of trade are weighted or not.
    Consider now Tables 7 to 12, in which regressions are based on the sec-
ond measure of asymmetric shocks discussed earlier. The sign of the control
variables are very similar to those obtained previously and to save space in-
terpretations are not repeated here. Regarding the terms of trade variables,
similar results also emerge: the index of volatility has a discernible effect
on private savings only when the standard HP filter and the weighted terms
of trade are used, and the coefficient of the permanent component of the
terms of trade is not significantly different from zero. The dummy variable
capturing the asymmetric impact of improvements in the permanent compo-
nent of the terms of trade is highly significant when the HP filter iä used,

                                       15
with both weighted and unweighted measures. That is also the case with the
optimal HP filter—albeit significance levels are lower with weighted terms of
trade. With the nonparametric filter, the dummy variable is significant (at a
5 percent level) with unweighted terms of trade and not significant (although
with the correct sign) when the terms of trade weighted by the share of ex-
ports in output are used. Thus, the overall conclusion from the regression
results presented here is that favorable movements in the permanent compo-
nent of the terms of trade tend to have the asymmetric effect hypothesized
earlier on private savings. The use of a series of control variables, weighted
and imweighted terms of trade, three different detrending techniques, and
two different ways of measuring "favorable" disturbances give some degree
of robustness to the results.


5 Concluding Remarks
The purpose of this paper has been to examine whether terms-of-trade shocks
have an asymmetric effect on private savings. The first part used a simple
three-period framework to argue that, in the presence of binding borrowing
constraints in bad states of nature, savings rates can be sensitive to favorable
movements in the permanent component of the terms of trade—in contrast
to what the conventional consumption-smoothing framework would predict.
Households in developing countries (particularly those that have limited cred-
itworthiness to begin with) may indeed be unable to smooth consumption in
the face of adverse shocks to world commodity prices and the terms of trade,
because they are subject to credit constraints that become more binding in
such situations. As a result, to maintain a smooth consumption path, do-
mestic agents may be forced to dissave by a larger amount than they would
otherwise when faced with a significant deterioration in their terms of trade.
This argument also suggests that, to the extent that domestic agents in-
ternalize the possibility of facing tighter credit constraints in bad states of
nature, they may also consume less and save more in good times.
    The second part described the econometric methodology and the em-
pirical specification of the model, which controls for various standard de-
terminants of private savings. The third part presented and discussed the
regression results, based on panel data for non-oil commodity exporters of
sub-Saharan Africa covering the period 1980-96. Overall, they suggest that
transitory movements in the terms of trade have a positive effect (albeit less

                                      16
than one to one) on the propensity to save and that increases in the per-
manent component of the terms of trade (measured using three alternative
detrending techniques and with both weighted and unweighted measures of
the terms of trade) tend indeed to lead to higher rates of private savthgs.
    Our interpretation focused on the adjustment of saving to a permanent
shock, in circumstances where borrowing constraints are anticipated to bind
in the future. It should be noted, however, that the empirical results may
be consistent with another interpretation. For example, if the permanent
shock is associated with an anticipated increase in future volatility, it would
raise the demand for assets needed to be used as an effective buffer stock in
the future, increasing thereby saving today. Nevertheless, it can be verified
that the logic of our analysis continues to apply in this case—the increase
in the demand for the buffer stock is magnified by the anticipation of future
borrowing credit constraints and by greater loss aversion.
    The analysis developed in this paper can be extended to study the asyrn-
metric effects of terms-of-trade shocks on saving to oil-exporting countries
and analyze the response of public savings as well.10 This is important be—
cause of the policy concerns that the high degree of commodity price volatility
has generated in recent years. The 1998 slump in commodity prices, for in-
stance, generated large terms-of-trade effects. Although the real income effect
on primary commodity exporters was moderate (of the order of-0.5 percent of
GDP), and net importers of oil and primary commodities actually registered
a gain overall, oil exporters registered a negative real income effect of the
order of -6.3 percent of GDP (World Bank (2000, Chapter 4)). Because oil
exports account for almost all of government revenues in oil-exporting coun-
tries, the public sector bore the brunt of adjustment. The ability of each
country to smooth public consumption in response to the revenue shortfall
was, however, limited by their ability to draw down their official reserves
and to borrow, both domestically and abroad. In many cases, constraints
on domestic finance and lack of access to international capital markets ac-
tually prevented governments from successfully smoothing the impact of the
oil price cycle, and economic performance deteriorated." The same study by
  '°An early study that attempted to test for an asymmetric effect of terms-of-trade
movements on savings in oil-exporting countries is by Spatafora and Warner (1995). How-
ever, the test poerformed by the authors was essentially a standard stability test of the
coefficient of the terms-of-trade variable across two sub-periods (1965-80 and 1981-89).
  1'The World Bank report estimated that the effect of the drop in oil prices on the
external earnings of oil-exporting countries in sub-Saharan Africa led to a deterioration in


                                            17
the World Bank also noted that although adjustment to the oil price swings
in the past few years differed significantly across oil exporters, most countries
increased their aggregate saving rates during the rise in oil prices in 1996-
97 (compared to 1993-95) and reduced them during the 1998 slump. This
pattern is consistent with consumption smoothing behavior in the presence
of perceived transitory shocks, In addition, the savings response was found
to be asymmetric: on average, savings rates rose by less than half of the
real income gain during the 1996-97 boom, but fell by the full amount of
the decline in real incomes during the 1998 collapse in prices. Extending the
analytical framework presented in this paper to account for an asynunetric
response of public savings along these lines would provide a fruitful exercise.




the fiscal balance of these countries of about 7 percent of GDP in 1998.

                                           18
                           Appendix A
         Loss Aversion, Savings, and Borrowing Constraints

   The purpose of this Appendix is to show that, following Aizenman (1998),
loss aversion magnifies the increase th saving induced by the anticipation of
future binding borrowing constraints induced by adverse shocks to income.
   For expositional simplicity, we will assume the absence of habit formation,
that is, the case in which = U = 0 in equation (2). Loss aversion modifies
the maximization problem with full access to the capital market given in (4)
as follows:

              f n(x — si) + (w + q)[u(x —8 + si — 4) + u(x + 4)]
                          -
                 +(l - q w)[u(x + s - s') + u(x + $)J                    Al

where to simplify notations, u(ci; c±) is written as u(ct) and 1— q w 0.
The term w is the extra utility weight attached to the bad state of nature
due to loss aversion (see Aizenman (1998) for further details). The expected
utility case corresponds to w = 0. With no access to the capital market, the
maximization problem (9) becomes
                        —
               maxsI u(x 81) + (w + q)[u(x —8
                                           H
                                              + Si) + u(x)]
                                                       H                   2
                      (l—q—w)[u(x+si—s2)+u(x+s2)
   Applying (Al) if follows that with access to the world capital market,
first-period savillg is
                                        8(q+w)
                                                                        (A3)
whereas without access to borrowing and with no habit formation, saving is

                              —         8(q+w)                           A4
                                  2— 0.5[l — (q + w)j

   Ftom (A3) and (A4), we have

                          Si — Si —   8(q+w)(3—q—w)
                                        3(3+q+)
   Consequently, loss aversion magnifies the increase in saving associated
with future borrowing constraints.

                                        19
                             Appendix B
                Countries, Variables, and Data Sources

   This Appendix presents the list of countries included in the text and
provides a more precise definition of the variables used in the regressions
(including the dummy variables) shown in Tables 1 to 12.
    The sample used in this study includes all sub-Saharan African coun-
tries except oil exporters. Specifically, the list of the countries consists of
Benin, Botswana, Burkina Fa.so, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Dji-
bouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya,
Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, May-
otte, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Sene-
gal, Seychelles, Sierra Leona, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tan-
zania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
    The variables used in the regressions reported in Tables 1 to 12 are defined
as follows.

   • Private saving, SP%GDP: The ratio of private saving to GDP. It is
     obtained as the difference between Gross Domestic Saving and Gov-
      ernment Saving. The gross domestic saving is defined as the difference
      between gross domestic product and total consumption. Source: the
      World Bank's Statistical Information Management and Analysis Sys-
      tem (SIMA).
   • Foreign saving, SF9oCDP: Ratio of foreign saving to GDP. Foreign
     saving is equal to the current account surplus, which is defined as mi-
     nus the sum of net exports of goods and services, income and current
     transfers. Source: SIMA.

   • Residual foreign saving, RSF%CDP: obtained by regressing foreign
     saving on the log of the terms of trade weighted by the ratio of real
     exports to real GDP, an index of terms-of-trade volatility, the log of
      real GNP per capita, and the rate of change in the ratio of broad money
      to GDP.
   • Inflation, INFL: growth rate of GDP Deflator. It is calculated by
      using GDP in current and constant 1987 local currency prices. Source:
      World Development Indicators (WDI).

                                      20
• Residual inflation, RINFL: Obtained by regressing inflation on the
  log of the terms of trade weighted by the ratio of real exports to real
  GDP, an index of terms-of-trade volatility, the log of real GNP per
  capita, and the rate of change in the ratio of broad money to GDP.
• Log of real GNP per capita, LGNPPC: gross national product (in
  constant 1995 U.S. dollars) divided by midyear population. Source:
  WDT.

• Real GNP per capita growth rate, GNPGR: growth rate of real GNP
  per capita. Source: WDI.
• Residual Real GNP per capita Growth Rate, RGNPGR: obtained
  by regressing real GNP per capita on the log of the terms of trade
  weighted by the ratio of real exports to real GDP, an index of terms-
  of-trade volatility (as defined above), the log of real GNP per capita,
  and the rate of change in the ratio of broad money to GDP.
• Government Saving, SG%GDP: ratio of government saving to GDP.
  Government saving is defined as the difference between tax revenue and
  general government consumption. General government consumption
  includes all current expenditures for purchases of goods and services
  by all levels of government, excluding most government enterprises. It
  also includes capital expenditure on national defense and security. Tax
  revenue comprises compulsory, unrequited, nonrepayable receipts for
  public purposes collected by central governments. Source: SIMA.
• Residual government saving, RSG%GDP: obtained by regressing gov-
  ernment saving on the logarithm (log) of the terms of trade weighted
  by the ratio of real exports to real GDP, an index of volatility of the
  terms of trade (as defined below), the log of real GNP per capita, and
  the rate of change in the ratio of broad money to GDP.
• Trend component of terms of trade weighted by ratio of real exports
  to real GDP, RLTOT: obtained through the three filtering methods
  described in the text. The terms of trade used in this study are defined
  as the log of the terms of trade unweighted and weighted by the ratio
  of real exports of goods and services to real GDP. The terms of trade
  for goods and services are the ratio of the export price index to the cor-
  responding import price index (with base 1995=100). Real exports of

                                  21
  goods and services and real GDP are defined in constant local currency
  units. Source: SIMA.
• Residual (temporary) component of terms of trade weighted by ratio
  of real exports to real GDP, RLTOT: The residual component of the
  terms of trade is calculated as the difference between the (weighted or
  unweighted) terms of trade and LTOT.
• Index of terms-of-trade volatility, VLTOT3: equal to the standard
  deviation of the log-difference of the terms of trade for periods t, t — 1
  and t — 2.

• Index of terms-of-trade volatility, VLTOT4: equal to the standard
  deviation of the log-difference of the terms of trade for periods t, t — 1,
  t — 2 and t —3.

• Index of terms-of-trade volatility. VR3: equal to the standard deviation
   of the log-difference of the residual component of weighted terms of
   trade for periods t, t — 1 and t — 2, using each alternative filter.
• Index of terms-of-trade volatility, VR4: equal to the standard deviation
   of the log-difference of the residual component of weighted terms of
   trade for periods t, t — 1, t — 2 and t — 3, using each filter alternative
   filter.

• DUMMY: dummy variable equal to 1 times LTOT for period t when-
  ever LTOT is greater than LTOT1 and 0 otherwise.
• DUMMY2: dummy variable equal to 1 times LTOT for period t when-
  ever LTOT is greater than the mean value of LTOT plus at least one
  standard deviation of LTOT, and 0 otherwise.




                                  22
                                  References

Agenor, Pierre-Richard, The Economics of Adjustment and Growth, Academic
  Press (San Diego, CA: 2000).
Agenor, Pierre-Richard, C. John McDermott, and Eswar Prasad, "Macroeco-
  nomic Fluctuations in Developing Countries: Some Stylized Facts," unpub-
  lished, the World Bank (January 1998). Forthcoming, World Bank Economic
   Review.
Agenor, Pierre-Richard, and Peter J. Montiel, Development Macroeconomics,
   Princeton University Press, 2nd ed. (Princeton, New Jersey: 1999).
Aizenman, Joshua, "Buffer Stocks and Precautionary Savings with Loss Aver-
   sion," Journal of international Money and Finance, 17 (December 1998),
   931-47.
Alessie, Rob, and Anna Maria Lusardi, "Consumption, Saving and Habit For-
   mation," Economics Letters, 55 (August 1997), 103-8.
Bevan, David, Paul Collier, and Jan W. Gunning, "Trade Shocks in Develop-
   ing Countries: Consequences and Policy Responses," European Economic
   Review, 37 (April 1993), 557-65.
Cashin, Paul, and C. John McDermott, "Terms of Trade Shocks and the Cur-
  rent Account," Working Paper No. 98/177, International Monetary Fund
  (December 1998).
Cogley, Timothy, and James M. Nason, "Effects of the Hodrick-Prescott Filter
  on Trend and Difference Stationary Time Series: Implications for Business
  Cycle Research," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 19 (January
   1995), 253-78.
Collier, Paul, and Jan W. Gunning, "Trade and Development: Protection,
   Shocks and Liberalization," in Surveys in International Trade, ed. by David
   Greenaway and L. Alan Winters, Basil Blackwell (Oxford: 1994).
Deaton, Angus S., Understanding Consumption, Oxford University Press (Ox-
   ford: 1992).
Deaton, Angus S., and Guy Laroque, "On the Behaviour of Commodity Prices,"
   Review of Economic Studies, 59 (January 1992), 1-23.
Devereux, John, and Michael Connolly, "Commercial Policy, the Terms of Trade
   and the Real Exchange Rate Revisited," Journal of Development Economics,
   50 (June 1996), 81-99.
Edwards, Sebastian, "Temporary Terms-of-Trade Disturbances, the Real Ex-
   change Rate and the Current Account," Economica, - (- 1989), 343-57.


                                       23
Elbadawi, Ibrahim, and Francis Mwega, "Can Africa's Saving Collapse be Re-
   verted?," in The Economics of Saving and Growth, ed. by Klaus Schmidt-
   Hebbel and Luis Serven, Cambridge University Press (Cambridge: 1999).
Gavin, Michael, "Structural Adjustment to a Terms of Trade Disturbance: The
   Role of Relative Prices," Journal of International Economics, 28 (May 1990),.
   217-43.
Ghura, Dhaneshwar, and Michael Hadjimichael, "Growth in sub-Saharan Africa,"
  IMF Staff Papers, 43 (September 1996), 605—34.
Greene, William H., Econometric Analysis, 3rd. edition, Prentice Hall (Upper
   Saddle River, New Jersey: 1997).
Harberger, Arnold C., "Currency Depreciation, Income and the Balance of
   'liade," Journal of Political Economy, 53 (February 1950), 47-60.
Hubbaid, R. Glenn, and Kenneth L. Judd, "Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal Policy,
   and Consumption," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (June 1986),
   1-50.
King, Robert G., and Sergio Rebelo, "Low Frequency Filtering and Real Business
   Cycles," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17 (January 1993),
   207—31.
Laursen, Svend, and Lloyd A. Metzler, "Flexible Exchange Rates and the Theory
   of Employment," Review of Economics and Statistics, 32 (November 1950),
   281-99.
Loayza, Norman V., Luis Serven, and Klaus Schmidt- Hebbel, "What Drives
   Saving across the World?," in The Economics of Saving and Growth, ed. by
   Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel and Luis ServOn, Cambridge University Press (Cam-
   bridge: 1999).
Obstfeld, Maurice, "Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is there a
   Laiirsen-Metlzer Effect?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 47 (May 1982),
   251-70.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth A. Rogoff, Foundations of International Macro-
   economics, MIT Press (Cambridge, Mass.: 1997).
Ogaki, Masao, Jonathan Ostry, and Carmen M. Reinhart, "Saving Behavior in
  Low- and Middle-Income Developing Countries: A Comparison," IMP Staff
  Papers, 43 (March 1996), 38-71.
Ostry, Jonathan D., and Carmen M. Reinhart, "Private Saving and Terms-of-
   Trade Shocks," IMP Staff Papers, 39 (September 1992), 495-517.
Seater, John, "Ricardian Equivalence," Journal of Economic Literature, 31 (March
   1993), 142-90.


                                       24
Spatafora, Nikola, and Andrew Warner, "Macroeconomic Effects of Terms of
   Trade Shocks," PRE Working Paper No. 1410, the World Bank (January
   1995).
Svensson, Lars, and Assaf Razin, "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account:
   The Harberger-Laursen-Metizer Effect," Journal of Political Economy, 91
   (February 1983), 97-125.
World Bank, Global Development Finance 1999, the World Bank (Washington
   DC: 1999).
      Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries 2000, the World
   Bank (Washington DC: 2000).
Zeldes, Stephen, "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Tnsves-
   tigation," Journal of Political Economy, 97 (April 1989), 305-46.




                                      25
                                             Figure 1
                                   Non-Oil Sub-Saharan Africa:
                         Volatility of Output and the Terms of Trade
                                               (Averages for 1980-96)


         0.35       -


                                           .
          03                                   •
  0
  o     025 -
  o
   (U
   a)                                                  S
  ::o     0.2-                                                  S
                                                                                       S
  2'
                                                            a
  >
         0.15-                 •• ••                        V                          .
          0.1-
                                                   ••
                               S
                               —a                                        S
         0.05- •                C
                                    S
                                               S

           0
            0.00                    0.05                            0.10                   0.15                  0.20

                                                                           Volatility of the terms of trade (weighted)


         0.35 -
                                                   S
          0.3-                      55
  0
  O
  0 0.25
                    -




  ,m
          0.2-                                                                         5


  >
         0.15-
                -
                               •
                               Si
                                           •••.
                                             •S.
                                                •                   S
                                                                                               Si
                                                                                                  S



          0.1
                               —S
                                           S
         0.05-             .%
                                                        .
                                                            S              S
                                                                                       .
                                                        I
            0                                                                      I



             0.00       0.01        0.02            0.03            0.04        0.05       0.06        0.07       0.08

                                                                        Volatility of the terms of trade (unweighted)



Source: World Bank.

Note: Volatility is measured by the coefficient of variation over the whole sample period.
1/List of the countries: Berm, Bostwana, Burkina Faso. BurLindi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Comoros, Congo Democratic Republic, Ethopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea. GuineaBissau, Kenya, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Toga, Uganda, Zambia. Zimbabwe.
                                                                                                         Table I
                                                                     Stab-Saharan African Countries: Determinantsof the Private SavingsRate, 1980-96
                                                                                         Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                                                                               (Unweighted termsof trade, III' filter)


                                          (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)             (10)              (ii)            (12)
SP%GDP(-I)                              0.495             0.490           0.495            0.493             0.490           0.489            0.474            0.469            0.474             0.473            0.469            0.468
                                        (9.122)          (8.916)          (9.125)          (9.107)         (8.924)           (8.905)          (8.852)          (8.613)         (8.852)          (8.824)           (8.621)         (8.594)
RSF%GDP                                 -0.135           -0.141            -0.135          -0.134           -0.142           -0.142           -0.109           -0.113           -0.109           -0.110           -0.114           -0.116
                                       (-2.140)         (-2.204)         (-2.140)         (-2.154)         (-2.217)         (-2.257)         (-1.754)         (-1.781)         (-1.754)         (-1.790)         (-1.794)         (-1.856)
RINFL                                   -0.025           -0.023            -0.025                           -0.022                            -0.022           -0.020           -0.022                            -0.019
                                       (-0.461)         (-0.411)         (-0.460)                          (-0.401)                          (-0.406)         (-0.367)         (-0.407)                          (-0.358)
LGNPPC                                   0.061            0.077            0.060           0.075             0.076           0,091             0.083            0.097            0.083            0.098            0.095            0.112
                                       (1.746)           (2.134)          (1.740)         (2.264)          (2.106)          (2.653)           (2.382)         (2.675)          (2.379)           (2.938)         (2.643)           (3.225)
RGNPGR                                   0.084            0.088            0.084                             0.086                             0.097            0.100            0.098                             0.099
                                       (1.214)           (1.265)          (1.218)                          (1.235)                            (1.436)         (1.466)          (1.443)                           (1.437)
RSG%GDP                                 -0.576           -0.583           -0.576           -0.565           -0.587           -0.576           -0.610           -0.611           -0.609           -0.595           -0.615           -0.601
                                       (-6.630)         (-6.656)         (-6.604)         (-6.561)         (-6.697)         (-6.658)         (-7.110)         (-7.059)         (-7.077)         (-6.996)         (-7.098)         (-7.025)
M2%GDP                                  -0.002           -0.002           -0.002           -0.002           -0.002           -0.003           -0.002           -0.003           -0.002           -0.002           -0.003           -0.003
                                       (-3.234)         (-3.584)         (-3.240)         (-3.392)         (-3.554)         (-3.682)         (-3.555)         (-3.808)         (-3.566)         (-3.714)         (-3.779)         (-3.901)
LTOT                                     0.04!            0.034            0.042            0.039           0.033             0.028            0.031            0.024            0.032            0.028            0.023            0.017
                                       (0.880)          (0.742)           (0.893)         (0.836)          (0.695)          (0.593)          (0.674)          (0.532)          (0.696)          (0.617)          (0.495)          (0.369)
RLTOT                                    0.089            0.097            0.090            0.096           0.095             0.102            0.077            0.084           0.078             0.086           0.082             0.091
                                       (2.790)          (2.993)          (2.824)          (3.079)          (2.960)          (3.236)          (2.453)          (2.615)          (2.495)          (2795)           (2.580)          (2.898)
VLTOT3                                   0.047                                                                                                 0.047
                                       (0.678)•                                                                                              (0.693)
VLTOT4                                                   0.115                                                                                                 0.321
                                                        (1.488)                                                                                               (1.596)
VR3                                                                       0.029            0.039                                                                                0.026            0.036
                                                                         (0.386)          (0.547)                                                                              (0.366)          (0.517)
VR4                                                                                                         0.106            0.428                                                                                0.110            0.133
                                                                                                           (1.192)          (1.480)                                                                              (1.258)          (1.561)
DUMMY                                                                                                                                         0.007            0.006            0.007            0.007            0.006            0.006
                                                                                                                                             (3.280)          (3.070)          (3.280)          (3194)           (3.066)          (2.983)

Adj. R2                                 0.930            0.930            0.930            0.930            0.930            0.930            0.933            0.933            0.933            0.932            0.933            0,932

Totalpanel                               283              279              283              283              279              279              283              279              283              283              279              279
Observations
Standard error   ofregression           0.056            0.056            0.056            0.056            0.056            0.056            0.055            0.055            0.055            0.055            0.055            0.055

      Note: t-statittics are in parentheses, Private saving rate (SP%GDP) is the ratio of private saving to GDP. SP"/oODP(-I)is the lagged value ofSP%00P. RSF%GDP and RINEL. RGNPGR and RSG%GDP are the instrumental
      variables used for SF'/GGDP, fl'4fL, GNPGR and SG%GDP, successively (SF%GDI' is the ratio of foreign savings to GDP; INFL is the inflation rate in tenna of the ODP deflator; GNI'GR is the growth rate of the real GNP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               per
      capita; S0%GDP is the ratio of general government saving to GDP). LGNPPC is the log of real ON? per capita in conslant US dollars. M2%GDP is the ratio of M2 to ODP. LTOT a the trend component of teems of tTade,
      obtained by Ilodrick-Preseott fiftermelhod. RLTOT is the residual component of terms oftrade, ohtained by Hodrick-Prescott filter method. VLTOT3 is the volatility measure as Ihe standard deviation ofterms oftrade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           forperioda
      1-2, 1-1 andt, and VLTOT4 is forthcperiodi-3, 1-2, c-I and t. VR3 and VR4 arethe volatilitymeasuresofkLTOTforthcperiodof t-2, i-I and!, and 1-3, (-2, I-I and t.successively. DUMMY is the dummyvariable equal to I tines
      LTOT whenever LTOT, it greater than LTOT11.
                                                                                                                                                                        -171011 ug41aoinoa2 S! LOLl loAourn]M 1011          7 01
          1rnbo 1qfluvA (wLnnp041 Awi!nu &IaMss000rIs ;puw 7-; 'i—; g-;puE '7 puE 7-J 'i-; jopouodoqiio;         jØj)JJ0
                                                                                                                       sainsEOm API1IEIOAOMI 3m p)JApuw cJ)Jp,   put-;'z- 's-; pouodoipaoj7!    101lA puP ';p'm 7-; 'i-; spouod
          IOJ OpP11J0 1U1J01J0 UOilflAOPPiPPUPiS 04127 OJflSBOLUA1!II1EI0 042 Si £JOflA p0410w 8UU0111J opqwj wnwSldo Aq pOUiEIqO OpRJlJo SUu3 JO luouodwoo IEnP!101 0455! .L0L1M P0423W 2U7l31(IJ EP4WSI wnui!ldo £4 paurnqo
                apSJ1Jo 511001 Jo luouodwoo P0351 0415! LOll dUO 01 ZNJ0 07171 34177 dUO%ZN SmII0P Sf1107151100 1!3 10d dM0 j0J0 2Oj 0415! DddMOl (auo 01 SUIA?S 1UDIUUJOAOS jeirnso8jo 01121 45 71 dUO%OS 7l!d50
                                                                                                                      117
            nd dNO 7501041 JO 35714w012 341 SV0dN0 JOI5UOPdQOO4IJOSUUOSU! 0751U0!ICIJU!3455! 1JN1 JQO 05 52U!A5S U!3JOJJO 0515104157 dUO%dS)XIOA!55300fl5 'dUO%0S PU? 10dNO 14M 'dUO%4SJOJ pOSfl SO74SUSA
            I7IUOSUTUISU! 041   015dU0%OSPu5aOdNOH 1JNN P115 dU0%JS1I dUO%d8J03n15t                055 ! (l-)aao%as dUO o12uiAss olsAudjoosIcioqIss
                                                                                                          0(11                                                  (duo%ds)31512u!Ass ON41d sasoqiuomdus 3m 5311si1715-1 :oloN
 9cc-u              900               9c00           900             9c0O             9c00            9c00               900           9ç0O            9c00             9c0a            9c00            uoissai2oijo10110   pnpuo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SUO!1PAJOsqo
  1-li               1-11              t'll           1-11            1-11             1-11            I'll                 1-11        1-11            I'll                                                              loundlelol
 t'E60              1-E60             1-EGO         1-E60            PE6O                             cE60              t'E60          c€6o            cE6o             '-€6.0           ccoo                                ni Ipv
(89ro-)           (octo-)           (9coo-)        (ct'oo-)         (Lao-)          (1900-)
000•0-             000-0-            000•0-         0000-            0000-           0000-                                                                                                                                 ANINflO
(89t1)             (LToT)                                                                            (i-ii)            (0660)
 6110               coto                                                                              ci to             auja
                                     (6810)         (scot)                                                                            (zsto)          (ocoo)
                                      9100           cooo                                                                              ciot            t-ooo                                                                       EUA
                                                                    (c9o1)                                                                                             (ct-oi)
                                                                     c600                                                                                               1600                                                I-lofl&
                                                                                     (L6oo)                                                                                             (Lso'o)
                                                                                     8000                                                                                               L00.0                               £lOrL&
(lczE)             (t'co€)           ([LYE)         (€at)           (aloE)           (osoi)          (o8rE)            (890€)         (681€)          (ct-CE)          (aoU             (680€)
 1010               0010              SOlO          9070             8600             0010            1010              0070           SOlO            9010             8600            0070                                 1OlD!
(cEo-c)           (LP0-o-)           (c91-o)        (no-u)          (ocuo-)          (1100)          (tuou-)          (cLoo-)         (6c1u)          (6900)           (oLao-)          (cia-u)
 1000              1000-              6000          1-000            1000'            1000            000,0            t00'O           8000            £000             1-0O'O-         000'O                                  L01l
(€ttr)            (11-tv—)          (78Ev—)        (c61p—)          (oat—)          (osit--)         (L91-'t--)       (6L1's—)       (t-ct-'i-—)      (itrr)           (19Cr-)         (1-cry-)
1-000'             1-00'O            t'OOO-         1-000-           t-000-          1-00'O-         toot-              toot-         too'o-           *000-            1-000-          1-000-                             dUO%ZF'J
(cvz9-)           (zvt9-)           (v6r9-)        (1619-)          (La 1'9)        (ton-)           (ccl'9-)         (lcl'9-)       (81E9-)          (*119-)          (8 11-9-)       (L1r9-)
 1190-             9090-             1-190-         6090-            t'09'0          1190-            0190              c090-         1-190-           6090-            £090-            1790-                           dcIO%OS)1
                   (691-0)                         (ott-a)          (tcc'o)          (szc'o)                           (961-u)                        (9L1u)           (t-sco)          (9Eco)
                    S£00                            8£00             Lt'OO            "pa-c                             01-00                          6£00             81-0_c          ctoo                               1OdNtTh
(o*9c)             (t-EI'E)          (cst-'E)      (tau'€)          (L91'E)          (9coE)          (s-rt'€)          (osr'€)        (tEcE)          (9EaE)           (911€)           (060€)
 zcio               600              flI'O          [€10             onu              1-Etc           tcIa              01-to          1-Plo           lELO             11-10           1-E1O                               3ddMEfl
                  (EL 80-)                         (asu-)           (c€so-)         (aso-)                            (1980-)                         (nsa-)           (asa-)          (aso-)
                   tco'o-                           Lcuo-            i-coo-          i-coo-                             cao-                           Lcoa-            €cco-           vcou-
(s-sc'i-)         (1-691-)          (c9cl-)        (LL9l-)          (cai-)          (ccci-)          (L9c1-)          (0891-)        (act-)           (L89i-)          (zai-)          (scci-)
 £110-             Ella-             1110-          1110-            lU0-            1-110-           0110-            0110-          1110              1110-           £110-           1-110-                           dUD%r1S
(861-8)            (69(5)            (oots)        (6tcs)           (cops)           (ncs)           (c9cs)            (ct-is)        (rt-cs)          (c19S)          (itvs)           (1198)
 1co                ozc-c             szca          91ca             0l0             91cc             aco                lco           szco            91cc             IlcO             91cu                          (i-)duo%ds
  (zi)               (it)             (ot)            (6)             (s)             (t)               (9)                 (c)         (t-)             (c)             (z)              (I)
                                                                                    (Jallu vpqmuj mnmgdo 'apuiI Jo SWfl4 paiq7aMufl)
                                                                                      S;OaJJ paX!J IfliM poq;aj ajqrnJ7 isiuamnijsui
                                                                    96-086! 'a3flj s2U!Ass aJvA71J aq;jo sutujmiaiau :sau3uno3 us3!iJy uvnqsg-qn5
                                                                                                                                                                                    1-11011 UC4IloiniS Si 1011 10AtU4M 1011sam i 01
         Itnba 0jqsIJs&uimnp043 SI Apwno XlaAIssossns 7 put i-s 'z-; c-, put; put i-s z-; jo pouad 0131.103 10rm40 SOInSIsawAiqi;rjo.& 045 am fliA put £TA 7 pus r-;'z-rc-; pouad aqi 104 si t'IoIjA. put; put 1-; -s spouad
             104 OpRlljO 511110340 uoijrnap prnpuniw 045 St OlflStOUl X1i1i3t1o      Si £LOJ.]A   pOqpm                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                  zsupuiiusd-uou Aq pauiSlqo 'apISIljo SuIJI3 JO 3uOuodmOO tupiSalOi3) Si .L01Th poqlom 8tiuajij OLIllIrnutd-uou pauitiqo
                apluIjo suLla3 Jo3unuodmon U013 04) Loll 1000)
           iad dM0
                                                        S
                                                                                0533
                                                                           ZY'IJ°  01351 053 Si duO%ZIN
                                                                                                        8u1.lslpJ
                                                                                                         5J5110P
                    I'm-' 04)jO 0351q3MO1 0133 Si ?103N0 !lOltIjtp duo 31340 50003 Ui 351 UOiJtIJIIi 43 Si 14N1
                                                                                                                 SfllutltuoDU!tl!dtOThddNo
                                                                                                                 d0                            1t1140 80 0418! DddNOl (duo 038U1/t583110111U10408I"J°                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               01tfll31 dU05/oOStt,dto
                                                                                                                           03 ISUTAES ulioojjo 01351 3435! duO%dS)A1OATSSOX,ns 'duo%0SpUt )A0JZ0 1dM dUO%dS 104 posn sa)4SUSA
           pquamlulSut 3533 3.15 dGOt/0OSN  llt  MOdNOH'1dNIHPUO dUO%dSH dGO%dSJO                I5P0ZI           0431! (1-)dao%ds dUO 03 5uiAss 33rAudJo oqu aqi S (duo%ds) D3EI8U1ASSO3EA1Id sataq3uaitd U! 015 SD!3S!IBIS-3 OION
 9100              9100             9co-o             9c00             9coo             9c0o             9100             9100             9100             9100              9100             9c00            0015S01201J0 50110 PJEPUP3S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SUoi1tA10Sq
  I-U                                PU               PU                PU               PU               PU                                                                   vzz                                                jougdjuoj
 1c60              1160             9160              1160             1160             1(60             160              t'(60            1(60              1160             P160             1(60                                   ni Ipv-
(ton)             (89Ll)           (68L1)           (TnT)             (OIL-I)          (ocwi)
 P000              P000             P000             P000              P000             P000                                                                                                                                        AWWflU
(1980)            (two)                                                                                 (cooo)           (19t0)
 0800              1900                                                                                  1800             tL0O                                                                                                              Pm'
                                   (1110-)          (zuo-)                                                                                (1100-)          (P600-)
                                   000-              IWO-                                                                                  1000-            1000-                                                                           Itt
                                                                      (8160)                                                                                                 (110)
                                                                       9800                                                                                                   1600                                                  PJLOflA
                                                                                      (noo-)                                                                                                  (nto)
                                                                                       £000-                                                                                                   6000                                 £.L0.L1A
(6101)            (a9z)            (ssit)           Cast)             (u.cz)           (tv9z)           (nz)             (uoz)            (zcv)             (Lzi)            (988t)           (zcoz)
 lI0               (010             1110             6010              8600              010             RIO              P110             LZI0             OZI0              600              tITO                                  iorni
(6600)            (ozo)            (oro)            (6sro)            (o10)            (9zro)           (1100)           (1910)           (oIl-c)          (lI-to)           (ooio)           (oslo)
 P000             0100             6000              P100             1000              1100             (000             8000             8000             ZT00             1000              6000                                    IOn
(9z9P-)          (tzv-)           (p99p)            (z9ptr-)         (t'6c-P-)        (86n'-)          (nc-s—)           (sir—)           (IvcP-)          (6Prr-)          Coors-)           (zozP-)
 P000             P000             P000             t000              P000-            P000             tOO0              P000-            P000             P000-            P000              P000-                               dUO%ZW
(o8v9-)          (LLc.9-)         (cPl-9)           (Lzt'9-)                          (ppy_)            (6zr9-)          (clz9-)          (8€9-)           (9cz-9-)         (1119-)           (19r9)
 9190-                             0P90             9190              0190-            6(90-            U90-              690-             1Z90-            0Z90-            1190-             £Z90-                             dclO%0Sa
                  (89Lo)                            (9890)            (icso)           (911-0)                           (8P9o)                            (9Lco)            (aco)            (9990)
                   1900                              1100             6900              £900                              zco_0                             9P00              6100             P100                                 80dNDI
(1991)            (tsoc)           (ctc)            (0101)            (ai€)            (Pio€)           (zz9)             (1801)          (gocE)           (1101)            (zci€)           (010-U
 9P10              1110             IPIO            LZI0              1(10              8Z10             9P10              ZOO             UI-TO            8Z10              L(t0             0(10                                 DddNOl
                 (I-plo-)                          (96co-)           (solo-)          (1110-)                            (1110-)                           (stco-)          (coco-)           (izco-)
                                                    1(00-             1100-            ((00-                              £(00                              9(00-             1(00-            £100-                                  ldNIU
(olc t-)         (n9 I-)           (9811-)         (1191-)           (usj-)           (9691-)           (0091-)          (P191-)          (1191-)          (9191-)          (toci-)           (6111-)
0110-             9110-             0110-           8110-             6110-            OZI0-             Z110-            6110-            £1I0             0ZI0             UI0               £1 10-                             dUO%dSll
(soos)            Co   161)        (I-Los)          (1161)            (s'tst)          (ctot)           (1598)           (6918)           (9815)           (uv9s)            (tocs)           (9c9s)
 £010             zoco              soco             oco               loco             £010             0(10             0(10             ZEcO             zao               szco             (EcO                            (T-)duo%as
 (ti)                (it)            (01)              (6)              (s)              Ct)               (9)             Cc)               Cs)              (1)              ()               (1)
                                                                                  (ia;jij a!l3amuJsd-U0N'apFJ; JO SW1 pa;qThaAtufl)
                                                                                   SJDOjfl p3X11 IflM poipajç ajqE1 W1uuIfl1*Sil1
                                                                     960861 'ama SiIAt5 O3nA.Id 43JO sIuuulwlamaa:sa.luno UVOIJJV usicuv5-qn5
                                                                                                                   (aqBI
                                                                                                        Table4
                                                                      Sub-SaharanAfrican Countries: Determinantsof the Private Savings kale, 1980-96
                                                                                    Instrumental Variable Method with Eixed Effects


                                           (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)               (9)              (10)             (II)              (12)
SP%GDP(-l)                                0.459            0.454            0.458             0.461            0.453             0.456            0.451             0.446            0.451             0.449            0.445             0.444
                                        (8.591)           (8.361)          (8.545)           (8.583)          (8.283)          (8.372)          (8.511)           (8.277)           (8,472)          (8.441)           (8.202)           (8.178)
RSF%GDP                                  -0.127           -0.135            -0.127           -0,135           -0.133            -0.145           -0.127            -0.133           -0.127            -0.128            -0.132           -0.134
                                        (-2.066)         (-2.163)          (-2.070)         (-2.213)         (-2.147)          (-2.360)         (-2.089)          (-2.147)         (-2.091)          (-2.128)         (-2.138)          (-2.192)
RINFL                                    -0.006           -0.002            -0.011                            -0.006                             -0,004            -0.003           -0.009                             -0.006
                                        (-0.107)         (-0.041)          (-0.191)                          (-0.116)                           (-0.085)          (-0.050)         (-0.165)                           (-0.106)
LGNPPC                                    0.080            0.086             0.078           0.102             0.085            0,113             0.094             0.099            0.092            0.104             0.098            0.111
                                        (2.352)           (2.470)          (2.287)          (3.101)           (2.437)          (3.321)          (2.741)           (2.812)           (2.681)          (3.231)           (2.789)          (3.342)
RONPOR                                    0.080            0.090             0.082                             0.092                              0.073             0.084            0.074                              0.085
                                        (1.173)           (1.299)          (1.198)                            (1.336)                           (1.070)           (1.219)          (1.094)                             (1.247)
RSG%GDP                                  -0.586           -0.594            -0.585           -0.543           -0.593            -0.558           -0.613            -0.619           -0.612            -0.600           -0.619            -0.604
                                        (-6.904)         (-6.922)          (-6.882)         (-6.675)         (-6.909)          (-6.827)         (-7.214)          (-7.217)         (-7.192)          (-7.204)         (-7.207)          (-7.204)
M2%GDP                                   -0.002           -0.003            -0.002           -0.002           -0.003            -0.003           -0.002            -0.003           -0.002            -0,003           -0.003            -0.003
                                                         (-3,699)          (-3.391)         (-3.633)         (-3.673)          (-3.843)         (-3.675)          (-3.923)         (-3.631)          (-3.800)         (-3.903)          (-4.045)
LTOT                                     0.030             0.037             0.030            0.018            0.036             0.019            0.020            0.027             0.020             0.017            0.026             0.022
                                        (0.937)          (1.139)           (0.939)          (0.592)           (1.110)          (0.627)          (0.627)           (0.837)          (0.623)           (0.585)          (0.808)           (0.730)
RLTOT                                    0.110             0.107            0.108             0.117            0,106             0.116            0.107            0.103             0.105            0.108             0.102             0.107
                                        (4.463)          (4.347)           (4.358)          (4.911)          (4.273)           (4.886)          (4.372)           (4.232)          (4.274)           (4.594)           (4.16!)          (4.527)
VLTOT3                                   0.063                                                                                                    0.070
                                        (1.259)                                                                                                 (1.392)
VLTOT4                                                    0.082                                                                                                    0.093
                                                         (1.492)                                                                                                  (1.700)
VR3                                                                         0.098            0.066                                                                                   0,102            0.100
                                                                           (1.654)          (0.947)                                                                                 (1.740)          (1.843)
VR4                                                                                                            0.117            0.138                                                                                   0.126            0.121
                                                                                                              (1.672)          (1.671)                                                                                 (1.802)          (1.820)
DUMMY                                                                                                                                            0.006             0.006             0.006            0.007             0.006            0.007
                                                                                                                                                (2.285)           (2.263)           (2.287)          (2.363)           (2.277)          (2.344)

Adj. R2                                  0.933             0.933            0.933            0.933             0.933            0.933             0.935            0.934             0.934            0,935             0.934            0.935

Totalpanel                                283              279               283              283               279              279               283              279               283              283               279              279
Observations

Standard error   of regression           0.054            0.055             0.054            0.055             0.055            0.055             0.054            0.054             0.054            0.054             0.054            0.054

      Note: s-statistics areinparentheses. Private savingrate (SP%GDP) is the ratio ofprivate savingso GOP. SP%GDP(-I)is the lagged valueofSP%GDP. RSF%GDPand I&INFL, RGNPGltand RSG%GDP are the instrumental
      variablesusedfor SF%GDP, rNFL, GNPGRandSG%GDP, successively (SF%GDP is therstio of'foreigu savingstoGDP; NFL isthe intlatioss rate in terms of the GDP deflator; GNPGR1s the growthrateofthe real (iNP per
      capita; SG%GDP is the ratio of genera! government saving to GD!'). LGNPPC is the log of real GNP per capita in constant US dollars. M2%GDPis the ratio of M2 so GDP, LTOT is she trend component of terms of tmde weighted
      by the ratio of real exports to real GDP, obtained by l{odrick-Prescottfilter method. RLTOT is the residualcomponent of tcnsss of tnsde weighted by the mtio of real exports to real GDP, obtained by Hodrick-Prescoct filter method.
      VLTOT3 is the volatility measure as the standard deviationofweighted terms oflrade for the periods oft-2, c-I assdl, and VLTOT4 is for the period 1-3, 1-2, 1-I and I. VP) and VR4 are the volatility measures ofRLTOT for the
      period of i-2, 1-I and t,and i-3,t-2t-I and', successively. DUMMY is the dummy variableequalto I times LTOT whenever I—TOT,is greaterthan LTOT,,.
                                                                                                                   Table 5
                                                                    Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private SavingsRate, 1980-96
                                                                                    Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                                                                   (Weighted terms of trade, Optimum lambda fitter)


                                         (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)              (10)             (11)             (12)
SP%GDP(-1)                              0475             0.477            0.479            0.478            0.482             0.482           0.475            0476              0.479            0.479            0,482           0.483
                                       (7.723)          (7.741)          (7.777)          (7.848)          (7.805)           (7.893)         (7.754)         (7.767)           (7.820)          (7.912)          (7.843)          (7.948)
RSF%GDP                                 -0.184          -0.193           -0.179            -0.177          -0.189             -0.188         -0.173           -0.182            -0.168           -0.167           -0.178           -0.177
                                       (-2.383)        (-2.483)         (-2,314)          (-2,314)        (-2.418)           (-2.426)       (-2.255)         (-2.352)          (-2.181)         (-2.179)         (-2.289)         (-2291)
RINFL                                   -0.012          -0.011           -0.019                            -0.020                            -0.011           -0.011            -0,016                            -0018
                                       (-0.180)        (-0.164)         (-0.276)                          (-0.286)                          (-0.159)         (-0.164)          (-0.241)                          (-0.264)
LGNPPC                                   0.19!           0.189            0.188            0.196            0.184             0.190           0.193            0.189             0.190           0.195             0.185           0.189
                                       (4.204)          (4.172)         (4.190)           (4.702)          (4.116)           (4.600)        (4.261)          (4.208)           (4.254)          (4.699)          (4.163)          (4.582)
RGNPGR                                   0.024           0.013            0.025                             0.018                             0.010            0.000             0.011                             0.004
                                       (0.307)         (0.165)          (0,316)                            (0.227)                          (0.133)          (0.006)           (0.I39)                           (0.056)
RSG%GDP                                 -0.621          -0.612           -0.621            -0.622          -0,615             -0.618         -0.648           -0.637            -0.649          -0.652            -0.642           -0.646
                                       (-6.556)        (-6.483)         (-6.528)          (-6.700)        (-6.469)           (-6.653)       (-6.771)         (-6.681)          (-6.760)        (-6.946)          (-6.685)         (-6.879)
M2%GDP                                  -0,005          -0.005           -0.005            -0.005          -0.004             -0.005         -0.005           -0.004            -0.004          -0.005            -0.004           -0.004
                                       (-4.944)        (-4.936)         (-4.908)          (-5.141)        (-4.853)           (-5.09!)       (-4.896)         (-4.874)          (-4.860)        (-5,059)          (-4.793)         (-4.999)
LTOT                                     0,010           0.014            0.006             0,009           0.008              0,012          0.000            0.004            -0.003          -0.002            -0.001            0.002
                                       (0.261)         (0.346)          (0.167)           (0.264)          (0.204)           (0.328)        (0.017)          (0.108)           (-0,076)        (-0.006)          (-0.031)         (0.073)
RLTOT                                    0,116           0,113            0,117             0,119           0.115              0.116         0.114             0.111             0.115           0.116            0.112            0.112
                                       (4.761)         (4.689)          (4.809)           (5.040)         (4.731)            (4.958)        (4.673)          (4.593)           (4.744)         (4.928)           (4.652)          (4.827)
VLTOT3                                   0.009                                                                                               0.016
                                       (0.169)                                                                                              (0.30!)
VLTOT4                                                   0.0 10                                                                                                0.02 1
                                                        (0.177)                                                                                               (0.357)
VR3                                                                       0.012            0.014                                                                                0.015            0.017
                                                                         (0.207)          (0.253)                                                                              (0.258)          (0.316)
VR4                                                                                                         0.010             0.012                                                                               0.016            0.020
                                                                                                           (0.154)           (0.193)                                                                             (0.249)          (0.304)
DUMMY                                                                                                                                        0.006             0,006            0.006            0.007            0.006            0.006
                                                                                                                                            (1.657)           (1.587)          (1,718)          (1.772)          (1.657)          (1.696)

Adj. R2                                 0.941            0.941            0.941            0.941            0.941            0.941            0,942           0.941             0.941            0.942            0.941            0.942

Totalpanel                               219              219             219               219              219              219              219             219               219             219               219              219
Observations
Standard error of regression            0.054            0.054            0.054            0.053            0.054            0.054            0.053           0.054             0.053           0.053             0,054            0.053

      Note: t-statislics are in parentheses. Private saving rate (Sl'°/QDP) is the ratio of privatesaving to GDP. SP%GDP(-I) is the lagged value of SP%GDP. RSF%GDP and RINFL, RGNPGR and RSG%GDP are the instrumental
      variables used forSF%GDP, INFL, ONPURand SG%GDP, suceessively(SF%GDP istheratio offoreignsavings to GDP; INFL istheinflationrateinternsa of the GDP deflator; GNPGRis[he growth rate ofthereal GNPper
      capita; SG%GDP is the ratio of general government saving to GDP). LGNPPC is the log of real GNP per capita in constant US dollars. M2%GDP is the ratio ofM2 to GOP. LTO'l' is the trend component of terms of trade weighted
      by the ratio ofreal exports to real GOP, obtained by optimum lambda filtering method. RLTOT is the reaidual component of tenna of trade weighted by the ratio of real exports to real GOP, obtained by optimum lambda filtering
      method. VLTOT3 isthevolatilitymeasureas thestandarddeviatinn ofweightedtem,sof tradefnrperiodsz-2, i-I and!, and VLTOT4 is fortheperiod :-3, 1-2, I-I ande, VR3 and VR4are the volatilitymeasures of RLTOT forthe
      periodof 1-2, I-I and I, and 5-3, 1-2, 1-I and!, successively. DUMMYis the dummyvariable equal to I times LTOT wheneverLl'OT,isgreaterthanLTOT.5.
                                                                                uo
                                                                        -L-1101-j    1o4o41 S!Jflfl IOAOU24M     Jfl   sOmu 04 imbo Oqoun Auiwnp oqi Si }vJ41JJ -ApAissioons 7 PUS j-I '-l
                                                                                                                                                                                         (-7 PUB 'I pus i-i -s Jo pouad
       oqlJoJLoLpaJo SOJEIBUmU Ap1I4S1OA 045
                                                       l
                                                  PNAP"0 (MA ;pu -i'-J'(-;popodoqiJoJ ('IOLlA pue UB I-i 'z-; spopadaojaps1Jo UU1 0l4MJ0 U0qB!AOppJBpuBhsoLflSB alnsooulMiuleoAoqs Si OI-1A poqiim
          2uuojij ouiomiusd-uou £q pouioiqo 'juo W0J spodxo IBOJJ0 0401041 Aq p0142mM Open JO SWIO1 JO iuouodmo, ienpsa OqI Si JOIN p04)0W 8uu01j!Joulouiumd-uou Aq pOUSBlq0 dUO 180.101 SIIOdXD BOIJ0 0(150 011 X4
                                              4li                               !                                                                                                                   i
         iod dNO SaloqIjO
     ____________ 541
                           1
     p0148iaMapu1oJoSULIO1 Joluouodwoopuol4         LOJJ1 dUO 05 }JJ0O51SJ 041 dUO%t1' 0"-II°P211 lur-ISLIOn UI gjido,iod          jS0jjOiO 01415! DddNOl (duo 012U!ABS1U0Wu10A08 elouo2Jo 01150014 duO%Os gpdoo
                                44MO1 091 S')(fldt4O JOISIJOp dUO 041J0 SLIUO)UI0421UOi)I3IJU! 0541 0qJfl dUO 0] S8UIASS Ui!OJOJJO 011v04
                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                            dUO%dS)X!0A!SS000nS 'dUO%OSPUSMOJNO 1dM dUD%1S'°JpOST] SoqousA
                            dUO"/0OSUUB MOdNOM_idNTh PUTT dUO%dSM dUO%dSJ°OflirA 5)0220 41 (-)duo%ds STUD 0) 2u!ABS oiotudjo 0!tflI 044 Si (auov5as) 04012u1tes OWAPST oosaq100rndu!0.10 soi1siwlw-l :olof.
 ccoo           noo              pcoo           tcoo             noo             t'coo           vco'o             no-c             not                                                        uoissoi2ojo 10110 p10p11015
                                                                                                                                                                                                               suoqg,uosqçJ
  611             6!?             61?             6TZ             61?               61?           61?                  61?           61?           6!?           61?             61?                             ausd 5101
 Zt'60           160             lt'60           H'60            tt'6'0          1P6t            1f'60             060              lt'6'0        O60           0t'60           Ot-60                               vu
(1L9l)          (9191)          (E19i)          (cLcl)          (ssc1)          (vuT)
 coot           coo-U            cooo           P00U             P00-U           cooo                                                                                                                             AYil411U
(810-)         (8L1o-)                                                                         (t'Lco-)           (occo-)
 0f'o.o-        ot,0.o-                                                                         8t70-0-            91'OO-                                                                                                 flIA
                               (too-)           (LOGO)                                                                             ((910-)       (6010-)
                                0000-           0000                                                                                !lO0          LOOt-                                                                   (MA
                                                                (6cvo)                                                                                         (19 co)
                                                                9100                                                                                            1100                                              l'tOflA
                                                                                (oco)                                                                                          (cco)
                                                                                 8100                                                                                           8100                              £IOJTIA
(81cc)         (Lccc)           (61st)          (o9c)           (occc)          (ct9E)          (vosc)             (69cc)           (lot)        (oL9c)        (99cE)          (t'occ)
 VITO           110              6110            9110           (HO              8110           L110                P110            1110          8(10          @110            OttO                                LOL'TU
(p9cc)         (9oPo)           (czvo)          (osro)          (69(0)          (trio)          (LVco)             (Ec@o)           (Lo@o)       (szco)        (srvo)          (ocro)
 1900           1900            scot            scot              900           6c0U            1900               (900             scoo          6coo          1900            0900                                 tori
(cocc-)        (voc-)          (Lzvc-)         (arc-)          (tcic-)         (oozc-)         (6Lcc-)            (66cc-)          (cicc-)       (GEIc-)       (c9oc-)         (990-c-)
 coca-          coo-c-          cooo-           cooo-           coot-           coot-           cooo-              cooo-            coot-         coot-         coot-           cooo-                            dUO%Z}N
(8899-)        (stc9-)         (c!99-)         (1819-)         (?Lv9-)         (o9c9-)         (0819-)            (L9c9-)          (LLp9-)       (9Ic9-)       (Ioc9-)         (t9r9-)
Lt90-           6190            6190-           1190             1190-          1E90-           £090-              0190             960          t'090          1090-           6090                            dQO %D SM
               (cvvo)                           (taco)          (LsEo)          (9oco)                             (cco)                         (6c9o)         (((c-a)        (8c90)
                1(00                             8(00           0(00            6(00                               @4'00                          ocoo           ovoo           Icoo                             MDdMOM
(c19P)         (or't')         (L9cp)           (LLov)          (900f)          (PLoP)          (ccct')            (PLo-f)          (cocP)       (9?ot)        (6c6E)          (9sot)
 1610           9810             610            (810             1810           9810             0610              (810              6810         1810          0810            1810                              DddNOq
               (8 LU-U-)                       (pojo-)         (czIo)           (Lno)                             (oio)                          (oLoo)        (9Tro)          (soco)
                coo 0-                          9000-           8000            6000                               9000                           cooc          1100            0100                                'MNIM
(ELcz-)        (VPc-z-)        (coc-z-)        (oLd-)          (Lzcz-)         (it'vz-)        (v9c1-)            (dc-?-)          (L8Ez-)       (o(cz-)       (661?-)         (to
8610            8610-           t-810-          P810-           L610-           6810-           6610-              L61O-            @810-         1810-         coo-            9810-                           dUD%1JSM
(csL'L)        (oELL)          (paL)           (889L)          (8c9L)           (L19L)         (6c8L)             (I'E8L)          (01st)        (l6LL)        (ZPLL)          (aLL)
 9L1'O          8Lt'O           ELPO            9LV0            ?LP0             ILVO           1810               9810             6L10          £810          6L10            6L10                          (1-)duo%ds
 (tO             U0              (01)            (6)              (s)               (L)          (9)                   (c)           (v)           (c)           (1)             (1)
                                                                                    (nu 3!a!amcacd-uoN          'apc13JO     smiaj pa)qMaJ
                                                                                   spajj pax!j 14UM POIIPIAJ OqtJt IS]IIOIIIIIJISUI
                                                               96-0861    'alB! suiAE5 flBA!JJ alfljo s)ucuuualaq :sapjuno3 ucoajy uEflqo5-qn5
                                                                                                              9 aqcf
                                                              Table 7
                           Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private Savings Rate, 1980-96
                                          Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                                (Unweighted terms of trade, lIP filter)

                                                  (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                (6)
       SP%GDP(-l)                               0.475             0.467               0.475              0.474              0467               0.466
                                               (8.738)           (8.473)             (8.740)            (8.730)            (8.472)            (8.463)
       RSF%GDP                                 -0.125             -0.133             -0.125             -0.123             -0.134              -0.133
                                              (-1.996)           (-2.099)           (-1.996)           (-1.985)           (-2.112)            (-2.125)
       RINFL                                   -0.033             -0.031             -0.033                                -0.030
                                              (-0.612)           (-0.562)           (-0.605)                              (-0.547)
       LGNPPC                                   0,085              0.105              0.085              0.100              0.105              0.i21
                                               (2.367)           (2.791)            (2.368)             (2.898)           (2.784)             (3.334)
       RGNPGR                                   0.082              0.084              0.082                                 0.082
                                               (1.193)           (1.223)            (1.197)                               (1.181)
       RSG%GDP                                 -0.601             -0.609             -0.601             -0.591             -0.613              -0.604
                                              (-6.930)           (-6.968)           (-6.907)           (-6.867)           (-7.016)            (-6.988)
       M2%GDP                                  -0.003             -0.003             -0.003             -0.003             -0.003              -0.003
                                              (-3.715)           (-4.073)           (-3.722)           (-3.874)           (-4.052)            (-4.184)
       LTOT                                     0.003             -0.003              0.004              0.002             -0.006              -0.010
                                               (0.071)           (-0.074)           (0.083)             (0.049)           (-0.135)            (-0.218)
       RLTOT                                    0.083             0.092               0.084              0.090              0.090              0.097
                                               (2.633)           (2.871)            (2.669)             (2.909)           (2.835)             (3.090)
       VLTOT3                                   0.052
                                               (0.750)
       VLTOT4                                                     0.122
                                                                 (1.59 8)
      VR3                                                                            0.035               0.048
                                                                                    (0.474)             (0.67 1)
      VR4                                                                                                                   0.120              0.144
                                                                                                                           (1.360)            (1.676)
      DUMMY2                                   0.005              0.006              0.005              0.005               0.006              0.006
                                              (2.394)            (2.431)            (2.392)            (2.355)             (2.454)            (2.442)

      Adj. Ri                                  0.931              0.932               0.931              0.931              0.932              0.932

      Totai panel                               283                279                283                 283                279                279
      Observations
      Standard error of                        0.055              0.055              0.055               0.055              0.055              0.055
      regression
Note: t-stalistics are in parentheses. Private saving rate (SP%GDP) is the ratio of private saving to GDP. SP%GDP(-1) is the lagged value ofSP%GDP.
RSF%GDP and RINFL, RONPOR and RSG%GDP are the instrumentai variables used for S%CDP, INEL, GNPGR and SG%ODP, successively
(SF%GDP is the ratio of foreign savings to GDP; INFL is the inflation rate in terms of the GDP deflator; GNP0R is the growth rate of the eeal CiNP per
capita; SG%ODP ia the ratio ofgeneral government saving to ODP). LGNPPC is the log ofecal GNP per capita in constant US dollars, M2%ODP is the
ratio of M2 to GDP. LTOT is the trend component of terms of trade, obtained by Hodrick-Prescott filter method. RLTOT is the residual component of
tcnns oftrade, obtained by l-lodsick-Prescott filter snethod. VLTOT3 ia the volatility measure as the standard deviation ofterms oftrade for periods t-2, I'-
 I ande, and VLTOT4 is for the period t-3, t-2, I-I andL VR3 and VR4 are the volatility measures ofRLTOT for the period of 1-2, i-i and I, and (-3, t-2,
1-I and t, successively. DUMMY2 is the dunmay variable equal to I times LTOT whenever LTQTI is greater than both the mean ot'LTOT and LTOTw.
                                                                         TableS
                          Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private Savings Rate, 1980-96
                                         Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                       (Unweighted terms of trade, Optimum lambda filter)

                                                (1)              (2)                  (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)
       SP%GDP(-l)                             0.518              0.515              0.518            0.520             ft516              0.517
                                             (8.537)           (8.413)             (8.546)          (8.676)            (8A08)            (8.530)
       RSF%GDP                               -0.110             -0.110              -0106           -0.097             -0.107             -0.098
                                            (-1.548)           (-1.543)           (-1.494)         (-1.386)           (-1.495)           (-1.398)
       RINEL                                 -0.046             -0.045             -0.049                              -0.047
                                            (-0.719)           (-0.695)           (-0.762)                            (-0.730)
       LGNPPC                                 0.173              0.175              0.170            0.182              0.173             0.186
                                             (3.673)           (3.672)            (3.641)           (4.148)           (3.640)            (4.186)
       RGNPGR                                 0.029              0.039              0.024                               0.032
                                             (0.345)           (0.468)            (0.294)                             (0.400)
       RSG%GDP                                -0628             -0.619             -0.624           -0.630             -0.620             -0.625
                                            (-6.428)           (-6.284)           (-6.407)         (-6.528)           (-6.316)           (-6.432)
       M2%GDP                                -0.004             -0.004             -0.004           -0.004             -0.004             -0.004
                                            (-4.428)           (-4.397)           (-4.445)         (-4.612)           (-4.415)           (-4.595)
       LTOT                                  -0.044             -0.044             -0.041           -0.039             -0.043             -0.041
                                            (-0.749)           (-0.739)           (-0.700)         (-0.677)           (-0.718)           (-0.718)
       RLTOT                                  0.108             0.103              0.115             0.116              0.107             0.108
                                             (3.323)           (3.192)            (3.519)           (3.762)           (3.269)            (3.496)
       VLTOT3                                -0.027
                                            (-0.33 8)
      VLTOT4                                                    0.071
                                                               (0.799)
      VR3                                                                         -0.039            -0.031
                                                                                  (-0.448)         (-0.367)
      VR4                                                                                                              0.069              0.078
                                                                                                                      (0.673)            (0,775)
      DUMMY2                                 0.006              0.005              0.006             0.007             0.005              0.006
                                            (2.033)            (1.776)            (2.085)           (2.216)           (1.790)            (1.917)

      Adj. It?                               0.936              0.935             0.936              0.936             0.935              0.936

      Total panel                             224                224               224                224               224                224
      Observations
      Standarderrorof                        0.056              0.056             0.056              0.055             0.056              0.056
      regression
Note: t-statisties are in parentheses. Private saving rate (SP%GDP) is the ratio of private saving to GOP. SP%ODP(-1) is the lagged value ofSP%ODP.
RSF%GDP and RINFL, RONFUR and RSG%GDP are the instrumental variables used for SF%GDP, INUL, GNPGR and SG%GDP, successively
(SF%GDP is the ratio of foreign savings to ODP; INFL is the inflation rate in terms of the GDP deflator; ONPGR is the grotth rate of the real C}NP per
capita; SG%GDP is the ratio ofgeneral government saving to GDP). LGNPPC is the log of real GNP per capita in constant US dollars. M2%GDP is the
ratio ofM2 to ODE LTOT is the tread component of terms oflrade, obtained by optimum lambda filtering method. RLTOT is the residual component of
terms of trade, obtained by optimum lambda filtering method. VLTOT3 is the volatility measure as the standard deviation of temss of trade for periods
2, i-i and and VLTOT4 is for the period 1-3, !-2,t- I and 1, VR3 and VR4 are the volatility measures of RLTOT for the period of t-2, s-I and I, and t-3,
(-2, 1-1 and , successively. DUMMY2 it the dummy variable equal to I times LTOT whenever LTOT, is greater than both The mean of LTOT and
LTOT,1.
                                                             Table 9
                          Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private Savings Rate, 1980-96
                                                Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                               (Unweighted terms of trade, Non-parametric filter)


                                                (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)

       SP%GDP(- I)                             0.505              0.502              0.504             0.506               0.503              0.505
                                              (8.051)           (7.949)             (8.041)            (8.221)           (7.988)             (8.143)
       RSF%GDP                                -0.128             -0.126             -0.126             -0.116             -0.124             -0.115
                                             (-1.801)           (-1.778)           (-1.763)           (-1.669)           (-1.734)           (-1.652)
       RINFL                                  -0.042             -0.040             -0.045                                -0.042
                                             (-0,677)           (-0.641)           (-0724)                               (-0.670)
       LGNPPC                                  0.144              0.150              0.142              0.153              0.146              0.158
                                              (3.336)           (3.430)            (3.318)             (3.806)           (3.379)             (3.911)
       RGNPGR                                  0.041             0.048               0.035                                 0.042
                                              (0.505)           (0.593)            (0.442)                               (0.528)
       RSG%GDP                                -0.642             -0.634             -0.638             -0.645             -0.636             -0.642
                                             (-6.473)           (-6.335)           (-6.456)           (-6.598)           (-6.411)           (-6.540)
       M2%GDP                                 -0.004             -0.004             -0.004             -0.004             -0.004             -0.004
                                             (-4.665)           (-4.646)           (-4.716)           (-4.900)           (-4.672)           (-4.861)
       LTOT                                   -0.020             -0.023             -0.017             -0.020             -0.020             -0.024
                                             (-0.401)           (-0.453)           (-0.331)           (-0.392)           (-0.395)           (-0.471)
       RLTOT                                   0.107             0.104              0.115               0.121              0.109              0.115
                                              (2.846)           (2.769)            (3.024)             (3.303)           (2.863)            (3.137)
      VLTOT3                                  -0.003
                                             (-0.042)
      VLTOT4                                                     0.082
                                                                 (0,93 7)
      VR3                                                                           -0.014             -0.005
                                                                                   (-0.181)           (-0.072)
       VR4                                                                                                                0.067               0.080
                                                                                                                         (0.705)             (0.859)
      DUMMY2                                  0.005              0.005              0.005              0.005              0.005               0.005
                                             (1.972)            (1.886)            (1.964)            (1.959)            (1.918)             (1.917)

      AdJ. 1(2                                 0.936             0.935               0,936             0.936              0.935              0.93 6

      Total panel                               224               224                224                224                224                224
      Observations
      Standard error of                        0.056             0.056              0.056              0.05 5             0.056              0.056
      regression
Note: t-statisties are in parentheses. Private saving rate (SP%GDl') is the ratio of private saving to GD?. SP'/aGDP(-l) is the lagged value of SP%GDP.
RSI1%GDP and RINFL, RGNPGR and ItSG%tl0P are the instrumental variables used for SF'/SGDP, INFL, GNPGR and SG%GDP, soecessively
(SF%GDP is the ratio of foreigti savings to GDP; INFL is the inflation rate in terms of the GD? deflator; GNPGR is the growth rate of the real GNP per
capila; SG%GDP is the ratio ofgeneral government saving to GD?). LGNIPPC is the log ofreal GNP per capita in constant US dollars. M2%GDt' is the
ratio of M2 to GDP. LTOT is the trend component of tenna of trade, obtained by non-parametric filtering method, RLTOT is the residual component of
tcnna oftrade, obtained by non-parametric filtering method. VLTOT3 is the volatility measure as the standard deviation of terms of trade for periods /-2,
I-I and C, and VLTOT4 is for the period 1.3, t-2, /-landt. VR3 and VR4 are the volatility measures of RI.TOT for the period of 1-2, 1-1 and /. and 1-3, t-2,
I-I and', successively. Dl,fl\tM'Y2 is the dummy variable equal to 1 times LIOT whenever LTOrI is greater than both the mean ofLTOT and LTOT,.,.
                                                             Table 10
                          Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private Savings Rate, 1980-96
                                         Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects



                                               (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
      SP%GDP(-1)                              0.460             0.454             0.459              0.456             0.454              0.452
                                            (8.675)            (8.434)           (8.627)           (8.577)            (8.363)           (8.324)
      RSF%GDP                                -0.111            -0.116            -0.111             -0.113            -0.115             -0.118
                                            (-1.802)          (-1.861)          (-1.808)           (-1.847)          (-L841)            (-1.908)
      RINFL                                  -0.010            -0.006            -0.015                               -0.010
                                            (-0.176)          (-0.108)          (-0265)                              (-0.179)
      LGNPPC                                 0.090              0.095             0.088             0.102             0.094              0.109
                                            (2.644)           (2.725)            (2.574)           (3.159)            (2.693)           (3.275)
      RGNPGR                                 0.088             0098               0.090                                0.101
                                            (1.291)           (].431)            (1.316)                              (1.469)
      RSG%GDP                                -0.595            -0.602            -0.595            -0.579             -0.60!             -0.584
                                            (-7.060)          (-7.061)          (-7.034)          (-6.999)           (-7.049)           (-6.999)
      M2%GDP                                 -0.003            -0.003            -0.003             -0.003            -0.003             -0.003
                                            (-3.850)          (-4.093)          (-3.799)          (-3.949)           (-4.065)           (-4.179)
      LTOT                                   -0.009            -0.002            -0.009            -0.009             -0.003             -0.005
                                            (-0.261)          (-0.063)          (-0.251)          (-0.263)           (-0.088)           (-0.144)
      RLTOT                                  0.110              0.107             0.108            0.112               0.106              0.112
                                            (4,511)           (4.373)            (4.401)           (4.745)           (4.303)            (4.706)
      VLTOT3                                 0,065
                                            (1.294)
      VLTOT4                                                   0.082
                                                              (1.50 1)
      VR3                                                                         0.100             0.099
                                                                                 (1.711)           (1.820)
      VR4                                                                                                             0.115              0.111
                                                                                                                     (1.657)            (1.665)
      DUMMY2                                 0.006             0.006              0.006             0.006             0.006              0.006
                                            (2.127)           (2.110)            (2.111)           (2.008)           (2.101)            (1.986)

      Adj. R2                                0.934             0.934              0,934             0.934             0.934              0.934

      Total panel                             283               279                283               283               279                279
      Observations
      Standard error of                      0.054             0.054              0.054             0.054             0.054              0.054
      regression
Note; s-statistics are in parentheses. Private saving rate (SP%60P) is the ratio ofprivate saving to GOP. SP%SJDP(-l) is the lagged value ofSP%GDP.
RSF%GDP and RINEL, RGNPGR and RSG%GDP are the instrumental variables used for SF%GDP, INFL, GNPGR and SG%GDP, successively
(SF%GDP is the ratio of foreign savings to GOP; INFL is the inflation rate in tersais ofthe GDP deflator; GNPGR is the growth rate ofthe real GNP per
capita; SG%GDP is the ratio ofgeneral government saving to GOP). LGNPPC is Ihe log of real GNP per capita in constant US dollars. M2%GDP is the
ratio of M2 10 GDP. LTOT is the trend component of terms of trade weighted by the ratio of real exports to real GOP, obtained byHodrick-Prescott filler
method. RLTOT is lhe residual component of Irons ofirade weighted by lhe ratio of real exports to real GDP, obtained by Uodrick-Preacott filter
method. VLTOT3 ia the volatility measure as Ihe standard deviation of weighted tenns oftrade for the periods of 1-2, f-I and t, and VLTOT4 is for the
period t-3, 1-2, f-I and 1. VR3 and VR4 are the volatility measures of RLTOT fortheperiod of h2, 1-1 and, and /-3, s-2, f-I and f. successively.
DIJMMY2 is the dummy variable equal tot times LTOT wheaeevcrLToT,ia greater than both the mean of LTOT and LTOT,.1.
                                                                        Table 11
             Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private Savings Rate, 1980-96
                                               Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                              (Weighted terms of trade, Optimum lambda fitter)

                                               (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
       SP%GDP(-1)                             0.473              0.474             0.477             0.475              0.480              0.479
                                             (7.720)           (7.736)            (7.772)            (7.832)           (7.800)            (7.875)
       RSF%GDP                               -0.173             -0.182             -0.169            -0.168             -0.178            -0.178
                                             (-2.250)          (-2.347)           (-2.192)          (-2.201)           (-2.292)           (-2.308)
       RINFL                                 -0.007             -0.005             -0,012                               -0.013
                                             (-0.100)          (-0.083)           (-0.181)                             (-0.186)
       LUNPFC                                 0.197              0.194             0.194             0.202              0.t90              0.196
                                             (4.331)           (4.304)            (4.323)            (4.838)           (4.255)            (4.744)
       RGNPGR                                 0.028             0.017              0.029                                0.023
                                             (0.356)           (0.220)            (0.379)                              (0.292)
       RSG%GDP                               -0.633             -0.624             -0.633            -0.633             -0.628            -0.629
                                            (.6.685)           (-6.619)           (-6.664)          (-6.826)           (-6.610)           (-6.784)
       M2%GDP                                -0.005             -0,005             -0.005            -0.005             -0.005            -0.005
                                            (-5.205)           (-5.202)           (-5.180)          (-5.409)           (-5.132)           (-5.366)
       LTOT                                  -0.015             -0.012             -0.019            -0.018             -0.017            -0.016
                                            (-0.35   I)        (-0.272)           (-0.429)          (-0.451)           (-0.399)           (-0.404)
      RLTOT                                   0.112             0,109              0.113             0.115              0.111              0.112
                                             (4.585)           (4.515)            (4.642)            (4.891)           (4.567)            (4.813)
      VLTOT3                                  0.018
                                             (0.332)
      VLTOT4                                                    0.0 19

                                                               (0.33 8)
      VR3                                                                          0.020             0.020
                                                                                  (0.337)           (0.360)
      VR4                                                                                                               0.017              0.018
                                                                                                                       (0.264)            (0.281)
      DUMMY2                                  0.006             0.006              0.006             0.006              0.006              0.006
                                             (1.609)           (1.622)            (1.635)           (1.648)            (1.651)            (1.667)


      Adj. P.2                                0.941             0.94 1             0.941             0.942              0.941              0.942


      Total panel                              219               219                219                219               219                219
      Observations
      Standard error of                       0.053             0.053              0.053             0.053              0.054              0.053
      regression
Note: S-statistics are inparcntheses. Private savingrate (SP%GD?) is the ratio of private saving to GOP. SP%UDI'(-l) is the lagged value ofS?VsGDP.
RSF%GD? and RINFL, RGNPGR and RSG%GDP are the instnsmental variablea used for SF%GDP, NFL, GNPGR and SG%GDP, successively
(SF%GDP is the ratio of foreign savings to (JO?; NFL is the inflation rate in semis of the GD? deflator; GNPGR is the growth rate of the real UN? per
capita; SG%GDP is she ratio ofgeocral government saving to 00?). LGNPPG is the log of reat UN? per capita in constant US dollars, M2%GD? is the
ratio ofM2 to GDP. LTOT is the trend component of terms ofirade weighted by tbe ratio ofreal exporta to real GD?, obtained by optimum lambda
filteriag method. RLTOT is the residual component of terms ofirade weighted by the ratio ofreal exports to real GD?, obtained by optimum lamhda
filteeiag method. VLTOT3 is the volatility measure as the standard deviation of weighted terms oftaadc for periods 1-2, t- I andi, and VLTOT4 is for the
                        fl3
period 5-3, 5-2, 2.1 and I.    and VR4 am the volatilitynieasures ofRLTOT for the period of 5-2, r-l andt, and t-3, 5-2, 2-1 and I, successively.
DUMMY2 is the dummy variable equal to I times LTOT whenever LTOT,ia greater than both the mean of LTOT and LTOTI.I.
                                                                          Table 12
              Sub-Saharan African Countries: Determinants of the Private Savings Rate, 1980-96
                                               Instrumental Variable Method with Fixed Effects
                                               (Weighted terms of trade. Non-parametric filter)


                                                (I)               (2)                 (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
       SP%GDP(-1)                             0.478              0.479               0.483            0.478              0.485              0.481
                                             (7.740)            (7.750)           (7.788)            (7.799)            (7.840)           (7.858)
       RSF%ODP                               -0.180             -0.190             -0,178            -0.179             -0.191             -0.193
                                             (-2.320)          (-2.429)           (-2.276)           (-2.322)          (-2.445)           (-2.496)
       RINFL                                  0.019              0.020               0.003                               0.005
                                             (0.295)            (0.307)           (0.052)                              (0.091)
       LGNPPC                                 0.185              0.183               0.183            0.192              0.186              0.193
                                             (4.049)            (4.025)           (4.056)            (4.552)           (4.133)             (4.612)
       RGNPGR                                 0.055              0.044              0.054                                0.049
                                             (0.709)            (0,564)           (0.710)                              (0.642)
       RSG%GDP                               -0.610             -0.602             -0.603             -0.595            -0.610             -0.603
                                             (-6.374)          (-6.3 13)          (-6.308)           (-6.408)          (-6.377)           (-6.486)
       M2%GDP                                 -0.005            -0.005             -0.005             -0.005            -0.005             -0.005
                                             (-5.221)          (-5.221)           (-5.254)           (-5.418)          (-5.348)           (-5.518)
       LTOT                                    0.049             0.051               0.049             0.049             0.052              0.051
                                             (0.818)           (0.888)            (0.836)            (0.902)           (0.932)             (1.003)
       RLTOT                                   0.115             0.110             0.114              0.118              o.J 10             0.114
                                             (3.561)           (3.419)            (3.524)            (3.773)            (3.424)            (3.669)
       VLTOT3                                  0.018
                                             (0.337)
       VILTOT4                                                   0.02 0
                                                                (0.3 53)
       VR3                                                                         -0.000             -0.004
                                                                                  (-0.006)           (-0.062)
       VR4                                                                                                              -0.045             -0.047
                                                                                                                       (-0.541)           (-0.565)
       DUMMY2                                 0.003              0.004             0.003              0.003             0.003               0.003
                                             (1.240)            (1.252)           (1.080)            (1.046)           (1.227)            (1.201)

       Adj. R2                                0.940              0.940               0.940            0.941             0.941              0.941


       Total pane]                             219               219                 219               219                219               219
       Observations
       Standard error of                      0.054              0.054               0.054            0.054             0.054              0.054
       regression
             are in parentheses. Private saving rate (SP%GDP) is the ratio ofprivale saving to GOP. SP%GDP(- I) is the lagged value ofSP%GDP.
Note: t-statistics
RSF%GDP and RINFL, RGNPGR and RSG%GDP are The inatrurnental variables used for SF%GDP, INH, GNPGR and SG%GDP, suceessivety
(SF%GOP is the ratio of foreign savings to GOP; JNFL is the inflation rate in tenns ofThe GOP deflatog GNPGR is The growth rate ofthe real GNP per
capita; SG%GDP lathe ratio of general government saving to GDP). LGNPPC is the log of real GNP per capita in constant ff8 dollars. M2%GDP is the
ratio of M2 to GOP. LTOT is Ihe trend component of terms of trade weighted by the ratio of real exports to rent GOP, obtained bynon-parasoetrie
filtering method. RLTOT is the residual component of terms oftrade weighted by the ratio of mat exports to mat GOP, obtained by non-parametric
filtering method. VLTOT3 ia the volatitity measure as the standard deviation ofweiglited lernts of trade for periods 1-2,1-I andt, and VLTOT4 is for the
period I-], 1-2, f-I andt. VIR3 and VR4 are the volatility measures of RLTOT fortheperiod of (-2, t-t and:, and 1-3, t-2, f-I and'. successively.
OLJI\iIMY2 is the dummy variable equal to t times LTOT whenever LTOT1 is greater than both the mean of LTOT arid LTOT,i.
