                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FINANCIAL CRISIS, HEALTH OUTCOMES AND AGING:
                             MEXICO iN THE 1980s AND 1990s


                                                  David M. Cutler
                                                   Felicia Knaul
                                                   Rafael Lozano
                                                   Oscar Méndez
                                                   Beatriz Zurita


                                               Working Paper       7746
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w7746




                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 2000


This paper  was originally prepared for a conference on "New Approaches in Organizing and Financing Health Care
Systems." We are grateful to the National Institutes on Aging for financial support, to Ana Mylena Aguilar, Hector
Arreola, Paul Kowal, Yvon Saenz and Paola Zufliga for excellent research assistance, and to Elizabeth Brainerd, Ed
Dowd, Bill Encinosa, Jorge Escobeda, Sonia Fernández, Julio Frenk, Francisco Garrido, Chris Murray, Pierre Pestieau
and participants in the conference for comments and suggestions. The usual caveats apply - all errors are ours and results
do not necessarily reflect the work or opinions of the institutions we represent.

  2000 by David M. Cutler, Felicia Knaul, Rafael Lozano, Oscar Méndez, and Beatriz Zurita. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
Financial Crisis, Health Outcomes and Aging: Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s
David M. Cutler, Felicia Knaul, Rafael Lozano, Oscar Méndez, and Beatriz Zurita
NBER Working Paper No. 7746
June 2000
JELNo. Ii, F3


                                              ABSTRACT

       We study the impact of economic crisis on health in Mexico. There have been four wide-
scale economic crises in Mexico in the past two decades, the most recent in 1995-96. We find that
mortality rates for the very young and the elderly increase or decline less rapidly in crisis years as
compared with non-crisis years. In late 1995-96 crisis, mortality rates were about 5 to 7 percent
higher in the crisis years compared to the years just prior to the crisis. This translates into a 0.4
percent increase in mortality for the elderly and a 0.06 percent increase in mortality for the very
young. We find tentative evidence that economic crises affect mortality by reducing incomes and
possibly by placing a greater burden on the medical sector, but not by forcing less healthy members
of the population to work or by forcing primary caregivers to go to work.



David M. Cutler                                               Felicia Knaul
Department of Economics                                       World Health Organization
Harvard University                                            20, Avenue Appia
Cambridge, MA 02138                                           CH-1211, Geneva 27
and NBER                                                      Switzerland
dcutler@fas.harvard.edu                                       knaulf@who.ch

Rafael Lozano                                                 Oscar Méndez
World Health Organization                                     Fundacion Mexicana para la Salud
20, Avenue Appia                                              Periférico Sur No. 4809
CH-1211, Geneva 27                                            El Arenal Tepepan, Tlalpan
Switzerland                                                   C.P. 14610, Mexico, D.F.
lozanor@who.ch                                                omendez@funsalud.org.mx

Beatriz Zurita
Fundacion Mexicana para la Salud
Periférico Sur No. 4809
El Arenal Tepepan, Tlalpan
C.P. 14610, Mexico, D.F.
bzurita@funsalud.org.mx
I. Introduction

          What are the consequences of economic downturns for the well-being of populations?

Clearly, incomes fall, poverty increases, and standards of living decline for most. But economic

downturns may have a more lasting impact on other aspects of well-being, and specifically on health.

          The impact of economic and financial crisis on health is particularly important because

economic crises have been both frequent and severe over the past three decades, particularly in

developing countries (Glick and Rose, 1998; Corsetti, Presenti and Roubini 1998). In Mexico, the

case that we study in this paper, large economic crises occurred in 1976, 1982, 1987, and 1994.

Much of Latin America experienced financial crisis in the 1 980s, and the mid-i 990s saw a wave of

crises throughout the developing world. Further, health effects in developing countries may be large

because large segments of the population are vulnerable — for example, the very young, the old, or

the poor. Examining how and why the health status of these groups is affected by an economic crisis

is therefore an important step in developing policy to alleviate the social welfare impact of economic

crisis.

          In this paper, we explore how economic crisis in Mexico affected health outcomes with a

special focus on the elderly population. Mexico is a particularly important developing country for

the study of the impact of economic downturn on health. First, as noted above, economic crises have

been repeated and severe. Second, Mexico is undergoing a prolonged and protracted epidemiological

transition, accompanied by population aging (Lozano and Frenk, 1999; Frerk et al., 1989). Third,

Mexico is one of the only developing countries with time series information on health, health care

and economic outcomes at the national and sub-national levels.

          We analyze the effects of economic crisis on mortality rates in Mexico, particularly the crisis


                                                    3
of 1995. We note at the outset that mortality is only one measure of health status and not likely to

be the most responsive or easily observable indicator of the effect of economic crisis. Morbidity and

other indicators of well-being may show more rapid changes. Still, we focus on mortality rates

because substantially more data are available on mortality over time and by age group and region

than is the case for any other measure of health status.

        Our empirical analysis points to a strong conclusion: mortality rates have increased with

economic crisis, particularly among the elderly and possibly among the very young. We estimate

that mortality changes between 1994 and 1996 (equivalently, the mortality rate in 1996)among the

population aged 60 and over were about 5-6 percentage points worse than expected based on pre-

crisis trends. For children aged 0 to 4, mortality rates were approximately 7 percentage points above

expected levels. This translates into about 7,000 additional deaths among children (.06 percent of

the 11 million children) and 20,000 additional deaths among the elderly (.4 percent of the 5 million

elderly).

        The increase in mortality rates associated with economic crisis is of particular concern given

long-run declining trends for mortality in Mexico and in most of the world (World Health

Organization, 1999a). They are also of concern because of the growing share of the aged in

developing countries, to rival the shares traditionally observed only in developed countries (World

I-Iealth Organization, 1999).

        We consider four theories for why the crisis in Mexico affected mortality: first, that the crisis

reduced income, which reduced resources for goods that improve or maintain health, such as out-of-

pocket medical spending or vital nutrition; second, that the crisis reduced public sector finds for

health systems, which affected groups particularly dependent on those systems; third, that the crisis


                                                   4
caused more people to work, which resulted in health reductions for affected workers; and fourth,

that the crisis affected the informal care that families can provide for children and the aged. We find

strongest evidence for the first two of these theories and little evidence for the latter two.

Specifically, we show that as the supply of medical resources in an area fell, mortality increased, and

that as more women went to work in an area, mortality rose. We count this as reflecting income

changes rather than changes in the ability of women to provide home services because the effect of

womens' work on mortality is found even for women without any aged family members. There is

some, but a weaker correlation between the supply of public medical resources and mortality.

       The paper begins, in the next two sections, by discussing the links between economic crisis

and health, and the evidence from a number of developed and developing countries. The fourth

section provides an overview of the nature of economic crisis in Mexico over the past 3 decades,

recent demographic and epidemiological trends characterizing the health condition of the population,

and the structure of the health care system in Mexico. The fifth section begins our empirical results

by considering trends in national mortality rates by age and cause of death. The sixth section

examines the reasons for higher mortality using cross-state evidence. The last section concludes.



H. Economic Crisis, health and vulnerability

       Economic crises are among the most severe and concentrated economic downturns. While

economic crisis is rare in modem-day developed countries, it has become a repeated feature of the

economies of many developing countries. In Latin America, particularly in the 1980s, many

countries suffered periods of dramatically high in±lation, increased unemployment, currency flight,

devaluation, and declining purchasing power. In some cases recovery was relatively rapid, while in


                                                  5
others downward spirals have lefi. lasting effects.

       One of the most disturbing aspects of economic crisis has been the effect on the poor and

other vulnerable population groups. Some studies suggest that, rather than being insulated from the

effects of economic crisis through limited participation, the poor are amongst the hardest hit

(Levinsolm. Berry and Friedman, 1999). This may involve a shock to income, but also a shock to in

social protection such as access to health services. Other work has highlighted the impact on

purchasing power that has impoverished middle-income groups (Boltvinik and Hemández, 1999).

Economic crisis may expose families that previously earned incomes that were low but sufficient to

maintain them above a poverty line to sudden reductions in purchasing power that make it

impossible to meet the needs of all members. Health, especially for particular groups such as the very

young and the very old, may be one of the areas most likely to suffer from these survival strategies.

       Economic crisis might affect health in four ways. The first is a reduction in family income.

Average family income declines in an economic crisis, and families must adjust to this in some way.

Absent the ability to borrow the entire shortfall, consumption will decline with declines in income.

The consumption decline may, in turn, affect the health of different family members. Direct medical

care spending is one use of funds that may be reduced —and this may be aggravated if coupled with

price increases for particular products such as drugs. Other types of spending may also be cut back.

For example, the quality and quantity of food consumption may fall if food is imported and import

prices rise, with a resulting impact on nutrition, health status and well-being. The health of

vulnerable family members such as the elderly may decline, even if other groups are able to maintain

themselves in the face of short-run crises.

       In addition to overall spending, the distribution of resources within the family may change as


                                                  6
 well. Families may devote a smaller share of resources to vulnerable or dependent members(the

elderly or young) when overall income is lower. Discrimination may also generate biases in the

distribution of resources. A substantial literature exists showing that girls receive fewer family

resources than their brothers (Sen. 1997). This may include a poorer diet and less timely access to

medical care (Chen et al., 1981).

        The second mechanism through which crisis may affect health is by changing public sector

resources. Loss of salaried employment often involves loss of the access to social health security

services and increased reliance on private health care or public services (Langer, Lozano and

Bobadilla; 1991). In Mexico, for example, between 40 and 50 percent of the labor force, and their

dependent family members, receive social security through their principal place of work. Only formal

sector workers are covered, however; those working in the informal sector by definition have no

access to social security through work. Thus, job loss, a move to the informal sector, or medium-run

periods of unemployment imply loss of social security coverage for workers and families. Further,

since health is a large part of public sector spending and public sector deficits usually rise in an

economic downturn, efforts to cut public deficits are likely to imply reductions in public medical

services (Lara et al., 1997; Wibulpolpraser, 1999). Each ofthese mechanismsmay particularly affect

the most vulnerable members of society.

       Historically, the most vulnerable members in developed countries were infants and some

research (discussed below) highlights the impact of economic crisis on infant mortality. Still,

effective public health programs have been developed that focus on children and matemal health,

attacking age-specific mortality that is particularly amenable to preventive interventions. These

vertical programs may have been protected despite periods of economic downturn (Ignacio-Santos,


                                                7
Veras Godoy and Flores del Campo, 2000). In contrast, the elderly have not tended to be the focus

of public health or social protection, their medical care costs are often high, and their sources of

illness are not necessarily amenable to many health interventions, leaving them particularly

vulnerable to economic downturn. Further, the elderly population is often more costly and difficult to

protect with existing technology, particularly in poor countries. At the same time, demographic and

epidemiological transitions have occurred so that populations have aged and patterns of death and

disease are more concentrated among chronic and non-communicable disease. Thus, the elderly now

constitute another, large population group highly exposed to the mechanisms that generate

vulnerability to economic downturn yet without the social protection that may be available to other

population groups such as the insured and children.

        The third link between economic crisis and mortality is that additional family members may

need to go to work in an economic crisis, and this could affect their health. Families often react to

economic crisis, declining incomes of primary wage-earners. and declining purchasing power by

sending more family members to work, particularly women and children. Evidence is available for

Mexico as well as other countries (Gonzalez de Ia Rocha, 1988; Benerfa, 1992; Chant, 1994;

Gonzalez de Ia Rocha, 1995; Moser, 1995; Gonzalez de Ia Rocha, 1998; Cunningham, 2000).

Depending on the nature of the work, child and youth labor force participation, can result in reduced

school attendance and negative implications for health (Knaul and Parker, 1998; Duryea, 1997).

Similarly, the elderly may enter the work force as well, although their health conditions might dictate

otherwise. For the elderly this either means reentering the labor force, or not retiring. In Mexico, only

50 percent of the labor force is covered by pensions and more than 90 percent of these have a

pension worth less than one minimum salary (approximately $US7O) per month (CONAPO, 1998).


                                                   8
 Thus, even in times of economic recovery, many elderly leave the formal labor force with a pension

 and continue to work in the informal sector in order to supplement their pension income. The

informal labor market accounts for up to 50 percent of employment in many Latin American

countries,

        A related work explanation is that the stress of work could increase mortality. Evidence from

developed countries suggests that increased job stress and lack ofjob control adversely affect health

(Bosma et a!., 1997). Job stress may increase in poor economic times. Unemployment may also

cause stress and therefore increase health problems (Hammerstron, Janlert and Theorell, 1988;

Janlert, Asplund and Weinehall, 1992), although decreased incomes may generate reductions in risk-

taking behaviour (Ruhm, 1995). Further, certain types of work may have more adverse health

consequences, as suggested by the importance of the shift from manual to white-collar jobs in

explaining reductions in chronic disease rates in the 20th century (Costa, 2000). Youths and elderly

who go to work may suffer stress and thus have worse health outcomes, particularly if the type of

work is hazardous or if work is scarce and underemployment pervasive.

        The final mechanism is that economic crises may lead caregivers to enter the labor force,

reducing their ability to care for those who are more dependent. Family caregivers are particularly

important in countries like Mexico, where nursing home and long-term care for the elderly is not

publicly provided and private medical care is only accessible to the wealthy. This explanation is

particularly important in the case of women, who are frequently at home caring for children and the

elderly. Women who need to work, for example during times of crisis, will have less time to provide

non-market goods to children and the elderly. If children need to work, they will also have less time

to care for the elderly, and vice versa. There are also potential interactions among different members


                                                  9
 working. The entry of young family members into the labor force may generate unemployment

 among the elderly, for example.



 IlL Previous evidence on health and economic crises

        The likelihood of a counter-cyclical relationship between economic recession and health

 outcomes, with an important moderating role for governments via the provision of health services,

has been investigated in both developing and developed countries (Musgrove, 1986 and 1987). One

of the most severe economic crises of the twentieth century was the Great Depression in the United

States. Breimer (1973) argues for an inverse relationship between mortality and economic

fluctuations, as measured by unemployment rates. The methodology and findings have been

disputed, however, and several authors suggest there is little evidence for or against such a

relationship (Wagstaff, 1985; Stern, 1983; Gravelle, Hutchinson and Stern, 1981; McAvinchey,

1988; Joyce and Mocan. 1993).

        Indeed, research on the effects of less severe economic downturns in developed countries

suggests that the relationship to mortality may have pro-cyclical components. Deaton and Paxson

(1999) using data from a panel of aggregate birth cohorts spanning 1975 to 1995 find that cyclical

increases in income raise mortality, which may be attributed to increased risk taking behavior. Still,

the long-run effect of increased income is protective and negatively correlated with mortality. Ruhm

(1996) presents a fixed effects model of the effect of unemployment on age-specific, adult mortality

using longitudinal, state-level data from 1972 to 1991 for the United States. He finds a negative

relationship between unemployment rates and total mortality for each age group, as well as with all

specific causes except suicide. The postulated explanations are the time costs of medical care and


                                                 10
healthy lifestyles, and the possible negative health effects of employment.

        The evidence suggests no one specific relationship between economic crisis and health.

Indeed, Murray and Chen highlight a general declining trend in age-specific mortality rates in most

countries that is highly resilient to shocks (Murray and Chen, 1993).

        Studies, particularly from the developing world, are hampered by data limitations, yet

information exists for a number of countries. Evidence of dramatic increases in adult mortality in

Russia has generated a large body of research. Age-adjusted mortality in Russia rose by more than 30

percent between 1990 and 1994, and life expectancy for men and women declined from 64 and 74

years to 58 and 71 years, respectively. More than three-quarters of the decline in life expectancy is

attributable to increased mortality rates among adults aged 25 to 64. Cardiovascular disease and

injuries account for approximately 65 percent of the decline. While causal factors are still being

debated, economic and social instability, high rates of tobacco consumption, high and concentrated

alcohol consumption, poor nutrition, depression and a deterioration in the health care systemappear

to be occurring simultaneously (Notzon et al., 1998; Chener et al., 1998; Walberg et al., 1998; Leon

et al., 1997; The Lancet, 1999; Brainerd, 1997).

       Indonesia has suffered a very recent and severe economic crisis. Family-level, panel data

from before and after the crisis provides information on the impact of the crisis (Frankenberg, Beegle

and Sikoki, 1998). In 1998 compared to 1997 use of public health care services declined among

adults, and there was a shift to private providers, although among the poorest households financial

constraints on private health care increased. Among children, the overall use of health services

declined, which resulted in reductions in the proportion receiving Vitamin A, among other services.

There is evidence of an improvement in health status based on self-reports over the period, yet


                                                 11
 weight declined for all age groups, especially among the oldest and the poor.

         Thailand suffered an economic downturn in 1997 that included a decrease ofper capita GDP

 of more than 30 percent. As part of the response to the crisis, the real public sector health budget was

 reduced by 17 percent. The prevalence of underweight schoolchildren and low-birth-weight

newborns increased in 1997 and 1998, particularly among the poor. There is also evidence of

increasing incidence of measles, malaria and diarrhea among children, although no changes in

mortality rates. Both the incidence and mortality rates of clengue haemorrhagic fever also increased

(Wibulpolpraser, 1999).

        In Cuba the tightening of the US embargo in 1992, in the context of a severe economic

decline from 1989 is reported to have had an important effect on health and health care. Total

mortality increased from 6.4 to 7.2 per 1000 inhabitants between 1989 and 1994. The increase is

almost entirely due to a 15 percent rise in mortality among Cubans aged 65and over associated with

influenza, pneumonia, tuberculosis, diarrhea, suicide, unintentional injuries, asthma and heart

disease. Deaths from each of these causes rose by 10 percent among the older population between

1992 and 1993. The medical system largely succeeded in protecting women and children, although

there is some evidence of an effect of prolonged crisis.

        Most relevant for this paper is evidence from Mexico. Data show that the crises of 1982 and

1987 forced families to reduce both the quantity and quality of food consumption. This was a

combined effect of reduced real salaries, increased unemployment and withdrawal of government

food subsidies on basic foodstuffs. Per capita consumption of basic foodstuffs and of non-protein

foods such as rice, the staple of many underprivileged groups, fell dramatically between the early and

late l980s. Rice consumption, for example, fell an annual level of 7.3 kg per capita to 3kg (Cordera


                                                  12
 Campos and Gonzalez Tiburcio, 1991; Langer, Lozano and Bobadilla; 1991).

         Trends in infant mortality in Mexico, although they have declined continuously throughout the

twentieth century, show a relationship to economic downturns (Langer, Lozano and Bobadilla, 1991).

Between the crises of the 1 980s, the infant mortality differential between rural and urbanareas, families

with more and less educated mothers, and between communities with belier or worse housing, all

increased. For example, infant mortality was 1.65 times as high in rural as in metropolitan areas prior

to 1982. Between 1982 and 1986, the difference doubled so that the rural rate was approximately 4

times the rate in larger cities. Further, during the crisis period, the decline in deaths from respiratory

ailments was lower than before the crisis. Dysentery, malnutrition and anemia, all causes associated

with deteriorating socio-economic conditions spawntg reduced hygiene and inadequate diets, gained

relative importance as causes of death among infants. Messmacher (1999) using state-level data from

1993 to 1996 on mortality, state employment rates, and social security coverage at the state level, finds

that homicide rates are significantly related to economic conditions,



1V Economic Crises, Health Conditions and the Health System in Mexico

         In Mexico, economic crises have been repeated and intense with intervening periods of mild

economic recovery. Over the last three decades, there have been four crises spanning the period of

the late 1 970s, the early 1 980s, the mid to late 1 980s and the mid 1 990s.' These are characterized by

sudden increases in inflation and unemployment accompanied by external imbalances and large



I Throughout the paper, we date crises as starting in the year in which real GDP declined the most and ending in the
year in which real GDP growth returned to pre-crisis levels. Thus, the crisis periods are 1983-84, 1986-89, and
1995-96. The results are relatively insensitive to the timing of the crises, with the exceptions discussed in the text.



                                                          13
devaluations. Three of these crises are evident from data on Mexico City, Guadalajara and Monterrey

where open unemployment increased dramatically in 1977, 1983, and 1995 (Figure 4.1). Data on

GDP growth, shown in Figure 4.2, show that in 1983 the rate of economic growth declined to -4.0

percent, in 1986 it again fell to -2.6 percent, and in 1995 it was -4.4 percent. Inflation followed a

similar pattern, going from 42 percent to 110 percent from 1982 to 1983, between 1986 and 1988

from 74 percent to 153 percent, and from 7 percent to 41 percent from 1994 to 1996. Relative to

1981, the real minimum wage declined by 18 percent in 1983, by 13 percent in 1988 and by 12

percent in 1994. The purchasing power of the minimum wage has been steadily eroding, and the gap

between prices and earnings has widened substantially since 1994 (Figure 4.3).

       The timing and severity of economic crises tend to vary across and within states — a finding

that is important for the regression results presented below. Some states suffered particularly large

declines in GDP between 1993 and 1996, while others appear to have been more insulated (Figure

4.4). These differences are not clearly correlated with the extent of poverty in each state. For

example, Chiapas, a poor state, suffered a less pronounced decline than did some richer states.

       The impact of economic crisis on health outcomes is likely to be a reflection of demographic

and epidemiologic transition. As is the case elsewhere in Latin America, Mexico is well into its

epidemiological transition but the process has been characterized as 'protracted and polarized (Frenk et

al., 1989). Mexico currently faces the double burden of a backlog of 'pre-transitional', infectious

disease and nutritional deficiencies in poorer parts of the country,juxtaposed with a growing burden

from chronic, non-infectious illness (Frenk et al, 1989; Frenk, Lozano y Bobadilla, 1994; Frenk,

Lozano and GOnzalez Block, 1994). In 1940, infections, diarrheas, and pneumonia accounted for 60

percent of deaths, while in 1992 more than 60 percent of deaths are associated with non-

                                                  14
 communicable diseases; 21 percent with communicable diseases, maternal mortality, perinatal

 mortality and malnutrition; and 15 percent with injuries (Frenk, Lozano and Gonzalez Block, 1994).

 Further, aging is dramatically reflected in the distribution of mortality. While in 1950 13 percent of

deaths occurred afier age 70, in 1995 the figure was 39 percent. There are large differences in health

outcomes within and between regions that reflect the high degree of inequality in both health status and

the distribution of health services. Infant mortality in the southern,poorer states was approximately 92

per 1000 in the 1 980s, as compared to 28 per 1000 in the wealthier, northern region (Bobadilla et al.,

1993).

         The health situation that has resulted from the prolonged and polarized epidemiological

transition, and the increasing complexity of health care needs associated with aging, place a heavy

burden on a relatively extensive, but inefficient, health system (Ham-Chande, 2000; Frenk, Lozano and

Gonzalez Block, 1994). The Mexican system is segmented and fragmented. The poor and uninsured

have the legal right to access the public health system in which the largest institution is the Secretariat

of Health. The package of services tends to be limited and does not reach largeparts of the population.

The insured population working in the private sector has the right to use the more extensive health

network of the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS,), while public sector workers are covered by

social security through ISSSTE. In 1994 official figures suggest that 52 percent of the population was

covered by social security, 38 percent through the Secretary of Health and solidarity programs in the

rural areas, and 11 percent were without access to services (Poder Ejecutivo Federal, 1995; Frenk et al.,

1999). It is in the poorest areas of the country where health status tends to be lowest, that health care

services are scarce (Figure 4.5; Frenic et al., 1995; Frenk, 1997; Lara et al., 1997). Given the lack of

quality and coverage that characterizes much of the public system, a large part of the demand for health


                                                   15
 care is met through out-of-pocket payments by both the insured and the uninsured population. Tn 1994,

 23 percent of all medical consultations and hospitalizations by the insured population and 47percent by

 the uninsured population occurred in the private sector (Frenk et al., 1999; Zurita, Nigenda, Ramfrez,

 1997; Knaul, Parker and Ramirez, 1997; Frenk, Lozano, Gonzalez Block, 1994).

        Economic shocks may force families to either reduce their consumption of health care, to

decrease their private spending on health care, or to use the public sector, facing queues and perhaps

lesser quality. They may change the composition of the care that they seek between the private and

public sector. Further, economic shocks tend to generate a decline in formal sector employment and

hence health insurance coverage, causing additional pressure on Secretariat of Health services,

increasing demand for private medical care or reducing the consumption of health care.



V Trends in Age-spec We Mortality

        We begin our empirical analysis by considering overall mortality rates in Mexico. The

mortality data that we employ are based on national statistics and population estimates produced by

the Mexican Secretary of Health (Secretarla de Salud), the national statistical agency (the Instituto

Nacional de Estadistica, Geograjia e Informatica INEGI) and the National Council on Population

(Consejo Nacional de Poblacion, CONAPO). We use information, by detailed age grouping, divided

into major cause groupings (I (communicable, nutritional and reproductive), II (non-communicable),

III (injuries) and ill-specified). We focus on the data from 1980 on, as the quality of these data has

been improved by adjusting for under-registration and misclassification of causes (Frenk, Lozano

and Gonzalez Block, 1994, Lozano et al., 1999; Lozano. 1997). These corrections improve the

quality of the time series, as under-registration, although declining over time, remains an important


                                                  16
source of error in Mexican mortality data (Frenk et al., 1999). The data were first corrected for

underreporting of deaths using information from Census data and from the National Family Plamiing

Surveys. Approximately 85 percent of under-registration occurs in the rural areas, and 60 percent is

attributed to deaths among children below age 5. We also compare the adjusted time series to

official, published data on mortality and demographic trends from the Secretariat of Health and the

National Council on Population. We analyze trends in mortality data at the level of the nation as a

whole from 1980 to 1996 and across states from 1982 to 1996.

        Overall mortality declined by nearly 30 percent from 1980 through 1996, which corresponds

to the longer-run trend associated with the epidemiologic transition. Figure 5.1 shows mortality by

cause from 1980 through 1996. The top line is overall mortality, scaled to 100 in 1980, so that the

trend can be interpreted in percent changes. The first row of Table 5.1 reports annual percent

changes. The remaining lines in the figure refer to Group I mortality (communicable, nutritional and

reproductive), Group II communicable disease mortality, and mortality from injuries (Group III).

Injuries include both intentional and non-intentional causes, among them accidents, homicides, and

suicides. Each of these lines is scaled to overall mortality in 1980, so the bottom three lines add to

the top one.

       The decline in mortality has not been even over time, and matches the pattern of economic

crises. Between 1980 and 1982, before the first crisis, mortality declined by 4.8 percent per year.

Between 1982 and 1984, the years of the crisis, the mortality decline fell in half, to only 2.5 percent

per year.

       Mortality statistics for the second crisis are more variable. In the 1984-85 pre-crisis period,

the Mexican economy was still recovering, and mortality was falling only modestly (a decline of 1.5


                                                  17
percent per year). Mortality declined at a similar rate over the period of the economic crisis (1.6

percent per year from 1985 to 1989), suggesting no effect of the crisis on mortality. But annual data

show this story is more mixed. Mortality declined rapidly in 1986 (5.5 percent) and then was flat

through 1989. Because of the difficulty in measuring pre-crisis trends and dating the timing of the

crisis exactly, we do not focus very heavily on this second economic crisis.

       A sustained period of economic growth between 1989 and 1994 reduced mortality by 2

percent per year. Since then mortality rates have increased. Mortality rose by approximately 1

percent in 1995 and fell by 1 percent in 1996, for a total change of 0.3 percent per year.

       Data by cause do not suggest any one explanation for the slowdown in mortality reduction in

recent years Chronic and non-communicable disease mortality —the leading cause group of death in

Mexico — rose by about 3 percent between 1994 and 1996, and communicable disease mortality,

which had been declining rapidly, declined much less rapidly. Death from injuries, the smallest of

the rates, continued to decline. The lack of any one dominant cause of increased mortality suggests a

systemic explanation more than a disease-specific explanation. Figure 5.2 shows changes in

mortality rates by age and sex. In each case, we scale the series to 100 in 1980. To aid in

interpretation, Table 5.1 shows annual changes in mortality rates by age and sex, for the same time

periods. There is clear evidence that economic crisis is associated with increased mortality for the

elderly, and possibly for the young. The figures and table suggests three age groupings of the

population; infants and children (less than 15); the elderly (ages 60+); and the middle aged (in

between). Changes in mortality for infants and young children match well the pattern of economic

crises. Mortality decline was rapid throughout the late 1 980s and early 1 990s, which corresponds to

good economic years (as high as 9 percent annual declines in mortality), and then slowed down in


                                                 18
bad economic periods. Indeed, in some cases, such as the 1986-89 crisis and post-crisis period,

mortality for infants actually increased, while in other cases, such as the 1995 crisis period, mortality

rates declined but at a less rapid rate. Some of the leveling off may be the result of the fact that

infant mortality had reached a low level by the mid-1990s so that additional gains were more

difficult to attain. Note that child mortality fell less rapidly during the crisis years as well.

        Similar patterns are true about the elderly. In this case, though, mortality actually increases

during economic crises. For example, mortality for people aged 70-79 fell by about 2.5percent per

year between 1989 and 1994, but rose by about 1 percent per year between 1994 and 1996. The

middle-aged population sees much steadier changes in mortality. In fact, the male population aged

15-29 and 30-44 — the groups for which medical care utilization is likely to be lowest — actually

experience larger mortality declines during years of economic crisis than during years of economic

growth. The female population in this age group shows on average the same decline in mortality in

good and bad economic years.

       Given that the Mexican Health Foundation mortality data are based on adjustments of official

data, we compare mortality changes among the elderly using several sources. Figure 5.3 compares

mortality rates for age groups 60-9, 70-9 and 80 and over, using three sources of data: the Mexican

Health Foundation (MHF) adjusted data on mortality and population trends (MHF/MHF), Secretariat

of Health estimates of mortality rates which are based on CONAPO population estimates

(SSAICON), and Mexican Health Foundation adjusted mortality estimates with CONAPO

population statistics (MHF/CON). All sources show an increase in mortality rates among the all age

groups in 1994 to 1996. The MFHI'MHF estimates, which are the ones used in this paper, show the

most moderate increase. Further mortality rates increased moderately, or declined less, in the 1980-9


                                                   19
period as compared to the years of economic recovery of 1989-1994. Finally, for the years 1997-8

data are only available from official statistics (SSAJCON) but these show that mortality rates again

decline.

       We examine the cause of increased mortality in Figure 5.4 for infants and the elderly. The

majority of the increase in mortality is in non-communicable disease mortality. For the elderly, for all

age groups, the pattern shows increases in mortality or slower declines in 1994-6 and 1980-9, than in

1989-94. Further, the 1994-6 mortality changes contrast markedly with the 1980-94 time period,

where chronic disease mortality was falling for all of the elderly other than the oldest old. For

infants, there are also increases or reduced declines in 1994-6. While disease-specific patterns have

to be analyzed with caution due to reporting error and sample size issues, increases in chronic

disease mortality among the elderly is seen for such causes as cardiovascular (including heart attacks

and cerebrovascular disease) and chronic respiratory and obstructive pulmonary disease. Group I

(communicable) disease mortality rates increased in the 1994-96 period, particularly for the elderly.

For other age groups, and in the 1980-89 period, the rates declined less than between 1989 and 1994.

The pattern for injuries does not demonstrate a clear relationship to cycles in economic growth

among infants or the elderly.

        Mortality changes varied substantially across states and were not limited to very poor areas.

Figure 5.5 shows the changes in mortality for the 1980-89, 1989-94 and 1994-96 periods for each of

5 states. Chiapas and Oaxaca are the poorest states in the country, while Nuevo Leon and Quinatana

Roo are the wealthiest. Mexico City is a mixture of poor and wealthy regions and populations. In all

of the areas, there are increases, or reduced declines in mortality during the periods of economic

crisis. The differences across age groups thus do not reflect a clear pattern across rich and poor


                                                  20
states.                                   -


           The trends in mortality by age and gender summarized in Figure 5.2 can be used to generate a

'differences-in-differences' estimate of the effect of economic crisis on mortality (Table 5.2).

Denoting the mortality rate as MR, the affected group as 'a', the unaffected group as 'u', and 't' as

the time period which we are examining, our estimate is:



           D = ch(MRat) — ch(MRa,ti)]            -
                                                     [ch(MR0) — ch(MRti)]



           We take as our potentially affected groups infants and the elderly. We use males aged 30-44

as the group whose health is least likely to be affected in the short-term by economic crisis.2 The

time period t corresponds to years of crisis and t-1 corresponds to the preceding years of economic

growth.3

           Table 5.2 shows the differences-in-differences estimates of mortality changes. As with any

complete census, the standard errors are very small; the standard error for the difference-in-

difference estimate D is never above 0.1 percent. Since all of the results are statistically significant,

we do not report these values.

          The results show large effects of crisis on mortality. h the 1982-84 crisis, the differences-in-

differences estimates of mortality changes are generally similar across groups, at roughly 6 to 9


2
    The results are qualitatively similar if we use males aged 15-29 as the unaffected group.

  We could alternatively estimate a regression model for modality for different age groups and estimate the crisis
impact relative to the entire time period. But the trends in mortality for different age groups appear to vary over
time, so we do not follow this path.




                                                           21
percent. The 1995-96 crisis witnessed increases in mortality of 5 to 7 percent.

        The 1986-89 crisis had a smaller effect on mortality for most age groups, with the exception

of infants. For the elderly, the excess change in mortality rates is 1 to 4 percent; for infants, the

excess mortality change is 10 percent. As noted above, however, because of the short pre-crisis

period we do not place particularly high weight on this experiment

        These changes in mortality are quantitatively significant. In 1990, there were approximately

11 million children and 5 million elderly in Mexico. Using the estimates in the last colunm of Table

5.2, we calculate that the number of additional deaths was 7,000 to 8,000 children aged 0 to 4

(compared to approximately 57,000 actual deaths) and 20,000 to 21,000 elderly aged 60 and over

(compared to 192,000 actual deaths). By another metric, these deaths represent 0.06 percent of the

young population and 0.4 percent of the elderly population. Overall, our results provide strong

evidence that economic crisis is associated with increased mortality, and that this change is

quantitatively important. The increase in mortality is not attributable to just one or two causes; both

conmiunicable and chronic disease mortality rose with the economic crisis.

       One might wonder whether these mortality changes are simply higher mortality among those

who were 'marginal survivors' and would have died in the next year or two without the crisis. If this

were the case, the crisis would simply hasten death by a few months to a year, but not impact people

with high long-term expected survival. We cannot address this issue for certain without longitudinal

information on the characteristics of people who die. We suspect this is not the case, however,

because the increase in mortality is observed for all causes of death. Marginal survivors, in contrast,

might be expected to die of particular diseases to a great extent, such as pneumonia or influenza.




                                                 22
 Vt How Economic Crisis Affects Mortality

         In this section, we analyze the reasons why economic crisis has such a large effect on

mortality. Testing different explanations with time series data is difficult, since it is hard to capture

all of the factors that change over time. We thus use data disaggregated to the state level to test the

four explanations for the change in mortality discussed above. We examine the years 1991, 1993,

1995 and 1996 in order to be able to match available time series on employment to data on mortality

and the supply of health care services.4

         We test the four theories of economic crisis presented above. The first explanation is the

income theory: mortality increases because family income falls and thus families have less to spend

on goods that improve or maintain health. We test this theory in several ways. First, we examine

changes in labor force participation across states. As the economy declines, fewer people with strong

attachments to the labor force (for example prime-aged males and some elderly) will be able to work

but more secondary workers (generally women, children and some elderly) will enter the labor force

(Beneria, 1992; Chant, 1994; Gonzalez de la Rocha, 1988; Moser, 1995; Gonzalez de la Rocha,

1995). We use as our first measure of economic crisis the reduction in labor force participation for

prime-age males and the increase in participation rates for women, children, and the elderly.

         The employment data come from the Encuesta Nacional de Einpleo (National Employment

Survey - NES), undertaken in the second trimester of 1991, 1993, 1995 and 1996 by the Instituto


  We also estimated regression models for mortality at the level of the microregion --groups of counties or
municipalities (municipios) of at least 20,000 people —of which there are 713, although only 90 have sufficiently
large populations to enable data analysis, and the city-level. These results were similar to the state-level analysis.
We thus present the state-level analysis only.

  We experimented with using data on GDP at the state level but found the employment data to be a better measure
of economic crisis. Further, the GDP data are only available from 1993 at the state level.


                                                           23
Nacional de EstadIstica, Geografla e Informal/ca (INEGI,) and the Secretarla del Trabajo y

Prevision Social. The NES cover both the urban and rural areas of Mexico and include

approximately 143,000 adults in 1991, 140,000 in 1993, 110,000 in 1995 and 365,000 in 1996. The

sample is nationally representative and divided into urbanized and less urbanized areas. The 1991,

1993 and 1995 samples are designed only for disagreggation into less and more urbanized areas,

while the 1996 sample is representative at the state level.6

         Table 6.1 shows summary statistics for these employment rates. The male labor force

participation rate fell from 91 percent in 1991 to 89 percent in 1996. The decline is not large, but

there was also a shift towards unemployment as rates among adult males went from in 3.6% in 1994

to 6.1 in 1995 and 5.3 in 1996 (INEGI, 1998). Over the same time period, female labor force

participation rose from 37 to 43 percent. Participation among youth and among the elderly fell. Both

the increasing trend for women, and the decline for children and youth are in line with longer run

trends, although the crises were accompanied by increased unemployment among youth and perhaps

increased participation of women.

         While we include overall trends in participation in our regressions, we note that this may not

be the best measure of economic crisis. Employment declines among the elderly, for example,

might result from either the healthiest and wealthiest choosing to retire, which would not have much

effect on health, or from those with low family income not being able to find work, which might


6 For the municipality-level regressions we use the NES employment data but must rely on a sample of only 90
micro-regions that are included in all years of the survey and have more than 30 observations for adults in any year.
The 90 micro regions cover 47 percent of the population included in the NES of 1996 and 83 percent of the urban
population, yet only 15 percent of the rural sample. For the analysis at the city level we use the Encuesta Nacioncil c/c
Einpleo Urbana (National Survey of Urban Employment - NSUE) from 1992 to 1996 which are representative of 32
of the largest cities and 225,000 adults.



                                                          24
well affect health. Similarly, there may be shifts from the formal sector, with better working

conditions and benefits, to the informal sector. We cannot match mortality to particular individuals,

however, so we cannot examine how changes in employment for particular workers affect their

health.

          The second explanation is the public medical system theory: mortality increases because public

sector spending on medical care falls absolutely, or relative to the need for public care. Public sector

budgets declined in crisis years. Lara et al (1997) present the trends in public sector per capita health

expenditure. In 1982, reported spending on health and labor (labor represents only 1 percent of

spending) reached 3.6 percent of GDP. In 1987, it reached its lowest point of 2.7 percent and from

1990 to 1994, rose steadily to over 4 percent. Between 1994 and 1996 per capitahealth spending fell by

about 15 percent and as a proportion of GDP from 3.8 percent to 3.4 percent (Figure 6.1). It is also

important to note that during the 1990s there was some effort to increase the level of spending on the

uninsured population as compared to the insured. There was a significant increase between 1990 and

1994 in per capita spending on the uninsured population through the PASSPA program (Pro grama de

Apoyo a los Sen'icios de Saludpara Población Abierta) which included the poorest states of Hidalgo,

Oaxaca, Guerrero and Chiapas (Figure 4.5). Spending doubled from .26 pesos per capita to .58 in

1994, while spending in other regions remained relatively stable. Thus the PASSPA region went from

being one where public health spending per capita was low compared to other parts of the country, to

one where per capita allocations are relatively high. Still, between 1994 and 1995, spending declined in

all regions, but most sharply in PASSPA, with a fall of 25 percent (Lara et al., 1997). In the l990s,

there was also a heavy focus on developing strong vertical public health programs to protect children

such as increasing vaccine coverage (Ignacio-Santos, Veras Godoy and Flores del Campo, 2000;


                                                   25
Gutierrez et al., 1999).

         We measure the public sector's supply of medical resources using data on the distribution of

public sector infrastructure (hospitals. clinics, doctors, and nurses) per capita.7 These data are

published by the Secretariat of Health and the Office of the President and refer only to the supply of

public services (the Secretariat of Health, the IMSS, the ISSSTE. etc). Thus, they are reasonably

exogenous measures of the ability to receive care. The supply of doctors, nurses and clinics per capita

in the public sector, measured as the number of units per 1000 population, increased up to the period of

crisis and then leveled off (Table 6.1). Although not evident from the data included in the table, there

was a slight worsening between 1994 and 1995 following by areturnto 1994 levels in 1996, and then a

continued increase the number of public sector physicians per capita in 1997 and 1998. Further, the

pattern varies across states. In some states, the number of public sector doctors per capita was rising

throughout the period 1991 to 1996, while in others such as Mexico City there are declines over the

period 1994 to 1996. Some of the increasing trend in the supply of physicians is associated with

PASSPA states such as Chiapas.

         Changes in the supply of doctors, nurses, clinics, and hospitals across states are highly

correlated. The correlation between changes in physicians per capita and both nurses and hospitals per

capita, for example, is .6. To avoid issues of multicollinearity, we only include the per capita supply of



 We also looked at the demand for public health spending using data on the proportion of the population covered by
social security (IMSS and. ISSSTE). Social security coverage is ameasure of formal sector, salaried employment, as weLl
of health insurance coverage for workers and their families. IMSS coverage declined over the crisis period. Between
1994 and 1995, the proportion of the adult population with social security coverage declined from 18.5 percent to 17.2
percent. Most of the decline is among short-term contract workers who are highly vulnerable to lay-offs. Among this
group, social security coverage declined by over 35 percent between 1994 and 1995. The social security coverage
variable was not as strong a predictor of mortality as the employment and medical variables, however, so we do not
report these results.




                                                         26
physicians in the regressions, although the results are very similar for hospitals, nurses and clinics.

        We are also interested in the possibility that families responded to reduced public medical care

budgets by increasing private payments. Overall, out-of-pocket health expenditures declined during the

crisis based on data from the Household Income and Expenditure Surveys of 1992, 1994 and 1996.,

from 3.9 percent of GDP in 1994 to 3.1 percent of GDP in 1995. The decline is evident among

middle-income and wealthier families in hospitalizations, and for families of all income levels for

doctor visits and dental care (Figure 6.2). Further, these declines are most substantial among families

with elderly members (27 percent), as compared to families with young children (15 percent) or

families that include neither children nor elderly (18 percent). This drop is concentrated among the

families in the wealthiest tercile (Figure 6.3).

        We experimented with a variety of measures of out-of-pocket medical spending in our

regressions. Unfortunately, there is an endogeneity problem with including such variables: when

people are sicker, they will spend more on medical care out-of-pocket. In our preliminary results, this

appeared to be the case: medical spending was positively associated with mortality. The appropriate

solution is to have an instrument for medical spending uncorrelated with sickness. We could not come

up with such an instrument, however, so we omit this variable from the regressions.

        The third theory is that mortality increases because workers who enter the labor force suffer

health declines. We test this using the labor force participation rates for youth and the elderly. To

the extent that these variables are significantly related to mortality, we would need additional

analysis to determine whether that is because they proxy for income changes or because increased

work among these populations is associated with worse health. Still, the available data is sufficient to

show whether or not there is a relationship between mortality at a given age and the participation


                                                   27
rates of the same age group.

        The final theory is that mortality increases because traditional caregivers have to enter the

workforce and thus the supply of informal health and care-giving services falls. We proxy for this

with the female labor force participation variable. Again, there is an identification problem with this

variable: if increased female labor supply is associated with higher mortality, we do not know

whether this is because income is falling or because family care-giving has declined. We return to

this issue below.

        Equal sized income changes may not have the same effect on all areas. In poorer areas, a

given reduction in income might have a larger effect on mortality than a similarly sized or even

larger change in rich areas, We include a measure of the illiteracy rate in the state (correlated with

overall poverty) to address this. The illiteracy rate is measured in 1995 and 1996. We interact this

with a dummy variable for the crisis years to see how economic crisis differentially affects high

versus low poverty areas. The mean state had an illiteracy rate of 12.2 percent.

        Table 6.2 presents regression estimates for age-specific mortality rates, differentiating by

gender for ages 15 to 29 and 30 to 44•8 Each row is a regression for a separate age group. The

dependent variable is the logarithm of mortality for the age group indicated. The independent

variables are shown in the next columns. The data are based on 32 states with data in 4 years, for a

total of 124 observations given that a few states have missing employment data in early years. Each



 The regressions at the microregion and city level tend to support the findings presented for the
regressions at the state level. Female employment rates are positively correlated with mortality for aged
60-69 and 80 and over, as well to some extent for children. Further, there is some support for the access
to medical care variables. Changes in the number of physicians per capita are negatively correlated
with mortality and tends to be significant for most age groups suggesting the potential importance in
changes in the supply of medical services.

                                                  28
cell gives the coefficients and t-statistics for each variable (other than the state and year dummies).

         The results suggest two conclusions most strongly. First, female labor force participation

rates are positively related to mortality among children and the elderly. A 3 percentage point

increase in female labor force participation — a rough estimate of the excess change from 1991

through 1996— leads to an increase of 0.8 percent in mortality among children, 1.2 percent in

mortality among youths, and about 0.4 percent in mortality among the elderly.9 These results are

generally statistically significant at the 10 percent, and sometimes 5 percent, level.

         Second, changes in public sector medical resources have some affect on mortality, although

the results are less strong than for female labor force participation. As the number of physicians per

capita falls, mortality among the youngest age groups and particularly among child-bearing women,

rises. The coefficients suggest that a decline of 1 percent in public sector physicians leads to a .4

percent increase in mortality rates among child-bearing women and a .25 percent increase in

mortality rates among children aged 0 to 4. We ran the regressions using each of the four measures

of access to medical care (nurses, doctors, clinics, and hospitals), and found similar results with each.

        The other variables are generally not as consistently or statistically significantly related to

mortality rates. When more elderly go to work, mortality rates among the elderly aged 60-69 rises.

But this is not true for other age groups among the elderly, who we suspect are also working.

Accordingly, we do not push this explanation particularly strongly. Male labor force participation

rates have a negative effect on mortality (the expected sign) but are not statistically significant.



 The female labor force participation rate (including all women aged 12 and over), roughly doubled between 1970
and 1990, reaching a level ofjust over 30 percent. This suggests a rate of increase of approximately .75 percent per
year. Applying this rate over a 5-year period 199 1-1996, and assuming that the rate of increase is the same for
women 18-65 as for women aged 12 and over, would imply an increase of almost 4 percent as compared to the?
percent observed in the data.

                                                         29
Youth employment rates are not significantly related to youth mortality. The indictor ofpoverty, the

proportion of adults who are illiterate, is positively and significantly related to mortality only for

children aged 0 to 4 and for elderly aged 60 to 69 but is negatively related to mortality for people

above age 80.

        Overall, the strongest conclusion is the link between female labor force participation rates

and mortality for children and the elderly. This fmding is consistent with two of our theories: that

the overall size of the economic shock affects mortality and female labor force participation proxies

for the size of the economic shock; and that when women go to work, they are less able to care for

dependent children and elderly, who suffer adverse health consequences as a result. To differentiate

between these two explanations, we separate out the female labor force participation rate into a rate

for adult women living in families with at least one elderly member and a rate for women living in

families without elderly members. If the caregiver hypothesis is correct, female labor force

participation in families with elderly should impact elderly mortality rates. If the economic crisis

effect is more apparent, this will not be disproportionately the case.

        The regression results differentiating between women in families with and without elderly are

presented in Table 6.3. While the standard errors increase substantially in this specification, as one

would expect given the correlation between these variables, the evidence is more consistent with the

economic shock theory than with the female caregiver theory. Female labor force participation in

families without elderly is positively and significantly associated with mortality for some elderly and

adult groups. At the same time, female labor force participation in families with elderly is

insignificant in all of the regressions and frequently and the opposite sign. We therefore conclude

that the effect of female labor force participation on mortality likely results from an income effect


                                                 30
more than a caregiver effect.



    VIIL Conclusions

        Our analysis of economic crisis in Mexico finds very clear evidence that economic crisis is

associated with higher mortality among vulnerable populations —children and the elderly. During

crisis periods, mortality rates for these groups rise absolutely and relative to less vulnerable groups.

The mortality change implied by economic crisis is large. We estimate mortality rate increases in the

1982-84 crisis of roughly 6 to 9 percent and during the 1995-96 of 5 to 7 percent.

       We provide tentative evidence of the explanations for this mortality increase. Using state-

level panel data, we find that the magnitude of the economic shock —as measured by the share of

women who enter the labor force — predicts increases in mortality. Further, reduction in public

sector medical services adversely affects mortality for at least some groups, although this evidence is

weaker than the results for female participation rates. We find no significant evidence that the

availability of caregiver time or having more children and elderly go to work adverse affects health

of these groups.

       There are several important areas for ifiture research in light of the results. Our research is

based on aggregate data, particularly at the state level. Additional conclusions and evidence could be

drawn from individual data that would make it possible to trace mortality in particular families.

These data may soon be available from the longitudinal component of the National Urban

Employment Survey.

       We found that the elderly constitute a particularly vulnerable group in time of economic

crisis. We hypothesize that the health of the elderly in developing countries is likely to be


                                                  31
particularly sensitive to economic trends and that the supply of health services may not be effective

in preventing this response.

       The growth of the elderly population presents a new challenge to health systems and social

support networks in many developing countries where populations are becoming old before they

become wealthy (Kalache and Sen, 1999). Historically, the very young have been dominant among

vulnerable groups and health systems, including the Mexican public sector, have reacted by

developing strong programs to support and protect the health of the young. The elderly constitute

another vulnerable group, yet the effect of economic crisis on the elderly may not have been present

or easily observable in the past as the proportion of the population to old age was small.

       The growth of the elderly population places new and emerging demands on the health care

system that add to the complexity and cost of the health care services required to meet the needs of

the population. The evidence presented in this paper highlights the importance of developing

institutions, interventions, health care services and other interventions tailored to the needs of older

as well as younger population groups. The elderly deserve particular attention in evaluating the

health and human costs of economic downturn and the range of policy responses that can be

implemented to reduce these costs by building public safety nets and support for families.




                                                  32
                                           References


AlarcOn G, D. (1994). La evolución de Ia pobreza en Mexico durante Ia decada de los ochenta.
      Frontera None Special number.

         (1999). Health in Russia is broke, but who is to fix it?. The Lancet. 353(9150); 337

Altimir, 0. (1990). Development, crisis and equity. CEPAL Review 40 (April).

_________ (1994). Distribucion del ingreso e incidencia de la pobreza a lo largo del ajuste. CEPAL
       Review 52 (April).

Altimir, Or. (1997). Desigualdad, empleo y pobreza en America Latina: Efectos del ajuste y del
       cambio en el estilo de desarrollo. Desarrollo Económico 37045).

Beneria, L.(1992) . The Mexican Debt Crisis: Restructuring the Economy & the Household. In
       Beneria & Feldman, eds., Unequal Burden. Boulder, San Francisco, Oxford: Westview
       Press.

Berg, A and C. Patillo (1999). Are Currency Crisis Predictable? A Test. IMF Staff Papers, 46(2),
       June

Bobadilla, J.L., et al., (1993). "The epidemiologic transition and health priorities". En D.T.
       Jamison, Mosley, WH, Measham, AR, and Bobadila JL, eds., Disease Con trol Priorities
       in Developing Countries. New York: Oxford University Press para el Banco Mundial.

Boltvinik, J. E. Hernández Laos (1999). Pobreza y DistribuciOn del Ingreso en México,Siglo
       XXI, Mexico.

Bosma, H , Marmot, M and Hemingway, H eta! (1997). Low job control and risk of coronary
       heart disease th Whitehall H (prospective cohort) study. British Medical
       Journal.314:558-565.

Brainerd E. (1997). Death and the Market. Mimeo, Williams College.

Breimer M.H. (1967). Economic Change and Mental Hospitalization: New York State, 1910-1960.
      Social Psychiatry 2(4) 180-188.

___________ (1969). Patterns of Psychiatric Hospitalization among Different Socioeconomic Groups
       in Response to Economic Stress. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 118(1); 31

            (1973). Fetal, Infant and material mortality during periods of economic instability.
       International Journal of Health Services ,3 (2); 145-159

                                                I
Chant, S (1994). Women, Work and Household Survival Strategies in Mexico, 1982-1992: Past
       Trends, Current Tendencies and Future Research. Bulletin of Latin American Research, 13
       (2).

Chen L. Huq E, and D'Souza S. (1981). Sex Bias in the Family Allocation of Food and Health Care
      in Rural Bangladesh, Population and Development Review. 7 (1);.55-71.

Chener, L, M. Mckee, V Shkolnikov, et.al (1998). Alcohol and cardiovascular mortality in
     Moscow; new evidence of a causal association. Journal of Epidemiology & Community
       Health; 52:772-774.

Consejo Nacional de Poblacion. CONAPO. (1995). Indicadores Socioeconomicos e Indice de
      Marginaciôn Municipal 1995. Mexico, D.F.

              (1998) .La Situación Demograflca de Mexico. Mexico, D.F.

Cordera, R. and E. Gonzalez Tiburcio (1991). Crisis and transition in the Mexican economy, in
      Mercedes Gonzalez de la Rocha and Agustin Escobar Latapi (eds.), Social Responses to
       Mexico's Economic Crisis of the 1980s. La Jolla: Center for U.S.-Mexican Studie,
       University of California, San Diego.

Corsetti, G, P. Pesenti and N. Roubini (1998) What Caused the Asian Currency and Financial
      Crisis: Part II The Policy Debate. NBER WP 6834. December

Costa, D.L (2000). Understanding The Tweintieh-Century decline in Chronic Conditions Among
       Older Men. Demography 3 7W; 53-72.

Cunningham W (1998). Breadwinner versus Caregiver: Labor Force Participation and Sectoral
      Choice over the Mexican Business Cycle. Mimeo.

Deaton, A, and Paxson, Ch. (1999). Mortality, Education, Income, and Inequality among American
      Cohorts. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 7140

Dc la Rica 5, and Lemieux T. (1993). Does Public Health Insurance Reduce Labor Market
       Flexibility or Encourage the Underground Economy?Evidence from Spain and the United
       States. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 4402.

Duryea, Suzanne (1997). "Children's Advancement through School in Brazil: The Role of
      Transitory Schocks to Household Income". Inter-American Development Bank. Mimeo.

Edwards, S. (1998). The Mexican Peso Crisis: How Much Did We Know? When Did We Know It?.
      World-Economy 21(1) pp. 1-30.


                                              2
Elizondo Mayer Serra, C (1998). Tres trampas: Sobre los origenes de la crisis económica mexicana
       de 1994. Revista-de-Economia-Politica 18(4);. 122-40.

Santos, J.I., M.E. Veras Godoy, Flores del Campo Orosco, J. G. (2000). Indicadores de atención ala
       salud del nifto. Gaceta Ivlédica de Mexico Vol 136 Suplemento No.!, S-li to S-19

Frankel J, A. and S. Schmukler. (1996). Country Fund Discounts, Asymmetric Information and the
       Mexican Crisis of 1994: Did Local Residents Turn Pessimistic Before International
       Investors?. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 5714.

Frankenberg E. K.Beegle B. Sikoki (1998). "Health, Family Planning and Well-being in Indonesia
      during an Economic Crisis: Early Results from the Indonesian Family Life Survey". Rand
      Labor and Poplation Program Working Paper Series 99-06.

Freak, J., et a!,, (1989). "Health transition in middle-income countries: New challenges for
       health care". Health Policy and Planning, 4, pp. 29-39.

Frenk J (1997). Mexico faces the challenge. World Health, April:20-23.

Frenk. J., Lozano, R. and Gonzalez-Block, M.A. (1994). Economlay Salud: propuestas para ci
       avance del sistema de salud en Mexico. Inforine final. Mexico, D.F. FundaciOn Mexicana
       para la Salud.

Frenk,J., Lozano, R and Bobadilla, IL (1994). La transicion epidemiologica en America Latina.
      Notas de Población, 22(60):79-l0l.

Frenk J, Durán-Arenas L, Vásquez-Segovia A, et al (1995). Los medicos en Mexico, 1970-1990.
       SaludPublica Mex;37: 19-30.

Frenk J, Knaul FM, Vázquez-Segovia LA, et al. (1999). Trends in medical employment: persistent
       imbalances in urban Mexico. AJPH 89: 1054-1058.

GarcIa N and Tolcman. (1984). Transformacion ocupacional y crisis. CEPAL Review 24 (December).

Garfiel Rand S Santana (1997). The impact of the Economic Crisis and the US Embargo on Health
        in Cuba American Journal of Public Health. 87;l5-20.

Glick R and A. Rose. (1998) Contangion and Trade: Why are currency crisis regional?. NBER WP
       6806 (November)

Gonzalez de la Rocha, M.(1988). Economic Crisis, Domestic Reorganisation and Women's Work in
      Guadalajara, Mexico, Bulletin of Latin American Research 7(2).


                                               3
        ________________ (1995). The Urban family and poverty in Latin America. Latin
        American Perspectives 22 :12.

       ________________ (1998). The Erosion of a Survival Model: Urban Household Responses to
        Persistent Poverty. Papers on Latin America 47. University of Columbia.

Graizbord B. and C. Ruiz. (1996). Recent Changes in the Economic and Social Structure of
      Mexico's Regions. In Changing structure of Mexico: Political, social, and economic
        prospects, edited by Laura Randall. Columbia University Seminar Series. Armonk, N.Y. and
        London: Sharpe; 365-390.

Gravelle, H.S.E, Hutchinson, G and J, Stern. (1981). Mortality and Unemployment: A critique of
      Brenner's time —series analysis. The ]iancet. 26; 675-679.

Gutierrez G, Reyes H, Fernández S. et al (1999). Impacto de los servicios de salud, ci saneamientoy
       la alfabetizacion en La mortal idad de menores de cinco anos. SaludPábljca de Mexico 41(5)
       pp.368-375.

Haaga, J and F. Mitchell (1997). The consumption of alcohol and mortality in Russia. The Lancet
       350;956-957.

Ham-Chande, R. (1996), El envejecimiento: una nueva dimension de Ia salad en Mexico. Salud
     Páblica de Mexico 38:409-418.

Haminarstrom, A (1988). Youth Unemployment and Ill Health: Results from a 2-year Follow-up
     Study. Social Science Medicine 2600); 1025-1033.

Instituto Nacional de EstadIstica Geografia e Jnformatica (IINEGI) (1996). Encuesla Nacional de
        Empleo. Mexico, D.F. Instituto Nacional do Estadistica, Geografia e Informática.

Instituto Nacional de Estadistica Geografia e Informática (INEGI) (1997). Encuesta Nacional
        Ingreso-Gasto (ENIGH) Compact Disc. Mexico, D.F. Instituto Nacional de Estadistica,
       Geografia e Informática.

Jnstituto Nacional do Estadistica Geografia e Jnformática (IINEGI) (1998). Anuario EstadIsico de los
        Estados Unidos Mexicanos, Edición 1998. Mexico, D.F. Instituto Nacional de Estadistica,
        Geografia e Informática.

Janlett, U, K Asplund, and L Weinehall (1991). Unemployment and Cardiovascular Risk Indicators.
         Scandinavian Journal of Social Medicine, 200): 14-18 (March).

Joyce T and N Mocan (1993). Unemployment and Infant Health: Times series Evidence from the
       State of Tennesse. Journal of Human Resources, 28(l):185-203 (Winter).


                                                4
Kalache A and K Sen (1999). Ageing and Health in The A geing andDevelopment Report: Poverty,
      Independence and the World's Older People. HelpAge International- Earthscan. London.

Kirkpatrick A F. (1996). Role of the USA in Shortage of Food and Medicine in Cuba. The Lancet
       348 ; 1489-91.

Knaul F., Parker, S. Ramirez, R., (1997). "El prepago por servicios medicos privados en
      Mexico: determinantes socioeconOmicos y cambios a través del tiempo", EnJ. Frenk,
       ed., Observatorjo tie La Salud: necesidades, seroicios, poilticas. Mexico, D.F.: Fundacion
       Mexicana para Ia Salud.

Knaul F., Parker, S. (1998). "Patterns over Time and Determinants of Early Labor ForceParticipation
       and School Drop Out: Evidence from Longitudinal and Retrospective Data on Mexican
       Children and Youth". Presented at the 4998 meetings of the Population Association of
       America, Chicago, Mimeo.

Langer A and R. Lozano. (1996). The Health of Women in Mexico: Current Panorama and Future
       Prospects. In Changing structure of Mexico: Political, social, and economic prospects,
       edited by Laura Randall. Columbia University Seminar Series. Armonk, N.Y. and London:
       Sharpe; 333-348

Langer A, R. Lozano and J.L. Bobadilla (1991). "The effects of Mexico's Crisis on the Health of
      Women and Children" in M. Gonzalez de la Rocha and A. Escobar Latapi, eds., Social
      Responses to Mexico 's Economic Crises of the 1980s ( San Diego: University of California,
       195-219.

Lara A, 0. Gómez —Dantes, 0. Urdapilleta, et al (1997). "Gasto federal en salud en poblaciOn no
      asegurada: Mexico 1980-1995" . SaludPáblica tIe Mexico. 39:102-109.

Leon D, Chenet L, V Shkolnikov, et al (1997). Huge variation in Russia Mortality rates 1984-94:
      artefact, alcohol or what?. The Lancet. 350;383-388. August

Levinsoim, J., Berry,5 and J, Friedman (1999). Impacts of the Indonesian Economic Crisis: Price
       Changes and the Poor. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper: 7194.

Lopez L. (1987). Crisis, polIticas de ajuste y agricultura. CEPAL Review 33 (December).

Lozano R., (1997). El peso de Ia Enfermedad en Mexico: avances y desafios. InJ. Frenk, ed.,
      Observatorio de La Salud: necesidades, sercicios, poilticas. Mexico, D.F.: Fundacion
      Mexicana para la Salud.




                                                5
    _____ (1999). Aspectos Sociomédicos del Envejecimiento en Mexico. In Arëcbiga,H. and
       Cereijido, M. Coord. El envejecimiento: sus desaflos y esperanzas. Mexico, D.F.: Siglo
       Veintiuno, LTNAM.

Lozano R, Zurita B. Franco F, et a!. (1999). Health hiequalities in Mexico: A Country Level
       Analysis 1960-1996. Mimeo FUNSALUD.

Lustig N. (1996). The 1982 Debt Crisis, Chiapas, NAFTA, and Mexico's Poor. In Changing
       structure of Mexico. Political, social, and economic prospects, edited by Laura Randall.
       Columbia University Seminar Series. Armonk, N.Y. and London: Sharpe, 1996; 157-65.

Lustig N and Ros J. (1998). Las reformas economicas, las politicas de estabilizacion y el "sindrome
       mexicano." Desarrollo-Economico 37(148); 503-32.

MacMahon B, and Yen S. (1971). Unrecognised Epidemic of Anencephaly and Spina Bifida. The
    Lancet January 2;31-33.

Martinez 0. (1998). What Lessons Does the Mexican Crisis Hold for Recovery in Asia?. Finance-
      and-Development 35(2); 6-9.

McAvinchey, I D( 1988). A comparison of Unemployment, Income and Mortality Interaction for
     five European Countries. Applied Economics 20(4); 453-71

McKinley T, and AlarcOn D. (1995). The Prevalence of Rural Poverty in Mexico. World
       Development 23(9) pp. 1575-85.

Messmacher, M. (1999). The Evolution of the rate of homicides across Mexican states. Mimeo

Moser, C.O.N. (1995). Confronting Crisis. A comparative Study of Household Responses to Poverty
       and Vulnerability in Four Poor Urban Communities. ESD Studies and Monographs Series
       No.8, Washington D.C., US: The World Bank.

Murray C J, and Chen L C. (1993). In Search of a Contemporary Theory for Understanding
      Mortality Change. Soc. Sci.Med 36 (2); 143-155.

Murray C J, and Lopez A. (1997). Global Mortality, Disability, and the Contribution of Risk
      Factors: Global Burden of Disease Study. The Lance! 349; 1436-1442.

Musgrove, P. (1986). Repercusiones de la crisis económica sobre la salud y sobre Ia atención
     sanitaria en America Latina y el Caribe: Crónica de Ia OMS, 40(4);17l-176.

________ (1987). The Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Health And Health Care in Latin America
      and the Caribbean. International Journal of Health Services 17(3); 411-441.


                                               6
Notzon, F, Y Komarov, S. Ermakov. et al (1998). Causes of Declining Life Expectancy in Russia.
      JAMA, 279(10);793-80

Poder Ejecutivo Federal.(1995) Programa de Reforma del Sector Salud 1995-2000. Mexico, DF:
       Poder Ejecutivo Federal:?

Riveros, Luis A. Labor markets, economic restructuring and human resource development in Latin
      America in the 1980's. Economlay Trabajo 11(4).

Ros S y G. RodrIguez.(1987). Mexico: estudio sobre Ia crisis financiera, las politicas de ajuste y ci
       desarrollo agrIcola. CEPAL Review 33 (December).

Ruhm, Ch. (1996). Are Recessions Good for Your Health?. National Bureau of Economic Research.
      Working Paper 5570.

          (1995). Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems. Journal of Health of Health
       Economics, 14(5); 583-603

          (1994). Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems. Journal of Health Economics. 14;
       583-603.

Salles, V and R. Tuirán (1995). Famiha, GCnero y Pobreza. El Cotidiano 68.

Secretaria de Saiud. 1991-1996. Muarios Estadistjcos Secretaria de Salud. Subsecretaria de
       Planeacjon. DireccjOn General de EstadIstica e Informática. Mexico, D.F.

Sen, A. (1997). " Economics and the Family". in Sen, A. Resources, Values and Development.
       Cambridge: Harvard U. Press.

Shkolthkov, V and D. Leon. (1998). Social Stress and the Russian Mortality Crisis. JAMA,
     279(10); 790-791.

Shkolnikov, V. (1999) The Role of Alcohol and Social Stress in Russia's Mortality Rate. JAM4,
      281(4);321-322.

Siembieda, W. and R. Rodriguez (1996). One country, many faces: The regions of Mexico. In
      Changing structure of Mexico: Political, social, and economic prospects, edited by Laura
      Randall. Columbia University Seminar Series. Armonk, N.Y. and London: Sharpe;. 351-363.

Soria, V M. (1988). La crisis de la protección social en Mexico. Un análisis de largo plazo con
      énfasis en el periodo 1971-1985. In Testimonios de la crisis. La crisis del estado de
      bienestar, Coord. by Gutiérrez Garza Esthela,. Mexico: Sigio veintiuno editores, S.A. de
      C.V; 174-203.



                                                 7
Springer GL. and JL Molina. (1995). The Mexican Financial Crisis: Genesis, Impact, and
       Implications. Journal-of-Interamerican-Studies-and.WorldAjfajrs 37(2); 57-81.

Stem, J. (1983). The Relationship between Unemployment, Morbidity and Mortality in Britain.
       Population Studies. 37; 61-74.

Stockwell EQ. (1963). A Critical Examination of the Relationship between Socioeconomic Status
      and Mortality. American Journal of Public Health 53(6) ;956-964.

Tanski, JM. (1994). The Impact of Crisis, Stabilization and Structural Adjustment on Women in
       Lima, Peru. World Development 22(11); 1627-42.

Tokman E.V. (1983). Salarios y empleo en coyunturas recesivas internacionales. CEPAL Review 20
      (August).

Urban, J. K. Asplund and L. Weinehall (1992). Unemployment and cardiovascular risk
       indicators. Data from the MONICA survey in northern Sweden. Scandinavian Journal of
      Social Medicine. 20; 14-18.

Valdes, T and E. Gomariz (coord). (1993) .Mujeres Latinoamericanas en C!fras Santiago de
      Chile. FLACSO

Wagstaff A. (1985). Time Series Analysis of the Relationship between Unemployment and
      Mortality: A Survey of Econometric Critiques and Replications of Brenner's Studies.
      Social, Science and Medicine. 21(9); 985-996.

Walberg P, M. Mckee, V Shkolnikov. et a! (1998). Economic Change, crime and mortality crisis in
      Russia: regional analysis. BMJ317; 3 12-8.

Wibulpolpraser,S. (1999). Economic Dynamicity and Health Implications: Lessons learnedfrom
      Thailand. Mimeo.

World Health Organization (1999). Ageing: Exploding the myths. Ageing and Health Programme,
      World Health Organization. Geneve.

____________________ (1999a). World Health Report 1999: Making a Dfference. Geneva,
       Switzerland: World Health Organization.

Zapata F. (1996). Mexican Labor in a Context of Political and Economic Crisis. In Changing
      structure of Mexico: Political, social, and economic prospects, edited by Laura Randall.
       Columbia University Seminar Series. Armonk, N.Y. and London: Sharpe;127-36.




                                              8
Zurita, B., Nigenda, 0. y RamIrez, T,, (1997). "Encuesta de satisfacciOn eon los servicios de salud,
       1994". En J. Frenk, ed., Observatorlo de Ia Salud: necesidades, servicios y poilticas.
       Mexico, D.F.: FundaciOn Mexicana pam la Salud.




                                                9
                                 CU    >,


                              0) CU
                                 = 0=



                                                       c-c
a)                                                           6>
a)
C.;
F.-                                                    '5'
0)                                                            4,
                                                       4
>'                                                           4,


                                                             4,


                                                             6>
                                                       4,
                                                        6:0
                                                             /
                                                       06>
                                                             6>

                                                             6>

                                                             6>
                                                       '9
                                                                   I-
                                                             4,    (5
                                                                   a)
                                                                   >-   0)
                                                                        0)
                                                             4,
                                                       4                0
                                                                        C
                                                                        (0
                                                             4,         -0
                                                                        D
                                                                        0
                                                                        a,
                                                             4,         a
                                                                        E
                                                       cJ               w

                                                       /     6>

                                                             6>
                                                                        a,
                                                                        -o
                                                                        (6
                                                                        =
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        z
                                                                        (6

                                                                        Ct
                                                                        0
                                                                        a,
                                                       6'               3
                                                                        0
                                                                        =
                                                                        w
                                                       6'               CO

                                                                        a,
                                                                          0
                                                                          0
                                                       C,
                                                                          0,
                                                                          0
                                                       '9               000
                                                       4/               a,

                                                       p                0
                                                                        C
                                                                        a,
                                                                        E
                                                       4                3
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
      C   0)   03   N-   CD      La)        0)   NrC                    C
                                                                        0
                                                                        Ui
                                                                        2
                    a;eJ ;uawAoidwau                                    a,
                                                                        0
                                                                        =
                                                                        0
                                                                        0)
                     N
                     C.,
                                    cc
                                    0)
                                    0)


                                    U-)
                                    0)
                                    0)


                                    0)
                                    0)

                                    cv)
0
0)
                                    0)
                                    0)


                                   N
                                   0)
03                                 0)
0)
 0
 C.)
                                   0)
                                   0)
 C)


                                   0
                                   0)
o                                  0)
CD
I-o
                                   0)
 a)

a:
                                   -I-
                                   0)




o
CD

0.1
                                   r
                                   Co




E
D
a)
it                         N
                           N

                                          a
                                          C-)

                                   Co
                                   0)
                                          0
                                   '-
                                   C.,
                                   Co     .2
                                   0)
                                          C
                                   N
                                   03 —
                                   0)0
                                   —w
                                   1
                                   Co     C.)
                                   0)
       N   cc                  0
                                          Co
             e;ei qoi6 jo sieqei
          Figure 4.3: Change in Minimum Wage and Price Index of Representative Basket of Goods and
                                                Servicesl/

      7



      6



      5



      4



      S



      2



      I


      0
                                                                    'ci.      In         Co       N-        Co   0)
              0)        0                               c)                    0)         0)       0)        0)   0)
                        0)         0)         0)        0)          0)                   0)       0)        0)   0)
              0)        0)         0)         0)        0)          0)        0)
              -.        r
                     Li1e        Index of Representative Basket of Goods and Services   -tr Minimum Wages
11Base Year =1994
Source: Banco de Mexico (Internet). 2000
                                                                         CD
                                                                         C)

                                                                         C)
                                                                         a)
      IC)
                                                                         Ct


Zr                                                                       F
0C
I_ Ct                                                                    C)

0.1.;
WO                                                                       a)
                                                               •

—                                                                        Ct
                                                                         -c
      C                                                                  9
( 0:
— 0;
ct4'H
   a        -
                                                                         C)
                                                               •         4
                                                                         C)
rn —                                                                     a)
                                                                         C)
                                                                         a
                                                                         Ct


0)0
(tb-
0
>0
— 4S                                                           :




 C4-'-
._u)                                                                     a)
                                                                         C)
                                                                         =

Co
                                                                         C.)



ctC)
.CC
4c)                                                                d
                                                                   C-)
'I'                                                                ><


DO                                                                 a)
                                                                   0
      'S                                                           a
u_-a                                                               0

  Q                                                                0)
                                                                   V
                                                                   0)
                                                                   I-
                                                                   a)
                                                                   U)
                                                                   a)
                                                                   E
                ___________           o6epi                     a
            o             0       a            0        0    —U)
                                                              0
            o             0•      0            0        0•    0
            o             t)                   "Ti      0
                                                        'C
                                                              to

                               4onpoJd 3d U! a6ueqa %
Figure 4.5:   Distribution of Health Services and Resources
                                          Poverty Index
                                         Source CONAPO
                                     U    Very High (473)
                                     a    High      (375)
                                          Medium    (969)
                                          Low       (388)
                                     U    Very Low (223)

                                          Ministry of Health Hospitals
                                                  By service type
                                                            910
                                                       hr_ 455
                                                      J91
                   "1                         Outpatient referal service
                                              Hospitalization
                                               Specialized medical service
                                         ••
                                J        Hidalgo                                       I



                     Guerrero
                        /           Oaxaca
                                                                             Chiapas
                                      Figure 5.1: Mortality by Cause, Mexico 1980-1996

     120




     100                                                                                                       —e—Total




     80                                                                                                        —U—Communicable,
                                                                                                                     Nutritional and
0                                                                                                                    Reproductive
0
0                                                                                                              —A--Non-
C)   60
                                                                                                                   communicable
0)
Cu


                                                                                                               —U---- Injuries
     40




     20
                                                                                                               L
      0
      1980            1982          1984         1986         1988         1990           1992   1994   1996
                                                              Year
           Source: Mexican Health Foundation based on Secretariat of Health and CONAPO.
 Figure 5.2: Mortality by Gender and Age Group. 1980-1 996


  120




  100




  80
                                                                —t- 0-4 M
                                                                •-•- 5-14M
  60                                                                 15- 59 M
                                                                -xH6O79M
                                                                —*—-80 y + M

  40



  20



   0
        80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96




 120




 100




  80                                                            —e--- 0-4W
                                                                —4----- 5-14W
                                                                —15 -44W
  60                                                            -—45-59W
                                                                     60-79W
                                                                     80 y + W
  40



  20




   0
        80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96


Source: Mexican Health Fundation based on Secretarial of Health and CONAPO.
        Figure 5.3:Mortality Rates in Mexico by Age Group and Data Source*

4.0%




30%



2.0%




1.0%
                                                                             fl1980-89
                                                                             [• 1989-94
                                                                             01994-96
0.0%




-1,0%




-2,0%




-3.0%
                   Age Groups (60-69 years, 70-79 years and 80+ years)
                          Figure 5.4: Changes in Mortality by Broad Cause Group
    6.0%


    4.0%                                                                          Non-communicable                      [i198o-s9198994D1994J

    2.0%


C
C

                                                           -I-


12.0%


 -6.0%


-8.0%
                                                                   Male                               Female              Male                      Female

                                                                 t-4      804$   70-IS    60÷   0-4   Ø*-4     C79 $4    89    7O7 Ot          *   GC}5S   7Q.7   8*
-10.0%
01950-89 -4.5% -4.6% -3.5% -0.3% -4,8% -5,1% -3.9% -1.9%               -a2% -0.8% -0.7%  1.2% -3.2% -1.0% -0.8% 0,3%    -1.8% -a6% -2.8% 0.1% -2.1% -4.0% -1.8% -02%
01989-94 -8.5% -6.6% -7.8% -4.2% -9,1% -6.4% -7.8% -4.2%               -2.8% -1.6% -1.3% 0.6% -2.7% -0.7% -1.8% -0.1%   -2.9% -3.5% -3.3% -0.8% -0.5% -5.3% -4.3% -1.7%
0199496 -3,9% -2.9% 0,7% 4.7% -4.4% -2A% -0.2% 4.0%                    -0.1% 0.4% 1.6% 3.0% 0.7% 1.1% 1.0% 1.4%         -1.6% -6A% -a9% -0.8% -43% -3.9% -7.9% -1.5%
                       Figure 5.5: Changes in Mortality in 5 States
              Changes in mortality in Chiapas                                    Changes in mortality in Oaxaca



              _1iii5 01989-94 01994-96



 C.                                                                     a,
                                                                        a
 C.                                                                     a?
                                                                        C,

 a
 C.                                                                     a,
                                                                        a
                                                                        a
 C                                                                      C
C                                                                       C




                         Age and Sex group                                                 Age and Sex group


              Changes in mortality in Nuevo Leon                             Changes in mortality in Quintana Roo




C.


C.
V
a
C.



C
C     iv
      -- 1
                                    11114
                                       rw
                 0198c.69 01989-94 01994-96
                                                                   C.

                                                                   a
                                                                   0I
                                                                   V
                                                                   a
                                                                   C,



                                                                   C
                                                                   C




                          Age and Sex group                                                Age and Sex group




                                              Changes in mortality in Distrito Federal

                                     ID 10%




             Source: Mexican Health Fundation based on Secretariat of Health and CONAPO.
                                                Figure 6.1: Public Sector* Health Expenditure, 1990-1997
                                                             Pesos per capita and % of GDP

                                       ——--                                                   ------                                       .5
      7-




                                 a3                                                                                                          3
           ________-                            -.---_________________________ _____________________
                                                                                                                                                      e      per capita health $
                                                                                                                                                            °&CfGDP
                                                              ..                         —                      .---
H
0c
4-0
00
cn    2
                   % Change Yr2-
                                                                                                                                             1   Source: Anexo Estadistico,
                                                     __________________________________
                                                                          +6.2%          -10.5%        -4.3%            +12.0%                   Qunto informe del Gobierno,
           —0            +14.7%          +4.7%          +7.1%
      1                                                                                                                                          Presidencia de Ia Repüblica.
                                         +4.7%          +7.2%             +2.3%          -4.9%         -4.8%            +4.7%


      0                    -—             ---                               ,----.___                                                        0
                1990            1991             1992              1993           1994            1995           1996            1997
                                                                          Year
          * Public sector
                          corresponds to the National Health System (Sistenia Nacional de Salud) which includes the Ministry of Health (Secretaria de Salud) and social security.
              Figure 6.2 Annual average expenditure by household in
                                ambulatory care.
                              Mexico, 1994, 1996
       $250


       $200


  Cu   $150
 a0                                                                                            -A--- VISITS-94
       $100
                                                                                               -4-— VISITS-96

       $50                                                                                      fl    DENTAL-94
                                                                                                      DENTAL-96
        $0




Source: Encuesta Nacional de
                             lngresos y Gastos de Hogares, 1994-96. Mexican Health
                                                                                   Foundation, 1999
                                                                                                             1
                                  Figure 6.3: Average Total Real Health Expenditure and Percent Change
                                  by Expenditure Tertile and Family Type for Years 1992, 1994 and 1996
      180.0


      160.0
 V
 4-
      140.0

 U,
 0 120.0
 a.
      100.0

 4-   80.0
 C
 a.                                                                                                                                E1994
 *    60.0
w
                                                                                                                                   0 1996
 C)
 C,
      40.0
C
      20.0


       0.0
                No Young, No   Young        Elderly     No Young, No          Young    Elderly   No Young, No   Young    Elderly
                   Elderly                                 Elderly                                  Elderly
o/1flJ9492192        3.86      -16.02        -16.25         -7.95             -22.61    -2.49       -21.61      -13.13   -34.91
                   -25.33      -10.21          0.27        -10.18             -22.14   -21.90       -16.72      -15.91   -34,66
                                         Family Groupings by Lowest, Middle and Highest Expenditure Tertiles
  Source: INEGI. Encuesta Nacional Ingreso y Gasto de los
                                                          1-logares. Mexico
                                 Table 5.1
           Annual Change in Mortality by Age and Sex


               1980-82   1982-84    1984-85   1985-89   1989-94   1994-96
    Total       -4.8%     -2.5%      -1.5%     -1.6%     -2.1%     0.3%

                                    Men
 Age Group     1980-82   1982-84    1984-85   1985-89   1989-94   1994-96
   Total        -4.4%     -3.3%      -1.7%     -1.5%     -2.1%     -0.2%
    0-4          -8.9      -3.8       -7.0     -1.1       -7.0      -2.9
    5-14         -7.8      -5.3       -1.3     -3.3       -7.3      -1.0
    15-29       -2.5      -9.3       -1.7      -3.4      -2.2      -3.8
    30-44       -3.2      -6.9        0.2      -4.5      -1.8      -4.6
    45-59       -3.1      -4.2       -0.8      -2.3      -1.8      -2.3
    60-69       -3.4      -1.4        1.1      -1.3      -2.3      -0.5
    70-79       -2.2      0.2        -1.9      -1.3      -2.2       1.2
     80+        -0.1       3.1       2.3       -0.2      -0.3       3.1

                                   Women
 Age Group     1980-82   1982-84    1984-85   1985-89   1989-94   1994-96
   Total        -5.4%     -1.4%      -1.2%     -1.7%     -2.1%     0.9%
    0-4          -9.2      -3.0      -7.1       -1.9      -7.2     -3.1
    5-14        -10.1      -4.9       0.8       -2.3     -7.1      -0.1
    15-29       -5.8      -7.2       -1.6      -5.2      -4.0      -2.6
    30-44       -6.4      -5.5        0.4      -5-1      -3.2      -4.0
    45-59       -2.7      -1.9       -0.5      -2.6      -1.7      -1.1
    60-69       -4.0      -0.9       -0.1      -1.3      -1.4       0.7
    70-79       -2.9      0.6        0.5       -1.9      -2.6       0.6
     80+        -2.3      3.0        2.4       -1.3      -0.9       1.8

Source: Mexican Health Foundation based on Secretariat of Health and CONAPO.
                                                     Table 5.2
                               Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the
                                  Effect of Economic Crisis on Mortality

                           198 2-84 Crisis                      1986-89 crisis                        1995-96 crisis
                 Pre-Crisis    crisis                 Pre-Crisis  Crisis                 Pre-Crisis       Crisis
Age Group         1980-82     1982-84 Duff-in-duff    1984-1985 1985-1989 Diff-in-ditf    1989-94        1994-96 Duff-in-duff
Affected (M&F)
       0-4         -9.0%       -3.5%         9.2%       -7.1%       -1.5%        10.3%     -7.1%          -3.0%        6.9%
      60-69         -3.7        -1.2         6.2          0.5        -1.3         2.9       -1.9           0,0          4.7
      70-79         -2.6        0.4          6.7         -0.8        -1.6         3.9       -2.4           0.9         6.1
       80+          -1.4        3.0          8.1         2.3         -0.8         1.6       -0.7           2.3         5.8
                                                                                           .
Unaffected
   Male, 30-44      -3.2        -6.9          ---        0.2         -4.5         ---          -1.8        -4.6        ---
               Table 61: Means of Dependent Variables
                          By state and year
                                                                             YEAR
               Variables                           1991             1993             1995            1996
Male Labor Force Participation Rate (18.
                                                   91.49            90.97            89.92            8948
Female Labor Force Participation Rate
                                                   .83              40.78            43.21            43.20
Elderly Labor Force Participation Rate
                                                   31.76            32.77            28.68            27.63

     Child and Youth Labor Force
                                                   27.83            29.80            27.34            23.45
      Participation Rate (12-17)

Doctors employed in the public sector               1.15             1.18             1.25            1 27
          per capita (*100)
Nurses employed in the public sector
                                                    1 66             1                1.76            I .77
          per capita (100)

 Public Clinics (consulta externa) per
                                                   0.19              0.18             0.19            020
               capita rico)
 Public Hospitals (Total units-clinics)
                                                   0.114            0112             0.112            0.110
          per capita (1000)

   Illiteracy rate, by state* dummy ii
                                                     0                   0           1215             1215
        yeanlSsS oryearl996
  Proportion of economically active
  women (18-85) in families with an                0.65              0.69             0.80            0.69
       elderly member (65+)
  Proportion of economically active
 women (18-85) in families without an              0.43              0.48             0,60            0.51
       elderly member (65+)

Notes: 1! Figures calculated without expansion factors.
      2/ Most cells include one observation for each state for a total of 32 observations in each year.
Observations for the employment variables are missing for one state in 1991 and 1993.
                                                   Table 6.2: Regressions on
                                                                               Age-Specific Morta!ity
                                                          by State, 1991, 1993, 1995 and 1996
                                                                          (coefficient In bold; t-statlstlc below)

                                                                 Labor Force Participation (1 00)
                         ln(Physlc!ans        II                                                                                  _______________ Summary Statistics
     Age Group
                           per capita)             Elderly 65+     Women 18-65         Youth 12-17                                 IllIteracy (*100)
                                           !                                                              Men 18-65
         04                  -0.25                                                                                    —
                                                     -0.09                0.29             0.07
                             -1.54                                                                             0.33                      0.43
                                           4         -0.86                1.79                                                                                      124
                                                                                           0.37                0.79                     2.07
         5-14                0.38
                                         sr*          0.19                0.41
                             1.69                                                         -0.16                0.49
                                         5            1.32                1.67                                                          -0.36                       124
                                                                                          -0.63                0.87                     -1.27
       15-29:                                                        4
                            -0.21                    0.10
                                                                         tht4D Wrw z
       Women                                                              0.31            0.02                -0.27
                            -0.92         k1!        0.65                1.43                                                           -0.10                       124
                                                                                          0.07                -0.48                     -0.36
        Men                 0.01                     -0.14               005
                            0.03                                                          -002                -028                     -0.07
                                          ii.        -1.11               -0.28            -0.10                                                             t91     124
                                                                                                              -0.60                    -0.29
       3044:
      Women         .       -038                     -0.11               0.13                                                                          5
                            -2.55                                                         0.02               -0.20
                                                     -1.15               0.90                                                           0.18                0.92    124
                                                                                          0.10               -0.53            .         0.97
        Men                -012                      -008                018              010
                           -0.80          •.                                                                 -027                      017
                                                    -0.77                1.18             0.59                                                         ç   092     124
                                                                                                             -0.68                     0.91
                            0.00                                                                         r
                                                                         0.19             0.04                0.04
                            0.03                     0.05                                                                              0.03                0.93    124
                                                                         2.27             0.40                0.20
       6049                                                                                                                            0.28            4
                           -0.05          N         0.22                 0.13            -0_OS
                           -0.69                                                                             -0.21        .            0.49                0.95
                                                    4.29                 1.74                                                                                      124
                                                                                         -0.95               -1.07                     5.03
       70-79               -0.01                                                                     n
                                                    0.03              011                0.01
                           -0.16                                                                             -011                      0.08
                                         •.         0.51              1.36                                                                                 0.95    124
                                                                                         0.14                -0.52
       80+                                                                                                                             0.82        5
                           os            5          0.07              016               -004
                                                                                                                      .
                           0.58       .                                                                      .0.25                    -0.20
                                                    1.24              1.81                                                                                 0.94    124
                                                                                        -0.44                -1.10                    -1.84
Note: 11 All regressIons Include state and
                                           year dummy variables (not reported).
                 Table 6.3: Regressionson Age-specific Mortality Dividing Female LFP by Whether Family includes Elderly
                                                   by State, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996

                                                             (coefficient In bold; t-statistic below)

                                                                                                              .
                                                          Labor Force PartIcipation (*100)                                                          SummaryStatistics
                                     •'                        Women 1845                                         1
                                                           FamIlIes
                                                                                                                            iiiit    (*100)
                   ln(Physlcians                           without    Families
                                                            elderly with elderly Youth 12-17            Men 1845                                        R2       N
Age Group (Years)1 per capIta)            Elderly 65+
                                                                                                                                              :I
      0-4              -0.24                 .0.07           8.66       -7.57       0.08                  0.21   lIZ             0.44                  0.98     124
                                                             0.76           -0.71          0.41           0.48                   2.08
                 H     -1.42     4           -0.62                                                                1
                                                                                                                                               :1
                                     I               ,                         4                                            -J   I4anf Is
        5-14        4      0.39              0.23           23.20           -9.72         -0.14           0.41                   -t34   Ij             0.85     124
                           1.72              1.52            1.51           -0.68         -0.54           0.70                   -1.18  1.
                    4
                                     .7
                                           st                           —                          -    '4flr d                     4%rr1t
        15-29:      7      -0.20     :1      0.12           18.87           -2.41          0.04           -0.31                  -0.08        F        0.88     124
     Women                  088              078             123            017            016             053                   030
                                                                                                                  ii:                         4
                           0.01      H       -t14            -4.61          -0.34         -(103           -0.29                  -0.07        9        0.91     124
        Men                                                                                                       1
                           0.03      H       -1.12           -0.37          -0.03         -0.13           -0.62   7              -0.31

     30-44:                                                                                                       •7                          :.
     Women          H      -0.38             -0.10           12.54          -4.83          0.02           -0.20                  0.19                  0.92     124
                            256               104            124            051            014             052                   102
         Men               -012              -008            1096           882            013            -023                   019                   093       124
                                                                                                                                              F
                    9      -0.78             -0.78           1.06           0.91           0.76           -0.58   4              0.97
                                                                                                          F4fl'                                        0.93      124
        45-59        1     0.01      H       0.01            0.12           1.72           0.06           0.05
                           0.07              0.19            2,12           0.31           0.61           0.22    4              0.38

        60-69       4      -0.04     H       0.23            0.02           -0.31         -0.07           -0.21   4              0.49         1        0.94      124
                    7      -0.57             4.35            0.37           -0.06         -0.83           -1.33   $.             4.96
                                                                                                             k         ..
                    H                        0.03            0.08           4.36           0.03           -0.08   4              0.09                  0.95      124
        70-79              -0.01     .4
                            016              053             145            085            033             039                   089

                                             009             013             554           .004           -026                   -019                  094       124
         80+               005
                    ..     0.58      7        1.48           2.09           -0.99         -0.38           -1,17   H              -1.74


Note:   It All regressions include state and year dummy variables (not reported).
