  

  

       


 
      
 
 !"#
$!% &'!!
($)' $!$'$'
*'+ $ ,,-.
" //000&1&+/ $ 2/0,,-.

   3 3   
4.-.$22$5"622 )6
$71'%+8 .94:;
<69...

           
   ! "#   $ % #
 &  '      $(  ))   '*"' 
+,-.,/0---12331$%4       &
* 5   $
6,---#&    $   (  ))  $  '  $ 
44 ' &#7  4   
  '6' $

7'$2#+7 0" $=2'$ )$+'+#
!$22'5$!2'7$2 
$5"
 !"#8$!% &'!!8$%($)' $!$'$'
*'+ $ &,,-.
<69...
<&-48-98-:
$%#%
"'2 $  >$7'2 " 16222 # > !$$= )$'$1!2 ' 52256= 57'5
+0" +22'2&   7 !=2 $ )! $

$5"8 $=2'$ )$+'+ # !$22'5$! 2'7$2

 80"'5"526522'7$2$2$0'+"%$)$+# 2'7$2#)= 22'1!
571'$'#'5!6%%)$'$1!2&"0'+"2$ !'%'%')'%6$!+22'2$?62'#'%
$=2'$+6%2'$0$=2'7'!$"0!!*0 5"0$@5''&#:9> !$$=)$'$1!2
0#'%441162!= $'$!!=5!$%0'"!+7+0"$%$"#'))$'$1!21
7$+'$!!=!$%&#$!!")$'$1!252'%%8"2+2)'%5'2#"'''$!!)!#
$!   5$ '$&
  
 
 #  &
3,-//8WK /--9
*: *:/--,1
# '  &
(  ))  
 
 #  &
3,-//8WK /--9
*: *:/--,1
*5  ! "# 
4,.; #$

 $  
 
 #  &
3,-//8WK /--9
*: *:/--,1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.- INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2.- STATISTICAL THEORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.1. Statistical Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2. Diffuse Priors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.3. Issues in Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.- DATA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.- RESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.1. Baseline Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2. Robustness of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.- CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
APPENDIX 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
APPENDIX 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
FIGURES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

1

1.- INTRODUCTION
Following the seminal work of Barro (1991), the recent empirical literature on economic
growth has identified a substantial number of variables that are partially correlated with the rate
of economic growth. The basic methodology consists of running cross-country regressions of the
form1
γ

α  β1#x1  β2#x2  ...  βn#xn  ε

(1)

where γ is the vector of rates of economic growth, and x1,...,xn are vectors of explanatory variables
which vary across researchers and across papers. Each paper typically reports a (possibly nonrandom) sample of the regressions actually run by the researcher. Variables like the initial level
of income, the investment rate, various measures of education, some policy indicators and many
other variables have been found to be significantly correlated with growth in regressions like (1).
The problem faced by empirical growth economists is that growth theories are not explicit
enough about what variables xj belong in the “true” regression. That is, even if we know that the
“true” model looks like (1), we do not know exactly what variables xj we should use. One reason
is that economic growth theory is not explicit about what variables matter for growth. For
example, almost all growth theories say that the “level of technology” [the constant “A” in the
typical production function, Y=F(K,L,A)] is an important determinant of growth, at least along a

1

Recently, a number of authors have broken up the period of analysis into various sub-periods
and have estimated the same type of regressions using panel techniques. See for example, Islam
(1995), Caselli, Esquivel, and Laffort (1996) or Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995).
2

transition towards the steady state.2 From a macroeconomic perspective, there are many things
other than the “engineering” level of technology which can be thought of as “the level of
technology,” A. In other words, a lot of factors may affect the aggregate amount of output, given
the aggregate amount of inputs. These may include market distortions, distortionary taxes,
maintenance of property rights, degree of monopoly, weather, attitudes toward work, and so on.
Hence, creative theorizing will generate models that “predict” that any of these or other variables
should be included in the growth regression.
The multiplicity of possible regressors is one of the major difficulties faced by
researchers trying to make sense of the empirical evidence on economic growth. However, the
problem is hardly unique to the growth literature: artistic economic theory is often capable of
suggesting an enormous number of potential explanatory variables in any economic field. In
principle, this is strictly a small-sample problem since, as the number of observations becomes
large, all of the variables which do not belong in the regression will have coefficients that
converge to zero. Thus, classical statistics offers us little help: we should simply include all of
the suggested regressors and let the data sort through them. When questions can be addressed
with very large datasets it is routine practice to include every regressor that comes to mind and
then report those that have significant coefficients. Often, however, we do not have the luxury
of having a sample size that allows us to include all potential regressors. Cross-country growth
regressions provide perhaps the most extreme example: the number of proposed regressors

2

Theories of endogenous growth suggest that such constant is a determinant of the steady-state
growth rate while neoclassical models argue that this is true along the transition only. Our
argument is completely independent of such disputes.
3

exceeds the number of countries in the world, rendering the all-inclusive regression
computationally impossible.
The methodology usually used by empirical economists consists on simply “trying” the
variables which are thought to be potentially important determinants of growth. However, as
soon as one starts running regressions combining the various variables, one finds that variable x1
is significant when the regression includes variables x2 and x3, but it becomes insignificant when
x4 is included. Since one does not know a priori the “true” variables to be included, one is left
with the question: what variables are “truly” correlated with growth?
An initial answer to this question was given by Levine and Renelt (1992). They applied a
modified3 version of Leamer’s (1983, 1985) extreme bounds analysis to identify “robust”
empirical relations for economic growth. In short, the extreme bounds test works as follows:
imagine that we have a pool of K variables previously identified as related to growth and are
interested in knowing whether variable z is “robust.” We would estimate regressions of the
form:

γ

αj  βy j # y  βz j # z  βx j # xj ε

(2)

where y is a vector of fixed variables that always appear in the regressions (in the Levine and
Renelt paper, these variables are the initial level of income, the investment rate, the secondary
school enrollment rate and the rate of population growth), z is the variable of interest and xj is
3

We say “modified” because they limited the number of regressors to be included in each
regression as opposed to the original Leamer technique which allows all potential combinations
of regressors.
4

a vector of up to three variables taken from the pool of the K variables available. One needs to
estimate this regression or model for all possible xj combinations. For each model, j, one
finds an estimate, β̂zj , and the corresponding standard deviation, σ̂zj . The lower extreme
bound is defined to be the lowest value of β̂zj

2σ̂zj over all possible models j, and the upper

extreme bound is defined to be the largest value of β̂zj  2σ̂zj . The extreme bounds test for
variable z says that if the lower extreme bound is negative and the upper extreme bound is
positive, then variable z is fragile.
Not surprisingly, Levine and Renelt’s conclusion is that very few (or no) variables are
robust. One possible reason for finding few or no robust variables is, of course, that very few
variables can be identified as correlated systematically with growth. Hence, some researchers
have been tempted to conclude that “nothing can be learned from this empirical growth
literature because no variables are robustly correlated with growth.” Another interpretation,
however, is that the test is too strong for any variable to pass: if there is one regression for which
the sign of the coefficient βz changes, or becomes insignificant, then the variable is labeled as
“fragile.” This is independent of how poorly the regression fits: all regressions are treated
equally and the statement of any one of them carries a veto.4 This problem is well recognized
and some solutions have been proposed such as the reasonable extreme bounds of Granger and
Uhlig (1990).5

4

There are other criticisms of extreme bounds analysis; see for example Durlauf and Quah
(1999).
5

See Doppelhofer (2000) for an application of Granger-Uhlig’s reasonable extreme bounds to
cross-country growth regressions.
5

Sala-i-Martin (1997a and b) proposes to depart from this “extreme” test and, instead of
assigning a label of “fragile” or not to a particular variable, he decides to assign some “level of
confidence” to each variable. To this end, he constructs weighted averages of all the estimates of
β̂zj

and its corresponding standard deviations, σ̂zj , using weights proportional to the

likelihoods of each of the models. As a measure of significance Sala-i-Martin calculates a
likelihood-weighted sum of normal cumulative distribution functions. He finds that Levine and
Renelt’s pessimistic conclusion is not warranted and that a number of variables are significantly
correlated with growth. In order to maintain comparability, Sala-i-Martin follows Levine and
Renelt in assuming that there is a set of “fixed regressors” which belong in all models6, and he
restricts all the regressions to have the same size of seven regressors.
A natural way to think about model uncertainty, related to Sala-i-Martin’s approach, is to
admit that we do not know which model is “true” and, instead, attach probabilities to different
possible models. While intuitively appealing, this requires a departure from the classical
framework in which conditioning on a model is essential. This approach has recently come to be
known as “Bayesian Model Averaging”. The procedure does not differ from the most basic
Bayesian reasoning: the idea dates at least to Jeffreys (1961) although fleshed out by Leamer

6

The fixed regressors in Sala-i-Martin are the initial level of income per capita, the life
expectancy and primary school enrollment in 1960. Even though he checks the significance of
these three variables, the computed “model averages” all include these three variables, which
may be problematic, especially if some of the variables tested are highly correlated with the
variables that are always included.
6

(1978). In this paper, we show that this approach can be used in a way that is well grounded in
statistical theory, intuitively appealing, easy to understand, and easy to implement.7
The fully Bayesian approach is entirely feasible and has been applied to various problems
by a number of authors. Examples include Raftery, Madigan and Hoeting (1997) and York,
Madigan, Heuch and Lie (1995).8 In the growth context, Fernandez, Ley and Steel (2000) apply
techniques from the Bayesian statistics literature to the dataset of Sala-i-Martin (1997a). A pure
Bayesian approach requires specification of the prior distributions of all of the relevant
parameters conditional on each possible model.9 Under ideal conditions, elicitation of prior
parameters is difficult and is indeed one of the major reasons for Bayesian approaches remaining
relatively unpopular. But when the number of possible regressors is K, the number of possible
linear models is 2K so with K large, fully specifying priors is infeasible. Thus, authors
implementing the fully Bayesian approach have used priors which are essentially arbitrary. This
makes the ultimate estimates dependent on arbitrarily chosen prior parameters in a manner which
is extremely difficult to interpret. In existing applications of this approach, the impact of these
prior parameters has been neither examined nor explained.
In this paper we will use the Bayesian approach to averaging across models, while
following the classical spirit of Sala-i-Martin (1997a and b). We propose a model-averaging

7

Although the computational burden of our procedure is not insignificant it can be executed on a
current PC.
8

A summary of much of the recent work can be found in Hoeting, Madigan, Raftery and
Volinsky (1999).
9

For readers unfamiliar with Bayesian language, the prior distribution, is a summary of the
researchers beliefs concerning the parameters, prior to seeing the data.
7

technique which we call Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates or BACE, to determine the
“importance” of variables in cross-country growth regressions. We show that the weighting
method can be derived as a limiting case of a standard Bayesian analysis as the prior information
becomes “dominated” by the data. BACE combines the averaging of estimates across models,
which is a Bayesian concept, with Classical OLS estimation which comes from the assumption of
diffuse priors. This name is chosen to highlight the fact that while averaging across models is an
inherently Bayesian idea, BACE limits the effect of prior information and uses an approach
otherwise familiar to classical econometricians.
Our BACE approach has several important advantages over previously used modelaveraging and robustness-checking methods: firstly, in contrast to a standard Bayesian approach
that requires the specification of a prior distribution for all parameters, BACE requires the
specification of only one prior hyper-parameter, the expected model k¯size. This parameter is
easy to interpret, easy to specify, and easy to check for robustness.10 Secondly, the interpretation
of the estimates is straightforward for economists not trained in Bayesian inference. The weights
applied to different models are proportional to the logarithm of the likelihood function corrected
for degrees of freedom (analogous to the Schwarz model selection criterion). Thirdly, our
estimates can be calculated using only repeated applications of OLS. Fourthly, in contrast to
Levine and Renelt and Sala-i-Martin, we consider models of all sizes and no variables are held
“fixed” and therefore “untested.”

10

In the standard Bayesian sense that we can calculate estimates for a range of different values of
¯
k . Thus we can make statements of the form, “whether you think a good model size is three
regressors or 12 regressors, this one particular variable is important”.
8

When we examine the cross-country data usually used by growth empiricists using this
approach we find striking and surprisingly clear conclusions. The data identify a set of four
variables which have a great deal of explanatory power and are very precisely estimated. A
second group, with seven variables, has somewhat weaker explanatory power, but have
coefficient which are still quite precisely estimated. Another five variables are marginal: they
would be reasonable regressors if a researcher had a strong prior belief in their relevance. The
remaining sixteen variables have weak explanatory power and are imprecisely estimated.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we outline the statistical theory
in which our estimates tests are based. In Section 3 we describe the data set used. Section 4
presents the main empirical results of the paper. The final section concludes.

2.- STATISTICAL THEORY
2.1. Statistical Basics
Following is a quick exposition of the basic reasoning and the language needed for
understanding our approach. An extremely clear and more detailed presentation of these ideas
can be found in Poirier (1995). We begin with Bayes’ rule. This is simply a theorem, a basic
consequence of conditional probability. Bayes’ rule in densities is:

g(β|y)

f(y|β)g(β)
f(y)

(3)

This is true for any random variables y and β. In classical statistics a parameter has a true, though
unknown, value, so it cannot have a density because it is not random. In the Bayesian framework
9

parameters are considered to be uncertain. In (3) above, g(β) is the prior density of a parameter
vector β, interpreted as the researcher’s information about β prior to seeing the data. The vector
y is the observed data and f(y) is its density. The left-hand side of (3), g(β|y) , is the density of β
conditional on the data and is called the posterior density: it fully describes what a Bayesian
researcher knows about the parameters after seeing the data. Thus, in a Bayesian interpretation,
Bayes’ rule tells us how to combine prior information with new data in order to get our final
opinions, or posterior beliefs.
“Model averaging” is a special case of Bayes’ rule. Suppose we divide the parameter
space into two regions and label them M0 and M1. These regions could be what we would
usually call hypotheses (e.g., β >0 versus β 0) or something we would usually call models (e.g.,
β 1= 0, β 2g 0 versus β 1g0, β2=0). Each of these has a prior probability specified by the
researcher as P(Mi). These prior probabilities summarize the researcher’s beliefs concerning the
relative likelihood of the two regions (models). Given the two regions, Bayes’ rule implies
g(β|y)

P(M0)

f(y|β) g(β|M0)
f(y)

 P(M1)

f(y|β) g(β|M1)
f(y)

. Rewriting this in terms of the posterior

probabilities conditional on the two regions (models) we get:

g(β|y)

where

P (Mi | y )

P(M0|y)

f(y|β)g(β|M0)
f(y|M0)

 P(M1|y)

f(y|β)g(β|M1)
f(y|M1)

(4)

is the posterior probability of the i’th region, the probability of that region

conditional on the data. In words, equation (4) says that the posterior distribution of the
parameters is the weighted average of the two possible conditional posterior densities with the
weights given by the posterior probabilities of the two regions. In this paper we will be
10

considering linear regression models for which each model is a list of included variables, with
the slope coefficients for all of the other possible regressors set equal to zero.
Much of the Bayesian statistics literature consists of formulae and methods for
calculating the various quantities in equation (4) for different statistical models. For the linear
regressions models examined here we will be able to refer to textbook derivations. The difficult
part lies in deriving the posterior model probabilities.

2.2. Diffuse Priors
As noted, fully specifying priors is infeasible when the set of possible regressors is large.
In applications of Bayesian theory, if a researcher is incapable or unwilling to specify prior
beliefs a standard remedy is to apply diffuse priors. Though there are some difficulties with this
notion, it is one way to represent initial ignorance. If the parameter space is bounded then a
diffuse prior is a uniform distribution. When the parameter space is unbounded, as in the usual
multiple linear regression model, a uniform distribution cannot be directly imposed and instead
we must take a limit as the prior distribution becomes flat. In many contexts, imposing diffuse
priors generates classical results: in the linear regression model standard diffuse priors and
Bayesian regression yields posterior distributions identical to the classical sampling distribution
of OLS.
We would like to work with diffuse priors but they create a problem when different
regression models contain different sets of variables. As noted above, when the parameter space
is unbounded we must get results for diffuse priors by taking a limit of informative priors. The
informative prior must specify prior information concerning both β, the vector of slope
11

coefficients, and σ, the error standard deviation. There are no difficulties taking the limit as our
prior information concerning σ becomes uninformative so the equations below all reflect a
diffuse prior with respect to σ. Equation (5) below gives the ratio of the posterior probabilities
of two regression models (called the posterior odds ratio) with different sets of included
variables, X for M0 and Z for M1.

P(M0|y)

P(M0)

|A| / |A  X X|

P(M1|y)

P(M1)

|B| / |B  Z Z|

1/2

SSE0  Q0

T/2

SSE1  Q1

(5)

where P(Mi) is the prior probability of model i as specified by the researcher. This expression
assumes that the marginal prior density for β is multivariate normal with variance-covariance
matrices given by A-1 under M0, and by B-1 under M1. SSEi is the OLS sum of squared errors
under model i, T is the sample size and Qi is a quadratic form in the OLS estimated parameters
that need not concern us here. This is a textbook expression (e.g., Zellner (1971)). Making the
priors diffuse requires taking the limit of (5) as A and B approach zero so that the variance of our
prior density goes to infinity. The mathematical difficulty with this is the factor in (5) with the
ratio of the determinants of A and B. Both determinants approach zero as the variance goes to
infinity, so their ratio depends on the rate at which each goes to zero. Depending on precisely
how one parameterizes the matrices one gets different answers when evaluating this limit.11 One
limit is the likelihood-weighting method of Sala-i-Martin (1997a). If we specify the prior

11

Leamer (1978) provides some intuition for why such problems occur but argues, in Bayesian
spirit, that one should not be interested in diffuse priors.
12

precision matrices as A

gX X and B

gZ Z (Zellner’s (1986) g-prior) and take the limit of (5)

as g goes to zero we get:

P(M0|y)

P(M0)

SSE0

P(M1|y)

P(M1)

SSE1

T/2

(6)

The second factor on the right-hand side is equal to the likelihood ratio of the two models. This
weighting is troublesome because models with more variables have lower SSE’s; the posterior
mean model size (average of the different model sizes weighted by their posterior probabilities)
will be bigger than the prior, whatever the data that is actually seen. Thus it is not sensible to use
this approach when considering models of different sizes.
The indeterminacy of the limit in (5) suggests that for fairly diffuse priors the exact
specification of the prior precision matrix, which will in practice be arbitrary, may generate large
differences in the results. There is, however, another limit one can take: the limit of (5) as the
information in the data, X1X, becomes large. The idea here is we are taking the limit as the prior
becomes “dominated” by the data. Instead of taking the limit as the prior becomes flat we are
taking the limit as the data becomes very informative relative to the prior information. If we
assume that the variance-covariance matrix of the X’s exists and take the limit of (5) as X1X goes
to infinity we get:12

12

See Leamer (1978) for a similar expression.
13

P(M0|y)

P(M0)

P(M1|y)

P(M1)

T

(k1 k0)/2

T/2

SSE0

(7)

SSE1

where ki is the number of included regressors in model Mi .13 This provides an approximation to
the odds ratios generated by a wide range of reasonably diffuse prior distributions. The degreesof-freedom correction should be familiar, since it is the ratio of the Schwarz criteria for the two
models, exponentiated. The similarity to the Schwarz criterion is not coincidental: Schwarz
(1978) used the same approximation to the odds ratio to justify the criterion. In our empirical
work we will use the approximation in equation (7).
In order to get weights for different models we need the posterior probabilities of each
model, not the odds ratio. However, using the odds ratio given by (7), to get an approximate
posterior model probability we simply need to normalize the weight of a given model by the sum
of the weights of all possible models, i.e., with K possible regressors:

P(Mj|y)

P(Mj ) T
2K

k j/2

M P(Mi ) T
i 1

SSEj

k i /2

T/2

SSEi

T/2

(8)

Once the model weights have been calculated, Bayes’ rule says that the posterior density of a
parameter is the average of the posterior densities conditional on the models as shown in (4) for

13

This precise expression arises only if we take the limit using g-priors. For other sorts of priors
it is an approximation.
14

two models. A posterior mean is defined to be the expectation of a posterior distribution.
Taking expectations with respect to β across (4) (with 2K terms instead of only two) gives:
2K

E(β|y)

M P(Mj|y)β̂

(9)

j 1

where β̂j

E(β|y,Mj) is the OLS estimate for β with the regressor set that defines model j. In

Bayesian terms, β̂j is the posterior mean conditional on model J.14 Note that any variable
excluded from a particular model has a slope coefficient with degenerate posterior distribution at
zero. The posterior variance of β is given by:

Var(β|y)

2K

2K

j 1

j 1

M P(Mj|y)Var(β|y,Mj)  M P(Mj|y) β̂j

2K

M P(Mj|y)β̂j

2

(10)

j 1

Leamer (1978) provides a simple derivation for (10). Inspection of (10) demonstrates that the
posterior variance incorporates both the estimated variances in individual models as well as the
variance in estimates of the β’s across different models.
While posterior means and variances are certainly of interest, there are other ways to
summarize the large amount of information supplied by the full posterior distribution. In
particular we would like to know the posterior probability that a particular variable is in the
regression (i.e., has a non-zero coefficient). We will call this the posterior inclusion probability
14

The difficulty with making the prior diffuse applies only to the comparison, or averaging, of
different models. Conditional on one particular set of included variables the mean of the
Bayesian regression posterior is simply the OLS estimate.
15

for the variable and it is calculated as the sum of the posterior model probabilities for all of the
models including that variable. We will also report the posterior mean and variance conditional
on the inclusion of the variable.

2.3. Issues in Implementation
2.3.1. Model Size
We have not yet discussed the specification of the P(Mi) 's, the prior probabilities
attached to the different models. One common approach to this problem in the statistical
literature has been to assign equal prior probability to each possible model. While this is sensible
for some applications, for linear regression with a large number of potential regressors it has odd
and troubling implications. In particular it implies a very strong prior belief that the number of
included variables should be large. We will instead specify our model prior probabilities by
¯ of being
choosing a prior mean model size, k¯, with each variable having a prior probability k/K
included, independent of the inclusion of any other variables, where K is total number of
potential regressors.15 Equal probability for each possible model is the special case in which
k¯ K/2 . In our empirical work we focus on a relatively small k¯ on the grounds that most
researchers prefer relatively modest parameterizations. We examine the robustness of our
conclusions with respect to this hyper-parameter in Section 4.2.

15

In most applications the prior probability of including a particular variable is not, for most
researchers, independent of the probability of including any other variable. For example, in a
growth regression if a variable proxying political instability is included, such as a count of
revolutions, many researchers would be think it less likely that another measure such as the
number of assassinations be included. While this sort of interdependence can be readily
incorporated into our framework, we do not presently pursue this avenue.
16

In order to illustrate further this

Prior Probabilities by Model Size: Kbar =7

issue the two figures shown graph the prior

0.2
0.15

probability distribution by model size for

0.1

our baseline model with k¯=7 and with

0.05
0
32

30

28
26

24

22

20

18
16

14

12

10

8

6
4

2

0

equal probabilities for all models, k¯=16,
given the 32 potential regressors we

Prior Probabilities By Model Size: Equal Model
Probabilities (Kbar = 16)

consider in our empirical work. Note that in

0.2

the second chart, the great majority of the

0.15
0.1

prior probability is focused on models with

0.05
0
32
30

28
26

24
22

20
18

16
14

12
10

8

6

4

2

0

many included variables: more than 99% of
the prior probability is located in models

with ten or more included variables. It is our strong opinion that few researchers actually have
such prior beliefs. Thus while we will calculate results for the equal model probability case
below, we do not choose to focus attention on this case.

2.3.2. Sampling
Equations (8), (9) and (10) all face the problem that they include sums running over 2K
terms: for many problems for which model averaging is attractive this is an infeasibly large
number even though each term only requires the computation of an OLS regression. For our
baseline estimation, with k = 32, this is around 4.3 billion regressions. As a result, only a
relatively small subset of the total number of possible regressions can be run.

17

Several stochastic algorithms have been proposed for dealing with this issue, including
the Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo Model Composition (MC3) technique (Madigan and York
(1995)), SSVS (George and McCulloch (1993)) and the Gibb’s sampler-based method of
Geweke (1994). These algorithms all move randomly through the different models as a Markov
chain approach and use results from the theory of Markov chain Monte Carlo’s to derive
theoretical convergence results. There are no analytic results concerning the relative
computational efficiency of these algorithms.
In contrast we will take a simpler approach that matches the form of the prior distribution.
We select models to evaluate by randomly including each variable with independent sampling
probability Ps(βi) . So long as the sampling probabilities are strictly greater than zero and strictly
less than one, any values will work in the sense that, as the number of random draws grows with
the sampled versions of (8), (9) and (10) will approach their true values.16 Clyde, Desimone and
Parmigiani (1996) have shown that this procedure, when implemented with Ps(βi) equal to the
prior inclusion probability, (called by the authors “random sampling”) has computational
efficiency not importantly lower than that of the MC3 and SVSS algorithms (for at least one
particular data set). For the present application, we found that sampling models using their prior
probabilities produced unacceptably slow convergence. Instead, we sampled one set of
regressions using the prior probability sampling weights and then used the approximate posterior
inclusion probabilities calculated from those regressions for the subsequent sampling
probabilities. This results in “oversampling” well-fitting regressions and accelerates

16

This is just the Law of Large Numbers at work.
18

convergence. Appendix 1 discusses computational and convergence issues in detail and may be
of interest to researchers looking to apply these techniques.

3.- DATA
Hundreds of variables have been found to be significantly correlated with growth in the
literature. Some of these variables are used systematically by most researchers. Others have
been used only once. From all of these we selected 32 variables by using the following criteria.
First, we kept the variables that can, in some ways, represent “state variables” of a
dynamic optimization problem. Hence, we choose variables measured as closely as possible to
the beginning of the sample period (which is 1960) and eliminate all those variables that were
computed for the later years only. For example, of all the education variables computed by Barro
and Lee (1995), we only use the values for 1960. We also neglect some of the political variables
that were published for the late 1980s, even though these variables have been put forward by a
number of researchers (in this category, for example, we neglect Knack and Keefer’s bureaucracy
and corruption variables, which were computed for 1985 only; corruption and bad bureaucracy
could very well be the endogenous response to a poor economic performance between 1960 and
1985).
Second, we also kept some variables, not because they are good proxies for some initial
state variable but because they are proxies for “parameters” of some theoretical models, such as
the rate of population growth for its role in the Solow model.
The third selection criterion derives from our need for a “balanced” data set. By
balanced, we mean an equal number of observations for all regressions. Since different variables
19

miss observations for different countries, we selected the 32 variables that maximized the
product of the number of countries with observations for all variables and the number of
variables.
With these restrictions, the total size of the data set becomes 32 variables plus the growth
rate of GDP per capita between 1960 and 1992 for 98 countries. The variables, their means and
standard deviations are depicted in Table 1. Appendix 2 provides a list of the included countries.

4.- RESULTS
We are now ready to conduct our BACE estimation. We will calculate the posterior
distributions for all of the β’s as well as the posterior means and variances given by equations (9)
to (10), using the posterior model weights from equation (8). We also calculate the posterior
inclusion probability, discussed in section 2.2, which provides a summary measure of how much
the data favor the inclusion of a particular variable in the growth regressions. Figure 1 shows the
posterior densities (approximated by histograms) of the coefficient estimates. Note that each
distribution consists of two parts: first, a continuous part that is the posterior density conditional
on inclusion in the model, and second, a discrete mass at zero representing the probability that
the variable does not belong in the model; this is given by one minus the posterior inclusion
probability17. As described in section 2, these densities are weighted averages of the posterior
densities conditional on each particular model with the weights given by the posterior model
17

The probability mass at zero is split into ten bins around zero to make the area of the mass
comparable with areas under the conditional density. Also the maximum height of the lump at
zero is limited to 0.08 meaning that for some of the variables with very low inclusion probability
the rectangle shows slightly less probability mass than it actually has. All of the figures are
plotted with the same vertical axis scaling.
20

probabilities. A standard result from Bayesian theory (see, e.g., Leamer (1978) or Poirier (1995))
is that if prior are taken as diffuse by taking the limit of a Normal-Student prior18 then the
posterior can be represented by:

t

βi

βiˆ

s[(X X) 1]

~ t(T k)

(11)

where s is the usual OLS estimate of the standard deviation of the regression residual. In other
words, with the appropriate diffuse prior, the posterior distribution conditional on the model is
identical to the classical sampling distribution. Thus the marginal posterior distribution for each
coefficient is a mixture-t distribution. In principle these distributions could be of almost any
form, but most of the densities in Figure 1 look reasonably Gaussian.

4.1. Baseline Estimation
This section presents the baseline estimation results with a prior model size, k¯, of seven
regressors. In Section 4.2 we examine the results with other values of k¯. The results are based
on approximately 21 million randomly drawn regressions19.

18

That is a prior in which the marginal prior for the slope coefficients is multivariate normal and
the marginal prior for the regression error standard deviation is Student.
19

The total number of possible regression models equals 232 , which is approximately equal to 4.3
billion models. However, convergence of the estimates is attained relatively quickly; after 2
million draws the maximum change of coefficient estimates normalized by the standard deviation
of the regressors relative to the dependent variable is smaller than 10-5 per 10,000 draws, and
after 20 million draws the maximum change is smaller than 10-6. The latter tolerance was used as
a convergence criterion for the reported estimates. See Appendix 1 for further details.
21

Table 2 shows the results: Column (1) reports the posterior inclusion probability of a
variable in the growth regression. Columns (2) and (3) show the posterior mean and standard
deviation of the distributions shown in figure 1, including the probability mass at zero. In
contrast, columns (4) and (5) report the conditional posterior mean and standard deviation; that
is, conditional on being included in the model. From the posterior density we can also calculate
the posterior probability, conditional on inclusion, that a coefficient has the same sign as its
posterior mean20; this “sign certainty probability” is contained in column (6). Finally, column
(7) contains the (unweighted) fraction of regressions in which a coefficient is significantly
different from zero in the classical sense of having a t-statistic with an absolute value greater than
two.
In Table 2 the variables are sorted in descending order of their posterior inclusion
probabilities. We can divide the variables according to whether seeing the data causes us to
increase or decrease our inclusion probability relative to the prior probability: for the baseline
estimation the prior inclusion probability is 7/32 = 0.219. There are 12 variables for which the
data provide support in this sense. For these variables, after seeing the data our belief that the
variable belongs in the regression is strengthened. Among these 12 variables there is a natural
division: (1) “top” variables that are strongly supported by the data with posterior inclusion
probability above 0.95, (2) variables with some support by the data with inclusion probability
below 0.95 but above the prior probability 0.219. The remaining 20 variables have little or no

20

This “sign certainty probability” is analogous to the area under the normal CDF(0) calculated
by Sala-i-Martin (1997 a,b).
22

support for inclusion: seeing the data further reduces our already modest initial assessment of
their inclusion probability.
Recall that the posterior model probabilities are given by equation (8) with prior model
probability given by the assumption that each variable has inclusion probability equal to 7/32.
The posterior inclusion probability is the sum of the posterior probabilities of all of the
regressions including that model. Thus, computationally, the posterior inclusion probability is a
measure of the weighted average goodness of fit of models including a particular variable,
relative to models not including the variable. The goodness of fit measure is adjusted to penalize
highly parameterized models in the fashion of the Schwarz criterion. Thus, variables with high
inclusion probabilities are variables which have high marginal contribution to the goodness-of-fit
of the regression model. Readers uncomfortable with the Bayesian interpretation of the posterior
inclusion probability may still regard this measure as a meaningful summary of the importance of
a variable.
The posterior mean in column (2) is computed according to equation (9) while the
posterior standard deviation is the square root of the variance formula in equation (10). The
posterior mean is a weighted average of the OLS estimates for all regressions, including
regressions in which the variable does not appear and thus has a coefficient of zero. The
conditional mean in column (4) includes only the regressions in which the variable actually
occurs and thus is equal to the posterior mean divided by the posterior inclusion probability. If
one has the prior with which we began the estimation then the unconditional posterior mean is
the “right” estimate of the marginal effect of the variable in the sense that it is the coefficient that

23

would be used for forecasting.21 The conditional mean and variance are also of interest however.
From a Bayesian point of view these have the interpretation of the posterior mean and variance
for a researcher who has a prior inclusion probability equal to one for the particular variable
while maintaining the 7/32 inclusion probability for all the other variables. In other words, if one
is certain that the variable belongs in the regression, this is the estimate to consider. It is also
comparable to coefficient estimates in standard regressions not accounting for model uncertainty.
The conditional standard deviation provides one measure of how well estimated the variable is
conditional on its inclusion. It averages both the standard errors of each possible regression as
well as the dispersion of estimates across models.22
Examination of figure 1 and of the conditional means and standard deviations indicate
that all of the 12 variables which are supported by the data are also conditionally well estimated.
We will call these variables robust. While there may be combinations of conditioning variables
which lead to very different estimates for these coefficients, those regressions do not fit well and
receive low posterior weight. Further, on average these coefficients are well-estimated within
individual models. Note that there is in principle no reason why a variable could not have a very

21

In a pure Bayesian approach there is not really a notion of a single estimate. However for
many purposes the posterior mean is reasonable, and it is what would be used for constructing
unbiased, minimum mean-squared-error predictions.
22

Note that one cannot interpret the ratio of the posterior mean to the posterior standard deviation
as a t-statistic for two reasons. Firstly the posterior is a mixture t-distribution and secondly it is
not a sampling distribution. However, for most of the variables which we consider the posterior
distributions are not too far from being normal. To the extent to which these are approximately
normal, having a ratio of posterior conditional mean to standard deviation around two in absolute
value indicates an approximate 95% Bayesian coverage region that excludes zero.
24

high posterior inclusion probability and still be non-robust, it just happens that in our dataset
there are no such variables.23
The “sign certainty probability” in column (6) is another measure of the significance of
the variables. This is the posterior probability on the same side of zero as the posterior mean of
the coefficient, conditional on the variable’s inclusion. As noted above, for each individual
regression the posterior density is equal to the classical sampling distribution of the coefficient.
In classical terms, a coefficient would be 5% significant in a two-sided test if 97.5% of the
probability in the sampling distribution were on the same side of zero as the coefficient estimate.
So if, for example, it just happened that a coefficient were exactly 5% significant in every single
regression its sign certainty probability would be 97.5%. Interestingly, applying a 0.975 cutoff to
this quantity identifies exactly the same set of 12 variables as the examination of posterior
probabilities (assuming we give the benefit of the doubt to the real exchange rate distortions
variable at 0.974.) This reinforces our conclusion that these variables are robust.
The final column in table 2 reports the (unweighted) fraction of regressions in which the
variable is classically significant at the 95% level. This is separated from the rest of the table
because it was calculated separately from the other estimates.24 This is calculated partly for
sake of comparison with extreme bounds analysis results. Note that for all but two of the

23

This would occur if, for example, a variable contributed a great deal to the fit of the model but
switched signs in the presence of another important variable.
24

This column was calculated based on a run of 31 million regression. It was calculated
separately so that the sampling could be based solely on the prior inclusion probabilities. The
other baseline estimates were calculated by oversampling “good” variables for inclusion and thus
produce misleading results for this statistic.
25

variables, many individual regressions can be found in which the variable is not significant, but
even the two favored variables would still be labeled fragile by an extreme bounds test.
Another interesting statistic is the posterior mean model size. For this baseline estimation
the prior model size was seven. But the data appear to favor somewhat larger models: the
posterior mean model size is 9.9. This number is, of course, sensitive to the specification of the
prior mean model size, as we will discuss below.

We are now ready to analyze the results from an economic point of view: what variables
do we find to be “strongly” related to growth?

Variables Strongly and Robustly Related to Growth
The Level of income in 1960 has an inclusion probability extremely close to one. The
first panel in Figure 1 shows the posterior distribution of the coefficient estimates for initial
income. Its inclusion probability is so high that in Figure 1, the mass at zero showing the
probability that the variable does not belong in the model, is invisible. The posterior mean
coefficient is -0.013 (with a standard deviation of 0.003); this is very precisely estimated. The
implied speed of convergence25 of 1.07% per year is somewhat smaller than 2% estimate given in
Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992). Due to the high inclusion probability the posterior mean is very
close to the posterior mean conditional on inclusion. The sign certainty probability in column (6)
shows that the probability mass of the density to the left of zero equals one to three decimal
places: this can be seen in Figure 1 by the fact that almost all of the continuous density lies below

25

The coefficient of convergence is given by (1 e
26

βT

)/T (see Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1992).

zero. Notice that the fraction of regressions in which the coefficient for initial income has tstatistic greater than two in absolute value is only 59%, so that an extreme bounds test very easily
labels the variable not robust. Nonetheless, the extremely well estimated coefficient and the very
high sign certainty statistic show that initial income is indeed robustly partially correlated with
growth. The explanation is that the regressions in which the coefficient on initial income is
poorly estimated are regressions with very poor fit: thus they receive little weight in the
averaging process. Furthermore, the extremely high inclusion probability suggests that
regressions that omit initial income are likely to perform poorly.
The Fraction of GDP in Mining has a positive relationship with growth and a very high
inclusion probability. This variable captures the success of countries with a large endowment of
natural resources, although one might expect that large rents could also induce more political
instability or rent-seeking.
The Sachs and Warner index of the Number of Years an economy has been open between
1950 and 1994 has a strong positive association with growth. The openness index captures
various aspects of the openness of a country to trade (tariff and non-tariff barriers, black market
premium, degree of socialism and monopolization of exports by the government)26.

26

Rodriguez and Rodrik (1999) have recently criticized the Sachs-Warner index because it is
mostly driven by the measure of the existence of state monopolies in major exports and by real
exchange rate distortions whereas the other components add little explanatory power to the
index. The Sachs-Warner index might therefore act as a catch-all variable for various
macroeconomic difficulties and instability and Rodriguez and Rodrik warn to draw strong
inferences about the effect of trade openness on growth from the coefficient.
27

The fractions of Confucians in the population enter positively in growth regressions.
Note that the Confucian variable can be interpreted as a dummy for Hong Kong and some East
Asian Tigers, which may explain the very high inclusion probability.

Variables Robustly Related to Growth
The following variables are supported by the data and are well-estimated. As will be
discussed below however, the evaluation of their importance is more sensitive to prior beliefs
than that of the variables above. Nonetheless, if one had a strong prior belief that any of these
variables should belong in the model it would be judged to be statistically important.
Life expectancy in 1960 has a high inclusion probability and is positively related to
subsequent growth of income per capita. Note that life expectancy may capture a whole set of
factors (including nutrition, health care, social security, literacy rates) that are associated with
high growth.
The primary schooling enrolment rate in 1960 is positively related to growth and the
inclusion probability is 0.63. Notice that when we consider larger prior model sizes in table 3,
the inclusion probability of primary schooling increases dramatically (up to 0.95 with prior
model size equal to 16) and falls for small prior model sizes. This suggests that primary
schooling performs better in explaining growth when several other variables are included to
capture steady state conditions.
Dummies for Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America are negatively related to income
growth. The posterior means are of comparable size, implying that Latin American and SubSaharan African countries had 0.6 and 0.7 percentage points lower income per capita growth

28

rates between 1960 and 1992, reducing the growth rate importantly from the sample average of
1.77.
The fraction of Protestants and growth are negatively related which may be explained by
the relatively larger share of Protestants in OECD countries, which are closer to their steady
states. For a country with 100% Protestants this effect is quite large at -0.6%.
The fraction of primary exports in total exports has a negative relationship with income
growth with an economically large coefficient estimate. Given that almost all posterior weight is
allocated to regressions containing the fraction of GDP in mining variable, the marginal effect of
this variable is more focused on primary exports from non-mineral sources.
The Real exchange rate distortions variable is negatively related to income growth, but
just barely make it into this category. Seeing the data only increases the inclusion probability by
around 1% from the prior. The 11 variables ranked above this do much better. That said the
variable is still quite robust and well-estimated with 97.4% of its conditional posterior density
falling below zero.

Variables Marginally Related to Growth
The following four variables: fraction of the population Buddhist, measure of outward
orientation, war dummy and the index of political rights all have posterior probabilities
somewhat lower than their prior probabilities, but nonetheless are fairly robust if they are
included in the growth regression. They all have sign certainty greater than 0.95, so that, very
loosely speaking, they are on average 90% significant. As we will discuss below the exact
importance of these variables is somewhat subject to the specific prior beliefs. The measure of

29

outward orientation has a somewhat surprising negative partial correlation with growth. Note
that the very high inclusion probability for the years of openness variable means that there is
already one openness measure in the regression.

Variables Not Robustly Related to Growth
The remaining sixteen variables show little evidence of any sort of robust partial
correlation with growth. They neither contribute importantly to the goodness-of-fit of growth
regressions, as measured by their posterior inclusion probabilities, nor have estimates that are
robust across different sets of conditioning variables. Notice that some political variables such as
the number of revolutions and coups or the index of political rights are not robustly related to
economic growth. Similarly the degree of capitalism measure has no positive correlation with
growth. This could be due to the fact that other variables which capture political or economic
instability such as real exchange rate distortions, the number of years an economy has been open
and life expectancy or regional dummies capture most of the variation in those variables.

Overall, we can conclude that the data support the hypothesis that there is a set of
variables that are robustly partially correlated with economic growth. This strongly contradicts
the extreme bounds test which would reject the significance of every single variable. Further
note that the list of robust variables is similar to that reported by Sala-i-Martin (1997), but that
several of the variables that Sala-i-Martin identified as significantly related to growth have low
inclusion probabilities. This can be reconciled by the fact that the weighting method used by
Sala-i-Martin (1997), weighting by the model likelihood, assigns a lot of weight to a very few

30

regressions. By contrast, the weighting method derived in this paper puts less extreme emphasis
on small groups of regressions and incorporates the estimates from a much larger set of models.

4.2. Robustness of Results
Up until now we have concentrated on results derived for a prior model size k¯ 7 . As
discussed earlier, while we feel that this is a reasonable expected model size it is in some sense
arbitrary. We need to explore the effects of the prior on our conclusions. Tables 3, 4 and 5 do
precisely this, reporting the posterior inclusion probabilities and conditional posterior means,
respectively, for k¯ equal to 5, 9, 11 and 16 as well as repeating the benchmark numbers for easy
comparison.
First note that the results for the four strongest variables show almost no sensitivity
whatsoever to the choice of prior model size, either in terms of their inclusion probabilities or
their coefficient estimates. On the other end of the scale, the sixteen variables that showed little
partial correlation in the baseline estimation are not helped by alternative priors. Their posterior
inclusion probabilities rise as k¯ increases, which is hardly surprising as their prior inclusion
probabilities are rising. But even the best in this group always have posterior inclusion
probabilities far lower than their prior inclusion probabilities. For example, one of the best in a
poor lot is the civil liberties index (civlibb) which has a posterior probability of around 25%
when k¯ 16 . But with k¯ 16 the prior inclusion probability is 50% so that the data halve our
prior probability. For some of the variables in this group the coefficient estimates are not very
stable across different model specifications but since they are not robust in the first place this is
of little importance.

31

More interesting are the in-between variables, some of which display interesting
systematic patterns when k¯ is varied. One of these is primary school enrolment rate in the initial
period (P60): here the posterior inclusion probability rises from 49% with k¯ 5 to 95% with
k¯ 16 . This suggests that the primary school enrolment rate is a variable which requires other
conditioning variables in order to display its full importance. Interestingly, the conditional
estimate of its slope coefficient is quite stable across specifications. Both the fraction protestant
and the primary commodity export share are also variables which appear to do better with more
conditioning variables and also have stable coefficient estimates. Unsurprisingly, the coefficients
on the two regional dummies (Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa) decline in absolute value
as more conditioning variables are included. Only one variable in the list of 12 that are robust in
the baseline regressions would drop out when priors indicate larger model sizes: real exchange
rate distortions (RERD). For k¯  9 the posterior probability is lower than the prior and the
coefficient is falling. This suggests that this variable is acting more as a catchall for various
other effects than in its own right. All of the other 11 variables that were robust in the baseline
model also appear to be robust to different prior specifications as can be seen by examining the
sign certainty probabilities in Table 5.
Finally there are the four marginally important variables from the baseline. Of these, two,
fraction Buddhist and the political rights index, show little change: there is still marginal
evidence for their inclusion. The other two, the index of outward orientation, and the war
dummy have posterior inclusion probabilities strongly increasing with the prior model size. For
both, in the somewhat extreme k¯ 16 case the posterior probability is above the prior inclusion
probability.

32

Unsurprisingly the posterior mean model size is strongly affected by the choice of prior
mean model size. Recall that for the baseline k¯ 7 the posterior model size was 9.9. For prior
model sizes of five through 11 the posterior model size is greater than the prior, indicating that
the data prefer larger models. With a prior model size of 16 the data reduce our opinion of the
size of the model. The posterior model size is quite sensitive to the prior specification.
The overall conclusions are at most mildly affected by considering different prior model
sizes. Including robustness to different prior specifications we still find 11 variables importantly
and robustly correlated with growth and five variables with marginal correlation.

5.- CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we propose a Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates method to
determine what variables are strongly related to growth in a broad cross section of countries. The
method introduces a number of improvements relative to the previous literature. For example, we
improve upon Sala-i-Martin (1997) because we use an averaging method which is a
(approximately) fully justified Bayesian estimators and because we do not restrict the number
regressors in the averaged models. Our approach provides an alternative to a standard Bayesian
Model Averaging since BACE does not require the specification of the prior distribution of the
parameters, but has only one hyper-parameter, the expected model size, k¯. This parameter is easy
to interpret, easy to specify, and easy to check for robustness. The interpretation of the BACE
estimates is straightforward for economists not trained in Bayesian inference, since the weights
are analogous to the Schwarz model selection criterion. Finally, our estimates can be calculated
using only repeated applications of OLS which makes the approach transparent and

33

straightforward to implement. In contrast to extreme bounds tests, models that fit poorly are not
given equal weight with those that fit well and no variables are held “fixed” and therefore
“untested.”
Our main results support Sala-i-Martin rather than Levine and Renelt: we find that a good
number of economic variables have robust partial correlation with long-run growth. In fact, we
find that about one third of the 32 variables used in the analysis can be said to be robustly related
to growth while several more are marginally related. Interestingly, the strongest variable is the
initial level of income which reflects the concept of conditional convergence discussed in Barro
and Sala-i-Martin (1992). Other important variables include regional dummies (such as Africa or
Latin America), some measures of human capital (such as life expectancy or primary schooling)
and some sectoral variables such as measures of openness, primary exports or real exchange
distortions.
There are three lines of research that we would like to pursue from here. First we would
like to apply a version of our BACE method to panel data estimates, which have become quite
popular in the recent empirical economic growth literature. Secondly, we plan to allow the
inclusion of nonlinear terms in the regressions. The literature has identified some variables
which may affect growth in a highly nonlinear way: for example, it has been argued that inflation
has important negative effects on growth, but only for very high levels of inflation. Our analysis
forces all variables to enter the regressions in a linear fashion and, therefore, does not allow for
such nonlinearities. Finally, we would like to expand our theoretical and empirical analysis to
allow for unbalanced data sets. The lack of data is an important problem for many fields, but it is
an especially important problem for the field of cross-country comparisons of long-term data like

34

the one required by the growth literature. Our analysis so far has required that the number of
observations be identical for each of the regressions and, as a result, we have been forced to
neglect many of the potentially important variables simply because they were missing too many
observations.

35

APPENDIX 1
This appendix includes some more precise details about computational aspects of the
BACE procedure with particular emphasis on the sampling algorithm and convergence. Given
¯ as
the form of our prior distribution, the prior inclusion probability for each variable is k/K
described in the main text. Represent a model, Mj , as a length K binary vector in which a one
indicates that a variable is included in the model and a zero indicates that it is not. Then:

P(Mj)

k¯ K
# Π (1
Π Mji
K i 1
i 1
K

Mji) (1

k¯
)
K

k¯
K

kj

# 1

k¯
K

1 kj

(A1)

where kj is the number of included variables in model j and Mji is the i’th element of the Mj
vector. The second equality in (A1) holds only in the case of equal prior inclusion probabilities
for each variable, but the first equality is easily adapted to the case in which the prior inclusion
probabilities may differ across variables. If the set of possible regressions is small enough to
allow exhaustive calculation, one may substitute (A1) into (8) to calculate the posterior model
probabilities and then use (9) and (10) to calculate the posterior mean and variance. For each
term of the sum one calculates the appropriate OLS regression, gets the OLS parameter estimates
for the β’s and σ and the sum of squared errors. These allow the computation of the individual
term in (9) and (10). Also the posterior probabilities allow the calculation of any other features
of the posterior distribution which may be of interest based on the 2K -term version of (4). As
for the other quantities cited in this paper, the “sign-certainty statistic” is given by:
2K

sign certainty for βj

M P(Mj|y)P sign(βj)
j 1

36

sign E(βj|y) |Mj,y

(A2)

The histograms for the posterior densities are calculated as follows. An initial run established the
important range of the distribution of the estimates for each β. This was then split into 100 equal
size bins for the histogram. Since for each regression the ratio of β̂ to the estimated standard
deviation of the error term is distributed t(T-k-1) we can use a t-CDF to evaluate the amount of
probability contained in each bin. This is then weighted by the posterior probability of the
regression. Note that the calculation of these histograms is quite computationally intensive as
with each regression we must make 100 times k calls to a t-CDF.
When we are sampling randomly from the space of possible models we want the limits of
all of our quantities of interest to approach their true values as the number of sampled models
approaches infinity. If we let the probability of sampling Mj be given by Ps(Mj) then the weight
attached to each regression must be adjusted by the inverse of the sampling probability. This is
because as the number of sampled regressions approaches infinity the fraction of times a
particular regression is run approaches its sampling probability, when in sums such as (9) and
(10) each regression gets equal weight. Thus, with sampling the analog of (8) becomes:

P(Mj )
P(Mj|y)

Ps(Mj )

M
N

i 1

T

P(Mm(i) )
Ps(Mm(i) )

k j /2

SSEj

T/2

(A3)
T

km(i) /2

SSEm(i)

T/2

where m(i) represents the model index associated with the i’th randomly sampled model and N is
the number of models sampled. This version of the weights can then be used to calculate
sampling analogs of (9) and (10). The intuition for (A3) is that we are over-sampling some

37

models so as usual we have to deflate observations by their sampling probabilities. (A3) is
particularly easy to calculate when the sampling probabilities are equal to the prior probabilities
in which case they cancel and need not even be computed. This is the sampling strategy
discussed in the text of randomly selecting models by randomly including variables with their
initial inclusion probability. So long as the sampling probabilities of all models are greater than
zero all of the numerical approximations will be consistent.
Trial-and-error calculation indicated that for the present problem the prior-weight
sampling was leading to slow convergence of the parameter estimates. This is because it samples
many, many poorly fitting regressions which receive little weight in the averages. Instead we
used the following procedure which we refer to as the stratified sampler: we ran 100,000
regressions using the prior weight sampler and then adjusted the sampling inclusion probabilities
to be equal to the posterior inclusion probabilities estimated from the initial sample. In order to
guard against too much impact from errors made in the first 100,000 regressions we limited the
sampling probabilities to lie in the interval [0.1, 0.85]. Some experimentation suggested that
moderate changes in these bounds has little effect on the behavior of the algorithm. Again, since
any set of sample inclusion probabilities will work asymptotically the choice of these parameters
is not critical. Thus our stratified sampler over-samples “good” regressions.
We then need some way of judging whether or not the sampled analogs of (9) and (10)
are approaching their limits. As always, convergence criteria are somewhat arbitrary. For the
estimates reported in the paper we examined changes in the posterior means of the β’s. First we
normalized the coefficient estimates by the ratio of the standard deviation of y to the standard
deviation of x. The standardization with respect to y is only to make the size of the convergence

38

criterion easy to interpret. This transformation standardizes the β’s into units of standard
deviations of y per standard deviation of x. Then in order to declare that the estimates
“converged” we looked at the change in the estimates of the normalized β’s generated by
sampling a further 10,000 regressions. When this change fell below 10E-06 for ten consecutive
sets of 10,000 regressions the algorithm declared convergence. For our stratified sampling
technique these parameter changes fall smoothly as a function of the number of regressions so
that this criterion is reasonable. For the prior probability sampler this change is much less
reliable with the occasional set of 10,000 having a large impact: we would not recommend the
use of this sampler with this particular convergence criterion. For our baseline estimation with
K̄

7 we also investigated the performance of the sampler and convergence criterion by

performing a number of further runs with the same convergence criterion: these all converged
with between 15 and 30 million regressions. Results were very similar: they suggest that the
posterior inclusion probabilities in table 2 are accurate to at least two decimal places, while the
conditional β estimates are even more accurate. Estimates based on only two million or so
regressions are even quite close to the 20 million regression baseline. This suggests that our
methodology will create quite accurate approximations in reasonable computing times even with
very large model spaces.
In the Bayesian Model Averaging statistics literature, which has used fully Bayesian
estimates of individual models, the most popular sampling algorithm appears to be the MC3
algorithm mentioned in the main text. We were resistant to using this algorithm because its
mechanism, based on the Metropolis-Hastings criterion, is quite difficult to understand
intuitively. In order, however, to both try to ensure that our stratified sampler is generating

39

correct answers and to compare it to procedures in other work we created a test data set. This
used all of the observations in our main data set but with only 20 variables rather than the full set
of 32. This reduces the set of possible regressions to around one million which easily allows the
precise calculation of the sums in (8), (9) and (10). We then performed sampling runs with
50,000 regressions each and calculated a weighted mean-squared error criterion for the posterior
means of the β’s with the weighting matrix being (X X) 1 . By this criterion the stratified
sampling algorithm was about four times as accurate as MC3, but for both accuracy was quite
reasonable.

40

APPENDIX 2
Countries included in the regressions:
Algeria
Benin
Botswana
Burundi
Cameroon
Cent'l Afr. Rep.
Chad
Congo
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Somalia
South africa
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Canada
Costa Rica
Dominican Rep.

El Salvador
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Trinidad & Tobago
United States
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Taiwan
Thailand
Austria
Belgium

41

Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, West
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
Australia
Fiji
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea

REFERENCES
Barro, Robert J. (1991a). "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106, 2 (May), 407-443.
Barro, Robert, (1996) “Determinants of Democracy”, Mimeo Harvard University, July.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (1993). "International Comparisons of Educational
Attainment," Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, 3 (December), 363-394. The data for
this paper were taken from the NBER Web Page.
Barro, Robert J and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992) "Convergence," Journal of Political Economy,
100(2), 223-51.
Barro, Robert J and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995), Economic Growth, McGraw Hill.
Caselli, Francesco; Gerard Esquivel and Fernando Lefort (1996), "Reopening the convergence
debate: a new look at cross-country growth empirics," Journal of Economic Growth 1(3):
363-89.
Clyde, M.; Desimone, H., and Parmigiani, G. (1996), “Prediction via Orthogonalized Model
Mixing,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 1197-1208.
DeLong and Summers, (1991) “Equipment Investment and Economic Growth”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106, 2 (May), 445-502. The data for this paper was taken from the
World Bank’s Research Department Web Page.
Doppelhofer, Gernot (2000), Doctoral Dissertation, Columbia University.
Durlauf, Steven N. and Danny T. Quah (1999), “The New Empirics of Economic Growth,” in
Handbook of Macroeconomics Vol. 1, John B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., North
Holland, Amsterdam.
Easterly William and Ross Levine (1997), “Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 4 (November), 1203-50.
Fernandez, Carmen; Ley, Eduardo and Mark F. J. Steel (2000), “Model Uncertainty in CrossCountry Growth Regressions,” mimeo.
George, E. and McCulloch, R. (1993), “Variable Selection via Gibbs Sampling,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 88, 881-889.
Geweke, J.F. (1994), “Bayesian Comparison of Econometric Models,” Working Paper 532,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Granger, Clive W. J. and Harald Uhlig (1990), “Reasonable Extreme-Bounds Analysis,”
Journal of Econometrics, 44, 159-170.
Hoeting, Jennifer; Madigan, David; Raftery, Adrian, and Chris Volinsky (1999), “Bayesian
Model Averaging: A Tutorial,” Technical Report 9814, Department of Statistics,
Colorado State University.
Islam, Nazrul, (1995) “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(4), 1127-70.
Jeffreys (1961) Theory of Probability, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, London.
Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, (1996), “The Productivity of Nations”, NBER Working Paper
#5812, November 1996. The data for this paper were taken from the Chad Jone’s Web
Page.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine. 1993. "Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and
Evidence." Journal of Monetary Economics 32 (3): 513-42.
42

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1995), “Institutions and Economic Performance: CrossCountry Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures”, Economics and Politics. The
data from this paper were provided to us by Robert Barro.
Leamer, E. (1978) Specification Searches, John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Leamer, Edward E. (1983). “Let’s take the con out of econometrics”, American Economic
Review, 73, 1, (March), 31-43.
Leamer, Edward E. (1985). “Sensitivity Analysis Would Help”, American Economic Review, 75,
3, (June), 308-313.
Levine, Ross and David Renelt (1992). "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions," American Economic Review, 82, 4 (September), 942-963. The data for this
paper was taken from the World Bank’s Research Department Web Page.
Madigan, D., and York, J. (1995), “Bayesian Graphical Models for Discrete Data,” International
Statistical Review, 89, 215-232.
Raftery, Adrian; Madigan, David; and Jennifer Hoeting (1997), “Bayesian Model Averaging for
Linear Regression Models,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92(437),
179-191.
Rodriguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik (1999), “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s
Guide to the Cross-National Evidence”, NBER Working Paper # 7081.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner, (1995), “Economic Reform and the Process of Economic
Integration”, Brookings Papers of Economic Activity, #1, (August), pp1-95. The data for
this paper was provided to me by Andrew Warner.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner, (1996) “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic
Growth”, mimeo HIID.
Sala-i-Martin, X., (1997a), “I Just Ran 2 Million Regressions”, American Economic Review,
May.
Sala-i-Martin, X., (1997b), “I Just Ran Four Million Regressions”, NBER Working Paper #6252.
Schwarz, G. (1978) “Estimating the Dimension of a Model,” The Annals of Statistics, 6, 461464.
York, J, Madigan, D., Heuch, I. and R. T. Lie (1995), “Estimating a Proportion of Birth Defects
by Double Sampling: A Bayesian Approach Incorporating Covariates and Model
Uncertainty,” Applied Statistics, 44, 227-242.
Zellner, Arnold (1971), An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics, Wiley, New
York.
Zellner, Arnold (1986), “On Assessing Prior Distributions and Bayesian Regression Analysis
with g-Prior Distributions,” in Bayesian inference and decision techniques: Essays in
honor of Bruno de Finetti. Studies in Bayesian Econometrics and Statistics series, vol. 6,
Goel, Prem, and Zellner, Arnold eds., North-Holland, Amsterdam, 233-43.

43

Table 1: Description of Data and Sources of Variables
Name

Variable Description and Source

Growth of GDP per capita between 1960 and 1992. Barro and Lee (1993)
[henceforth BL93]
0.0177
log(GDP per capita 1960). Log of Summers-Heston GDP per capita in
GDPSH60
1960. BL93.
7.3273
53.4173
LIFEE060 Life Expectancy in 1960. BL93.
Primary School Enrollment Rate in 1960. BL93.
0.7143
P60
Sub-Sahara African Dummy. Dummy for Sub-Sahara African Countries.
0.3265
safrica
Latin American Dummy. Dummy for Latin American countries.
0.2245
laam
OECD Dummy. Dummy for OECD countries.
0.2245
OECD
Outward Orientation. Dummy for outward orientation. Levine and Renelt
SCOUT
(1992).
0.3673
0.0213
dpop6090 Growth Rate of Population between 1960 and 1990. BL93.
Higher Education Enrollment Rate in 1960. BL93.
0.0348
h60
Number of Years economy has been Open between 1950 and 1994.
YrsOpen
Index computed by Sachs and Warner (1995).
0.3616
Revolutions and Coups. Number of military coups and revolutions. BL93.
0.1844
revcoup
War Dummy. Dummy for countries that have been involved in war
wardum
any time between 1960 and 1990. BL93
0.3878
Political Rights. See Barro (1996). Larger index values indicate fewer
prightsb
rights. [henceforth B96]
3.8801
Civil Liberties. Index of civil liberties. Knack and Keefer (1995). Larger
civlibb
values indicate fewer civil liberties.
3.8362
22.7228
ABSLATIT Absolute Latitude. B96.
Index of Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization. Probability two random people
0.3617
AVELF
in a country do not speak same language. From Easterly and Levine (1997).
Primary Exports in 1970. Fraction of primary exports in total exports in
PRIEXP70
1970. Sachs and Warner (1996)
0.7330
Real Exchange Rate Distortions. Levine and Renelt (1992).
125.4694
RERD
British Colony. Dummy variable for former British colonies. See B96.
0.3367
BRIT
0.1837
FRENCH French Colony. Dummy variable for former French colonies. See B96.
Spanish Colony. Dummy variable for former Spanish colonies. See B96.
0.1633
SPAIN
0.0418
BUDDHA Fraction of Buddhists. See B96.
Fraction of Catholics. See B96.
0.3554
CATH
Fraction of Confucians. Fraction of population that follows Confucian
CONFUC
Religion. See B96.
0.0140
Fraction Hindu. See B96.
0.0379
HINDU
Fraction Jewish. See B96.
0.0093
JEW
0.2033
MUSLIM Fraction Muslim. See B96.
Fraction Protestant. See B96.
0.1688
PROT
Fraction of GDP in Mining. From Hall and Jones (1996).
0.0479
Mining
Degree of Capitalism. Index of degree in which economies favor
3.4388
EcOrg
capitalist forms of production. Hall and Jones (1996).
0.3123
OthFrac Fraction of Population Speaking Foreign Language. Hall and Jones (1996).
Fraction of Population Speaking English. Fraction of the population able to
0.0841
EngFrac
speak English. Hall and Jones (1996).

Growth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Mean

44

S.D.
0.0180
0.9046
12.2979
0.3064
0.4714
0.4194
0.4194
0.4846
0.0094
0.0486
0.3504
0.2290
0.4897
2.0197
1.8183
16.4984
0.3037
0.2826
40.7523
0.4750
0.3892
0.3715
0.1594
0.3691
0.0753
0.1437
0.0828
0.3345
0.2312
0.0735
1.4436
0.4051
0.2517

Table 2: Baseline Estimation

1 GDPSH60
29 Mining
10 YrsOpen
24 CONFUC
2 LIFEE060
3 P60
4 safrica
27 MUSLIM
5 laam
28 PROT
17 PRIEXP70
18 RERD
22 BUDDHA
7 SCOUT
12 wardum
13 prightsb
32 EngFrac
14 civlibb
23 CATH
11 revcoup
31 OthFrac
15 ABSLATIT
30 EcOrg
16 AVELF
8 dpop6090
6 OECD
25 HINDU
21 SPAIN
19 BRIT
26 JEW
20 FRENCH
9 h60

Posterior
Inclusion
Probability

Posterior
Mean

Posterior
Standard
Deviation

1.000
0.998
0.997
0.971
0.887
0.627
0.596
0.580
0.514
0.474
0.430
0.239
0.194
0.151
0.145
0.138
0.107
0.104
0.096
0.078
0.076
0.073
0.054
0.054
0.045
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.034
0.033
0.032
0.031

-0.01276
0.06475
0.01819
0.05808
0.00079
0.01214
-0.00720
0.00809
-0.00588
-0.00641
-0.00592
-0.00002
0.00271
-0.00059
-0.00058
-0.00023
-0.00077
-0.00017
-0.00073
-0.00052
0.00032
0.00001
0.00004
-0.00026
0.00719
0.00014
-0.00016
-0.00009
0.00001
0.00020
0.00000
0.00001

0.00274
0.01490
0.00447
0.01861
0.00039
0.01107
0.00682
0.00779
0.00642
0.00781
0.00776
0.00003
0.00638
0.00164
0.00164
0.00068
0.00268
0.00064
0.00304
0.00225
0.00149
0.00005
0.00025
0.00156
0.05220
0.00135
0.00212
0.00123
0.00048
0.00256
0.00058
0.00559

Posterior
Mean
Conditional
on Inclusion
-0.01276
0.06490
0.01824
0.05983
0.00088
0.01938
-0.01209
0.01395
-0.01143
-0.01351
-0.01377
-0.00007
0.01398
-0.00392
-0.00396
-0.00165
-0.00719
-0.00164
-0.00759
-0.00663
0.00429
0.00015
0.00081
-0.00486
0.15920
0.00324
-0.00361
-0.00199
0.00033
0.00594
0.00007
0.00047

Conditional
“Sign
Fraction of
Posterior
Certainty
Regressions
Standard
Probability” with Abs(t)>2
Deviation
0.59
0.00273
1.000
0.54
0.01458
1.000
1.00
0.00436
1.000
1.00
0.01588
1.000
0.71
0.00028
0.999
0.89
0.00744
0.995
0.85
0.00436
0.994
0.26
0.00480
0.994
0.62
0.00409
0.992
0.71
0.00571
0.991
0.76
0.00564
0.989
0.52
0.00003
0.974
0.96
0.00724
0.967
0.01
0.00218
0.956
0.23
0.00227
0.955
0.40
0.00099
0.950
0.35
0.00464
0.933
0.26
0.00123
0.917
0.45
0.00660
0.855
0.08
0.00491
0.905
0.30
0.00352
0.882
0.40
0.00013
0.874
0.15
0.00075
0.855
0.30
0.00478
0.843
0.15
0.19000
0.796
0.21
0.00557
0.716
0.02
0.00943
0.644
0.36
0.00551
0.647
0.12
0.00257
0.544
0.00
0.01277
0.677
0.20
0.00323
0.502
0.06
0.03176
0.503

Notes: The left hand side variable in all regressions is the growth rate from 1960-1992 across 98 countries. Apart from the final
column all statistics come from a random sample of approximately 21 million of the possible regressions including any
combination of the 32 variables. Prior mean model size is seven. Variables are ranked by the first column, the posterior
inclusion probability. This is the sum of the posterior probabilities of all models containing the variable. The next two columns
reflect the posterior mean and standard deviations for the linear marginal effect of the variable: the posterior mean has the usual
interpretation of a regression β. The conditional mean and standard deviation are conditional on inclusion in the model. The
“sign certainty probability” is the posterior probability that the coefficient is on the same side of zero as its mean conditional on
inclusion. It is a measure of our posterior confidence in the sign of the coefficient. The final column is the fraction of
regressions in which the coefficient has a classical t-test greater than two, with all regressions having equal sampling probability.

45

Table 3: Posterior Inclusion Probabilities with Different Prior Model Sizes k¯
Prior Inclusion
Probability
1 GDPSH60
29 Mining
10 YrsOpen
24 CONFUC
2 LIFEE060
3 P60
4 safrica
27 MUSLIM
5 laam
28 PROT
17 PRIEXP70
18 RERD
22 BUDDHA
7 SCOUT
12 wardum
13 prightsb
32 EngFrac
14 civlibb
23 CATH
11 revcoup
31 OthFrac
15 ABSLATIT
30 EcOrg
16 AVELF
8 dpop6090
6 OECD
25 HINDU
21 SPAIN
19 BRIT
26 JEW
20 FRENCH
9 h60

k¯ 5

k¯ 7

k¯ 9

k¯ 11

k¯ 16

0.156

0.219

0.281

0.344

0.500

0.999
0.996
0.996
0.974
0.898
0.488
0.589
0.534
0.511
0.390
0.318
0.223
0.137
0.086
0.084
0.103
0.084
0.069
0.065
0.056
0.064
0.054
0.036
0.038
0.031
0.030
0.027
0.032
0.023
0.023
0.021
0.020

1.000
0.998
0.997
0.971
0.887
0.627
0.596
0.580
0.514
0.474
0.430
0.239
0.194
0.151
0.145
0.138
0.107
0.104
0.096
0.078
0.076
0.073
0.054
0.054
0.045
0.044
0.044
0.044
0.034
0.033
0.032
0.031

1.000
0.999
0.997
0.970
0.880
0.740
0.606
0.630
0.526
0.544
0.526
0.250
0.254
0.235
0.220
0.178
0.127
0.139
0.129
0.099
0.088
0.093
0.075
0.073
0.063
0.061
0.064
0.057
0.047
0.046
0.044
0.043

1.000
0.999
0.997
0.971
0.875
0.825
0.624
0.679
0.552
0.605
0.615
0.256
0.316
0.331
0.307
0.212
0.146
0.175
0.162
0.119
0.101
0.108
0.099
0.092
0.084
0.078
0.088
0.073
0.063
0.060
0.060
0.056

1.000
1.000
0.997
0.977
0.868
0.947
0.715
0.774
0.668
0.740
0.788
0.271
0.469
0.596
0.555
0.293
0.198
0.257
0.248
0.167
0.143
0.149
0.183
0.149
0.159
0.131
0.178
0.136
0.116
0.107
0.116
0.102

Notes: The left hand side variable in all regressions is the growth rate from 1960-1992 across 98 countries. Each
column contains the posterior probability of all models including the given variable. These are calculated with the
same data but which different prior mean model sizes as labeled in the column headings. They are based on
different random samples of all possible regressions using the same convergence criterion for stopping sampling.
Samples range from around 4 million regressions for k¯ 5 to around 30 million for k¯ 16 .

46

Table 4: Posterior Conditional Means with Different Prior Model Sizes k¯
k¯ 5

Prior Inclusion
Probability
1 GDPSH60
29 Mining
10 YrsOpen
24 CONFUC
2 LIFEE060
3 P60
4 safrica
27 MUSLIM
5 laam
28 PROT
17 PRIEXP70
18 RERD
22 BUDDHA
7 SCOUT
12 wardum
13 prightsb
32 EngFrac
14 civlibb
23 CATH
11 revcoup
31 OthFrac
15 ABSLATIT
30 EcOrg
16 AVELF
8 dpop6090
6 OECD
25 HINDU
21 SPAIN
19 BRIT
26 JEW
20 FRENCH
9 h60

k¯ 7

k¯ 9

k¯ 11

k¯ 16

Posterior Mean Conditional on Inclusion
-0.01274
0.06502
0.01876
0.06153
0.00095
0.01933
-0.01281
0.01409
-0.01176
-0.01354
-0.01383
-0.00007
0.01412
-0.00372
-0.00380
-0.00171
-0.00761
-0.00165
-0.00784
-0.00688
0.00477
0.00016
0.00082
-0.00504
0.16213
0.00300
-0.00200
-0.00293
0.00028
0.00663
0.00046
-0.00229

-0.01276
0.06490
0.01824
0.05983
0.00088
0.01938
-0.01209
0.01395
-0.01143
-0.01351
-0.01377
-0.00007
0.01398
-0.00392
-0.00396
-0.00165
-0.00719
-0.00164
-0.00759
-0.00663
0.00429
0.00015
0.00081
-0.00486
0.15920
0.00324
-0.00361
-0.00199
0.00033
0.00594
0.00007
0.00047

-0.01281
0.06479
0.01776
0.05846
0.00083
0.01958
-0.01142
0.01372
-0.01097
-0.01344
-0.01370
-0.00006
0.01392
-0.00408
-0.00406
-0.00160
-0.00678
-0.00162
-0.00724
-0.00634
0.00383
0.00014
0.00081
-0.00467
0.15926
0.00330
-0.00452
-0.00117
0.00037
0.00541
-0.00024
0.00198

-0.01285
0.06481
0.01728
0.05718
0.00078
0.01990
-0.01083
0.01344
-0.01046
-0.01338
-0.01361
-0.00006
0.01384
-0.00421
-0.00416
-0.00155
-0.00636
-0.00159
-0.00686
-0.00599
0.00339
0.00013
0.00080
-0.00449
0.16122
0.00318
-0.00558
-0.00035
0.00043
0.00483
-0.00062
0.00365

-0.01291
0.06513
0.01604
0.05437
0.00068
0.02080
-0.00980
0.01264
-0.00957
-0.01325
-0.01341
-0.00005
0.01350
-0.00449
-0.00438
-0.00143
-0.00539
-0.00146
-0.00603
-0.00495
0.00257
0.00009
0.00080
-0.00399
0.17161
0.00267
-0.00768
0.00162
0.00071
0.00306
-0.00134
0.00605

Notes: The left hand side variable in all regressions is the growth rate from 1960-1992 across 98 countries. Each
column contains the posterior mean of the regression slope coefficient for the given variable conditional on the
variables inclusion in the model. These are calculated with the same data but which different prior mean model
sizes as labeled in the column headings. They are based on different random samples of all possible regressions
using the same convergence criterion for stopping sampling. Samples range from around 4 million regressions for
k¯ 5 to around 30 million for k¯ 16 .

47

Table 5: Sign Certainty Probabilities
with Different Prior Model Sizes k¯
1 GDPSH60
29 Mining
10 YrsOpen
24 CONFUC
2 LIFEE060
3 P60
4 safrica
27 MUSLIM
5 laam
28 PROT
17 PRIEXP70
18 RERD
22 BUDDHA
7 SCOUT
12 wardum
13 prightsb
32 EngFrac
14 civlibb
23 CATH
11 revcoup
31 OthFrac
15 ABSLATIT
16 AVELF
30 EcOrg
8 dpop6090
25 HINDU
6 OECD
21 SPAIN
19 BRIT
26 JEW
20 FRENCH
9 h60
Posterior Mean
Model Size

k¯ 5
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.992
0.999
0.996
0.996
0.993
0.992
0.966
0.973
0.925
0.962
0.977
0.860
0.898
0.884
0.871
0.979
0.914
0.851
0.787
0.735
0.869
0.828
0.878
0.600
0.813
0.641
0.527

k¯ 7
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.999
0.995
0.994
0.994
0.992
0.991
0.989
0.974
0.967
0.956
0.955
0.950
0.933
0.917
0.855
0.905
0.882
0.874
0.843
0.855
0.796
0.716
0.647
0.644
0.544
0.677
0.502
0.503

k¯ 9
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.999
0.998
0.996
0.987
0.992
0.988
0.986
0.990
0.962
0.966
0.952
0.959
0.943
0.919
0.922
0.855
0.905
0.875
0.821
0.853
0.849
0.795
0.729
0.579
0.586
0.566
0.670
0.512
0.544

k¯ 11
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.999
0.997
0.995
0.991
0.993
0.986
0.989
0.990
0.958
0.965
0.964
0.965
0.942
0.908
0.907
0.841
0.874
0.831
0.851
0.819
0.856
0.797
0.716
0.518
0.701
0.516
0.641
0.537
0.524

k¯ 16
1.000
1.000
0.999
0.999
0.994
0.997
0.986
0.990
0.983
0.986
0.990
0.922
0.965
0.976
0.974
0.923
0.874
0.897
0.807
0.834
0.766
0.743
0.817
0.859
0.832
0.681
0.618
0.794
0.579
0.586
0.651
0.580

9.00

9.89

10.68

11.73

14.19

Note: The left hand side variable in all regressions is the growth rate from 1960-1992 across 98 countries. Each
column contains the sign-certainty probability of the regression slope coefficient for the given variable. This
measures our posterior degree of confidence that the signs of the conditional means in Table 4 are correct. These are
calculated with the same data but which different prior mean model sizes as labeled in the column headings. They
are based on different random samples of all possible regressions using the same convergence criterion for stopping
sampling. Samples range from around 4 million regressions for k¯ 5 to around 30 million for k¯ 16 .

48

Figure 1: Posterior Distributions
These figures show the posterior distributions of the marginal effects of each independent variable on long-run
economic growth. The rectangle centered on zero represents the probability mass at zero, the posterior probability
that the variable is not contained in the model.

49

Figure 1 (continued): Posterior Distributions

50

Figure 1 (continued): Posterior Distributions

51

Figure 1 (continued): Posterior Distributions

52

