  

  

     
       
 !"
#$%"&' (()(
**'++,,,"- $&+'' .+,(()(

     
/0)0 ..1. **.2 "1
!-& 3 0/45
61" 000

 ! 
"#
$%&&&'!#("# )# *)*
"!'+ " * )$*)
#

 $"$! $ 7* $ .*8$2" '*7.!
 !"
#$%"&'  $(()(
61" 000
$%#%
 /990. $"$!' 8$!" $8* .1&& .*.*** $1"*:!:2 * &*
!; $8 ".**1*$". " '$7 . *$ -  *  ' % '*7.* $"$!: " *  " , "8$!*$"
$"$!:.''  2 7$'.* $"8$<1&"&' %.**1." ;!" ., * * 
817877.* . * $" =. !'7$:! "*"'$1*2*:' 8$!" !% *7 &*!*
"* 8$' %3-1**  $".*-1*$"$ ."$*.* 7* /990.-$$!. *
,& .$87$,.%77,$% .3$"*"1 8177 !'7$:! "*,77& *7:.* "&* "* . 8$* 
.' % $"$!:1*,*":*"&7 ..*"8177 !'7$:! "**  $"$!:,777$. *.
71.*   2 " 8 *. $1.3 $, 2 3 *    $ " !'7$:"& ,$! " " ;* ""&
$," .'*$!":,$% . . 2 .** "*$"
 !"

/0)0 ..1. **.2 "1 
!-& 3 0/45
"23 3
 "* 8$$"$! 8$!"
8 !">"- $&

At the turn of the 21st Century the US economy is the envy of the world. It is the
envy of the world because throughout the 1990s it has generated higher employment and
lower unemployment without inflation than most other advanced countries. In early 2000
the unemployment rate in the US fell below 4 percent -- lower than in Japan or Germany
and other EU countries, which have traditionally had lower unemployment than the US.
The employment population rate in the US was at an all-time peak. Full employment was
accompanied by a federal budget surplus, successful movement of welfare mothers to
work, a booming stock market, and reduction in crime. From 1996 to 2000, moreover,
real GDP rose by over 4.0% per year while throughout the 1990s recover, productivity in
manufacturing grew more rapidly than in most other advanced countries.
Economists and policy makers did not anticipate the success of the US in these
areas. In the mid-1990s the Federal Reserve thought that an unemployment rate below 6
percent would set off rising inflation. The government (“Bill and Newt”) believed that
the only way to reduce the federal budget deficit was to adjust downard the consumer
price index to limit social security payments. Most experts feared that the welfare
reforms of 1996 would create disaster for unskilled single mothers and their children and
no one expected crime to fall. Longterm forecasts of US economic growth posited
modest increases in productivity, in line with post-oil shock patterns.
The US economy surpassed expectations by enough to suggest that the US might
just have developed what afficionados of the new economy have claimed: the right mix
of institutions and policies to assure full employment and sizeable productivity gains for
the foreseeable future. If the US maintains these successes over the next 5 to 15 years

1

and if persistent full employment reduces poverty and narrows the economic inequalities
that have marred US economic performance, even the sharpest critics of the US model
will have a hard time finding fault.
But perhaps the US economic performance at the outset of the 21st century is
more a matter of luck than of the right economic institutions. Associated with the US
boom is an unprecedented rise in consumer debt and balance of payments deficit and an
extroardinary stock market bubble, none of which can continue ad finitum. The US
economy could just as readily come back to earth as the exemplar capitalist models of the
1970s and 1980s, Japan and Germany, and the 1960s-1970s third way ideal, Sweden, as
continue along its new full employment prosperity.
The claim that the US (or any other economy) has found the best form of
capitalism for the modern world rests on the notion that there is a single peak capitalist
economic model. But does the economic world indeed have a single peak set of
institutions or does it allow for diversity? Section I develops criterion for judging
whether any economy is truly a peak and assesses which of these the US meets or does
not meet. Section II argues that the key features of the US job market that contributes to
economic success are not, as many believe, deregulation and high rising inequality but
rather expansion of opportunities for women and the growth of new “shared capitalist”
institutions. Section III shows that US full employment is improving US performance in
the one area where the US economy has done poorest: distributing the gains of economic
growth to all persons.
1. Single Peaked vs Diverse Capitalism

2

Behind the claim or belief that the US or any other country has developed the
ideal form of capitalism for the 21st century is the notion that economic outcomes are
related to institutions and policies according to a single-peaked social maximand. When
institutions or policies produce a single peak in the space of social outcomes, one set of
arrangements is indeed the global optimum. This is shown in the first landscape in
exhibit 1. The horizontal axis measures institutions along some general dimension (such
as centralization of wage-setting or the role of unions or the state in economic decisionmaking) while the vertical axis represents aggregate output (GDP per capita or some
variant thereof). In the first landscape the set of institutions N (for nirvana) produces the
highest output and every move in the direction of N raises well-being. It behooves all
economies to adopt the nirvana institutions as quickly as they can.
But there is nothing in economic logic that rules out very different institutionoutcome landscapes. One alternative is a landscape with multiple peaks separated by
valleys. Some of the multiple peaks may have similar heights, so that different
institutional arrangements produce the same well-being, but most peaks are local optima,
separated from higher optima by valleys that make it costly to change. The peak
economy might have better outcomes than others, but it may not be worthwhile for
countries with slightly lower outcomes to invest in change by going down from their
peak.
It is also possible that different institutions produce similar levels of output, with
little cost to changing them. This produces the flat peak in exhibit 1 This is a Coasian
world where institutions reflect different property arrangements and where side payments

3

guarantee that whatever the arrangements, the economy reaches an efficient outcome.
This diagram predicts similar GDP per capita (other social maximands) within a wide
range of arrangements. Each country can do it “its own way” without suffering any
economic penalty.
Belief in a single peaked outcome function (whatever the outcome and its
arguments) is deeply ingrained in economics. Models of optimizing behavior assume
convex functions so that first derivatives yield the maximizing conditions and second
derivatives or matrices thereof have the appropriate sign. Even if individuals choose
blindly, a single peaked function will generate budget constraints so that those who pick
institutions around the peak do better and eventually increase their share of markets.
Marxian analysis also takes a single-peaked view of capitalism, predicting the growth of
monopolies and proletariat in all countries.
In recent years globalization and the spread of information age technology have
led observers on both the right and left toward a single-peaked view of the world. When
the right argues for labor market flexibility or deregulation or privatization or contraction
of the welfare state, it often claims that these are the only ways to attain efficiency in the
modern world. When the left worries about social dumping, a race to the bottom, and
trade-induced impoverishment of low skilled workers, it does so from the same
perspective: that there is only one efficient way to operate a capitalist economy.
But there is a case for diversified capitalism as well. Since the end of World War
II living standards in advanced capitalist economies with differing institutions have
converged. The coefficient of variation of GDP per capita, measured in purchasing power

4

parity terms, among 18 major OECD countries has declined over time as Japan and EU
countries have closed much of the Post-World War II gap with the US. Comparative
advantage argues for diversity. If Germany can operate a tripartite social partners model
of capitalism better than the US while the US is more adept at a high
mobility/decentralized wage-setting model, Germany will do better with its system than
to mimic the US system and conversely. Game theory teaches us that interactive
decision-making creates many potential outcomes, with institutional rules or norms
determining equilibrium (Kreps). This is more consistent with multiple or flat peaks -diversity -- rather than single peak optima.
What factors might help us determine which landscape best describes the
economics world, and whether the US or some other economy represent the economic
peak? Exhibit 2 lists seven factors that differentiate peak landscapes from other
landscapes and that thus can guide any assessment of whether any economy has achieved
peak status.
The first criterion for a single peak landscape is that the peak economy does better
than other economies in various dimensions of aggregate economic performance. Over
the long run, the natural measure of aggregate performance is GDP per capita or GDP per
hour worked. But in any given period, the link between observed outcomes and long
term GDP per capita or per hour is unclear. If there was general agreement how to weigh
the impact on long term production of outcomes like inflation, balance of payments,
unemployment, fiscal deficits, etc we could form a single weighted average, as some
analysts do with so-called misery indices of various forms. But there is no such general

5

agreement. Some believe that inflation is the vampire’s kiss and thus place great weight
on inflation, while others weigh unemployment more heavily. Rather than argue over
particular weights on aggregate performanc, let us just stipulate that the peak economy
must do better on various dimensions of aggregate performance.
The second criterion is distributional. The peak economy should produce higher
incomes throughout much of the income distribution than competing economies. If one
economy produces higher outcomes at all points in the income distribution, we would
judge it as having a higher peak. Beyond that, there is no universally accepted weighting
of distributions. Rawls values how the poorest fare; your local billionaire may value how
the richest fare; while political economy considerations suggests that the middle of the
distribution is important. My criterion for higher incomes throughout much of the
distribution is a way of saying that distributional factors must enter any assessment.
The third criterion relates to the stability of the single peak over time. The
economy with peak institutions must dominate other economies for at least a decade or
so. Given that candidates for the peak, such as the US, are likely to have high income per
capita, and that other economies can take advantage of catch-up, I do not require that the
peak economy grow more rapidly than other economies, only that it maintain an edge on
outcomes over an extended period.
The fourth and fifth criterion relates to the convexity of the landscape space. As
exhibit 1 shows, N* lies at the top of a mountain, so that movements toward N* raise
well-being. Neighbors with characteristics close to those of N* should also have good
social outcomes; and copying this or that feature of the single peak economy ought to

6

raise social outcomes.
The sixth criterion relates to large changes in institutions. Since there is only one
peak, large-scale changes in policies or institutions toward peak institutions ought to be
relatively costless. An economy that chooses radical reform ought to see economic
improvements, not retrogression relative to others.
The seventh criterion refers to changes over time If the single peak hypothesis is
correct, and if countries seek to improve the economic well-being of their citizens with
sensible policies, the peak should be an attractor in institution-outcome space. They
should imitate the features of the peak economy. By contrast, economies that, for
whatever reason, move away from peak institutions should suffer losses of economic
well-being
US performance
How well does the this decade’s candidate for peak economy, the US, fare by
these criterion?
The US fulfills some of the criterion for peak economy but fails others. It has
produced sufficiently high employment-population rates and hours worked per employed
adult and low unemployment rates for enough years to be the peak economy on this front
(See columns 1-3 of Exhibit 3). The US has had lower unemployment than the EU for
roughly a decade or so, though it had higher unemployment than Japan until 1998. Using
employment to population rates, US success dates back to the 1980s or mid-1970s. In
1973 the US and OECD-Europe had the same employment-population rate. Since then
the US rate has risen while the European rate has fallen to produce a 16 point differential

7

in 1998!.
But not until the late 1990s did the US outperform other economies in growth of
GDP per capita or productivity and it trailed the others in growth of real compensation
over the same period. Output per hour worked in the US was roughly on a par with
output per hour worked in Germany, France, and some smaller EU countries in the 1990s
(Freeman, 1996; Conference Board; Mckinsey Institute) and has grown more slowly than
in most other advanced countries since the 1970s. The Economist has argued that “if
Germany and Japan can grow as fast (faster in the actual data) as America even when
their incentives are blunted by an inflexible model, imagine what they might do were
their economies to be set free.”(April 10, p. 20). But it is the rapid growth of
productivity in the US in the late 1990s, not a tortured interpretation of the US’s slower
productivity, that strengthens the case for the US as peak economy.
Whether this growth performance is sustainable is, to be sure, highly debatable.
The US has a low savings rate, but manages a reasonable investment to GDP ratio
because it attracts considerable foreign capital and runs a large trade deficit. The US has
an extremely productive research and development sector, and more venture capital than
other countries, which should increase longterm economic performance But it also has a
huge consumer debt. The US has a highly educated work force, but its lead has fallen
relative to other advanced countries; and US workers have lower scores on adult literacy
tests than workers in most advanced countries.
Even if rapid productivity growth can be maintained, the US has one major
problem in meeting the criterion for peak economy status. This relates to the

8

distributional criterion for judging a candidate peak economy. As Exhibit 4 shows, while
the US is # 1 in per capita income, it is # 13 in per capita income for those in the lower
decile of earnings. It is not until the 30th to 40th decile that the US surpasses most other
advanced countries in per capita income. In addition, the fact that Americans work so
much more than citizens of other countries implies that the US advantage in living
standards is less than indicated by GDP per capita. Greater hours worked per adult
means less leisure, so that any social value function that weighted leisure would bring EU
countries closer to the US in overall economic well-being. With hours per worker and
per adult rising in the US relative to other countries, moreover, the US advantage in
living standards actually eroded over the past twenty or so years.
In short, US performance has been clearly superior for an extended period on one
outcome: full employment; and has been superior for a short period on one other
outcome, productivity; but falls short of peak status on distributional grounds.
Other economies’ performance
According to the peak economy view of the economic landscape, the peak
economy’s closest economic neighbors should also do well while economies that adopt
peak economy institutions should improve their relative economic position. The view of
the US as peak economy fails both of these criteria.
Close neighbors refers to neighbors in institution space, not in geography, but in
fact the US’s closest geographic neighbor, Canada, is also its closest institutional
neighbor. The 1990s was a period of economic disaster for Canada. In 1990 Canada
stood third in the GDP per capita league tables, below Switzerland and the US, but

9

sufficiently above most EU countries to support the notion that North American
institutions generated higher average living standards than those in other advanced
countries In 1997, following a decade of economic decline/stagnation Canada had fallen
in the league tables to 7th position. One interpretation of the disparate performances of
the US and Canada is that the small differences between the two countries matters a lot,
and that Canada has just not gone far enough toward the US model. Alternatively, some
argue that Canada suffered from eggregious macro-economic policy. But the broader
interpretation is that institutions-outcome landscape does not fit the single peak
paradigm. Countries with similar institutions can do quite differently in any given time
period.
In the European Union, the UK is generally viewed as the economy most similar
to the US, and the reforms enacted by the Thatcher, Major, and Blair governments have
brought the UK even closer to the American model. Has this improved the position of
the UK in the league per capita income tables? No. In 1980 the UK was 16th out of in
the league tables; in 1997 it was 18th (US Bureau of the Census, table 1363). Perhaps the
UK was not radical enough. Mrs. Thatcher’s reforms never touched the National Health
Service, did not reduce the ratio of tax revenues to GDP to US levels, and left macroeconomic monetary policy in the hands of the government rather than the Bank of
England. Perhaps without the reforms the UK would have fallen further in the league
tables. But again, perhaps the correct interpretation is that the institutions-outcome space
does not fit the single peak model.

10

Outside Europe, the economy which has undertaken the most radical reforms is
New Zealand. New Zealand deregulated much of its labor market, freed its central bank
from political control, and introduced a variety of free trade measures. It out-Thatchered
Mrs T. With what result? In 1997 New Zealand ranked last in per capita income among
advanced OECD countries with an income per capita 14% below that of its natural pair,
Australia. In 1980 New Zealand was also last among the countries, with an income per
capita 19 percent below that of Australia. Extenuating circumstances may explain the
failure of radical reform to produce the expected outcomes. New Zealand had such
serious problems prior to its reforms that absent the reforms it might have fallen even
further. New Zealand may have screwed its monetary policy so badly that its labor and
product market reforms had no chance to bring about recovery. Perhaps, but once more a
simpler explanation is that the single peak landscape vision of capitalism is wrong.
What about the seventh criterion -- the predicted movement of economies toward
the peak institutional form? As there are many factors that differentiate the US model
from others, it is difficult to determine whether economies are in fact becoming
Americanized. In one readily measurable dimension, the extent of unionization and
collective bargaining coverage, they are not becoming more like the US. Exhibit 5 shows
that union density and collective bargaining coverage rates diverged across OECD
countries between 1980 and 1997. If the countries which moved further from the US on
this dimension did especially poorly in GDP per capita, we might reconcile this pattern
with a single peaked world (they screwed up), but the data do not show such a pattern.
Sweden fell in per capita income but so too did New Zealand.

11

Finally, it is important to recognize that few analysts regarded the US as the peak
economy until the mid or late 1990s. For much of the 1970s and 1980s, the 900 pound
gorilla on the economic scene was Japan. American business was frightened by
Japanese economic performance -- recall Ezra Vogel’s Japan as Number One, or the bestselling business book The Book of the Rings by the 14th century Samurai warrior
Musashi Musashi. The early Clinton Administration looked jealously at some German
institutions and sought to expand the US welfare state through mandated health
insurance. Major business school thinkers bemoaned Anglo-Saxon short termism in
capital markets and saw virtue in Japanese or German banking and ownership patterns
(Porter). Going back further, analysts in the 1970s thought that corporatist arrangements
were a better way to fight inflation than US style decentralized wage and price setting
(Bruno and Sachs).
In short, the safest reading of the empirical evidence is that the institutionoutcome space does not fit a single peak landscape but rather that the set of institutions
that performs best varies with economic circumstance. The US may have found the right
institutional mix for long term economic success, but the case is far from proven, and the
history of capitalist economies post World War II should make even afficianados of
capitalism, US style, cautious in their reading of the late 1990s. In any case, whether the
US has found nirvana institutions on a single peak landscape or not, , it is important to
understand, as best we can at this time, what economic institutions have in fact
contributed to the 1990s success of the American Model.
II US Institutions and Employment Creation

12

Many observeres believe that the US employment success results from a nonregulated labor market and high and rising wage inequality. The absence of regulations
allows firms to make more efficient use of its work force, be it through down-sizing or
out-sourcing or otherwise changing work or pay arrangements. From this perspective,
America has paid for its employment creation through falling real wages and conditions
of work.
This view is erroneous. The US labor market is not an unregulated laissez-faire
paradise (or hell, depending on your view). The US has not paid for its job creation with
wage inequality. Rather, the US job market has contributed to the country’s economic
success by opening employment opportunities for female workers at an unprecedented
rate and by developing new “shared capitalist” institutions that increase employee
decision-making and financial stake in firms.
The US job market is not unregulated
The view that the U.S. job market is largely unregulated is fallacious. The US has a
considerable corpus of labor law covering everything from hours worked to occupational
health and safety to protection of minorities and women. It has enough administrative
and judicial rulings interpreting these laws to fill volumes and create employment for
thousands of lawyers. For the most part, however, US laws protect workers as
individuals rather than as members of a collective or group Consider the following brief
chronology of US job market regulations:
1960s/1970s legislation regulating treatment of discriminated groups: The Equal
Pay Act of 1963, Civil Rights Act of 1964, amended in 1972; Age Discrimination Act of

13

1967; Executive Order 11246 requiring affirmative action including numeric goals and
timetables in increasing utilization of women and minorities;
1970s legislation regulating workplace health and safety and firm pension of
pensions. The Occupational Health and Safety Act of 1970 and Federal Mine Safety and
Health Act of 1977 regulating workplace conditions; the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974 governing private pension plans; tax advantages granted to
Employee Stock Ownership Plans .
1980s/1990s legislation enhancing individual employee rights. The Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990; Civil Rights Act of 1991; Family and Medical Leave Act of
1993; and Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988. In addition, the Worker
Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act of 1988 and Immigration Reform and
Control Act of 1986 add further controls on employer behavior in times of planned plant
closures and employment of illegal immigrants. Most states adopted rules on wrongful
dismissals that allow employees to sue for wrongful dismissal in court.
In the 1990s, moreover, Congress twice increased the minimum wage. It rejected
business efforts to modify the Fair Labor Standards Act that requires time and a half
overtime and failed to enact various Teamwork Bills to make it easier for employers to
empower employee involvement committees. Regulations of hours worked and on the
ability of business to establish works council type arrangements are more stringent in the
US than in the EU.
Because the federal government has few regulators to monitor these laws because the
US has not developed a workplace-based system of monitoring and enforcement, the

14

main mode of enforcement of labor laws has been through court suits or worker
complaints to agencies. Virtually every large firm in the US faces some court suit about
its employment practices every year. Firms have found the burden of employment law
sufficiently large to lead many to seek private dispute resolution alternatives in place of
expensive court suits. Hardly the sign of a laissez-faire labor market.
The US did not buy full employment with McJobs and wage cuts
Observers critical of the US experience stress that much of US job growth consists of
low paid unskilled fast food type jobs, of which McDonald’s is the archetype. Looking
at US jobs growth through an industry lens, American job creation has been concentrated
in the service sector, particularly retail trade, which pays less than, say, manufacturing.
But looked at through an occupation lens, US job growth has been in professional and
managerial work. In 1999 30.3 percent of the US work force was in managerial and
professional specialties compared to 23 percent in 1983. While the growth of
employment was bifurcated with fast growth at both the top and bottom of the skill and
wage distributions, on net US employment was more skilled in 1999 than it was in 1990
or 1980.
What about the claim that falling/stagnant real wages or poor productivity growth
underlies the US jobs boom?
From the 1970s through the mid 1990s, there is some support for this proposition.
Productivity growth was slower in the US than in EU countries or Japan. The real wages
of American production workers fell while the real wages of workers in most OECD
countries rose. But in the late 1990s, productivity growth is up, and real wages have

15

increased commensurately. Even during the earlier period, moreover, the trade-off claim
fails to explain the locus of employment growth. Given that the wages of low skilled
men fell sharply in the US, the trade-off argument suggests that their employment and
hours worked should have grown. In fact, until the late 1990s, the American jobs miracle
bypassed the low paid. From 1970 through 1990, annual hours worked for men in the
bottom deciles of the earnings distribution fell while hours worked by those in the upper
deciles were stable or rising (Juhn, Murphy, and Topel; Freeman, 1995). Inequality in
hours worked increased along with inequality in hourly pay, producing an even greater
increase in annual earnings inequality. Employment of women, whose wages rose
relative to that of men, increased most rapidly.
US experience with minimum wages also gainsays any wage cut story of US jobs
creation (Card and Krueger). During the 1980s the Reagan Administration tried to create
jobs for low skilled Americans by maintaining the nominal value of the minimum wage
while prices and other wages rose, without success. The modest increases in the
minimum by the Bush and Clinton Administration’s and by various states in ensuing
years had little discernible effect on employment. Comparisons of patterns of
employment growth in Canada, France, and the US (Card, Lemieux, and Kramarz) or
between Germany and the US tell a similar story (Freeman and Schettkat). There is no
clear relation across countries in the growth of employment among groups and in the
pattern of wage changes.
US Jobs Growth is Growth of Jobs for Women
Perhaps the most important fact about US employment growth is that growth has

16

been most pronounced among women. This is shown in Exhibit 6, which records
employment-population rates for the total population 16-64 and for women and men,
separately. Had the employment to population ratio of US women increased from 1973
to 1998 by the same percentage points as did the employment-population ratio of EU
women, the aggregate US employment to population rate would have changed only
marginally. All else the same, the movement of women into (largely full-time) work
added over 9 percentage points to the total employment rate in 1998 and explained
2/3rds of the 14 percentage point difference between US and European employment
rates.1
The biggest increase in female employment was among married women with young
children. Between 1960 and 1998 the proportion of married women with children less
than 6 who were in the work force increased from 18.6 percent to 63.7 percent. The
proportion of married women with children less than 6 in the work force in 1997
exceeded the proportion of married women with children of school age (6 to 17) working
in 1960 (39.0 percent), and was just 13 percentage below the proportion with children of
school age working in 1998 (76.8 percent).2 The contrast with Western European women
is striking. More American women with pre-school children participated in the labor
force in 1996 than did all European women, many of whom do not have children. This
occurred without national day-care facilities or with the state hiring a majority of women,
as in some Nordic countries, or with labor laws that give parents paid leave or other
benefits to ease the burden of child care.

17

In addition, the position of women in the occupational hierarchy improved. In
1983 women were less likely to be in the high wage executive and professional
occupations than men (22% of women versus 25% of men). In 1998 they were more
likely to be in those occupations (28% for women versus 25% for men) (US Statistical
Abstract 1999, table 675).
In sum, cherchez la femme if you want the real lesson of US employment growth.
Shared Capitalist Institutions
A major component of the US economic model is the growth of shared capitalism,
by which I mean a diverse set of mechanisms for worker participation in production
decisions and in the financial stake of their firm and of capitalism more broadly.
On the decision-making side, America’s best firms have delegated more decisions
to workers through employee involvement programs and team decision-making than ever
before. In the mid 1990s over half of Americans reported that they worked in firms with
employee involvement committees; and one-third of workers said that they were
members of employee involvement committees of some form (Freeman and Rogers).
On the financial sharing side, I have estimated that approximately 50 percent of
the US work force receives compensation related to company performance of (Dube and
Freeman, 2000). Exhibit 7 shows that approximately 25 percent of the work force had a
stake in their firm through some form of ownership. This includes working in a firm with
an employee stock ownership plan (ESOP) (around 8%), or receiving a stock option
through an employee stock option plan that covers the bulk of the work force, or through
purchase of stocks in a firm that offers discounts on purchases. A quarter of the work

18

force was covered by profit or gain-sharing. And approximately 10% of the work force
had a substantial proportion of their retirement funds invested in company stocks.
Millions more had a stake in the performance of the economy through defined
contribution pension fund ownership of other firms. In addition in 1998 55 million
workers were covered by a defined contribution private pension plan (Profitsharing/401(k) Council of America, www.psca.dcstats.hgtml,), which invested sizable
sums in equities, giving them a stake in the performance of the economy outside their
own firm. Unions had nearly twice as many private sector members in collectively
bargained pension plans than they had members covered by collective bargaining
contracts.
These forms of shared capitalist arrangements have grown rapidly. All employee
stock option plans barely existed in 1990 but become the leading edge of US
compensation policy by 2000. Electronics firms in particular could not attract the highly
skilled workers they needed without offering options. Firms like Starbucks give options
not only to executives but also to normal workers.
The view that the US economic model is one of the growth of labor with weak
ties to the firm -- the virtual employee working for the virtual company as a contingent
worker or consultant -- misses the increased financial participation of employees in their
firm and their increased role in workplace decision-making.
III. Can Full Employment Resolve Distributional Problems?
Until unemployment rates fell to 4-5 percent in the late 1990s, employment
growth US style, seemed incapable of raising the earnings of the bulk of the work force,

19

or of making much dent into poverty (Freeman, 1999). Real earnings of production
workers dropped by 14% in the private sector from 1973 to 1995. The pay of low skilled
workers in all sectors, particularly high school drop out men, fell by over 20%. Median
weekly earnings of all men fell while the median weekly earnings of women stagnated.
The historic relation between poverty and economic growth seemingly broke down in the
1980s (Blank and Card; Cutler and Katz), with more and more poor persons residing in
female-headed homes on welfare and with the decline of real wages for the bulk of the
male work force.
But the experience of the late 1990s presents a different picture. The real hourly
earnings of production workers in the private sector rose from 1995 to 1999 by over 5
percent. The earnings of men with less than 9th grade education 7% from 1995 to 1998
The earnings of workers in the bottom decile of the earnings distribution increased by
8.7% from 1996 to 1998. And the wages of workers in the much maligned retail trade
sector rsoes by 7.0% (Freeman, 2000).
Over the same period, spurred in part by the booming economy and in part by
changes in the welfare laws, the number of persons on welfare rolls plummeted
(Ellwood). Many persons who had been on welfare, which invariably gave them poverty
level incomes, moved into employment, where they received Earned Income Tax Credit
moneys that raised their incomes. The rate of poverty began dropping after years of
stagnation. While full employment did not reduce the level of inequality or make a huge
dent into poverty, the gains of economic growth finally “trickled down” the income
distribution. Conditional on full employment the US economy began to reduce the

20

principal flaw in economic performance and thus look more like a legitimate candidate
for peak economy.
But can the US maintain full employment for long enough to lock in the gains in
real wages, poverty reduction, and productivity growth to allow the country to pass
criterion for peak economy in exhibit 2?
Only a charlatan would claim to know the answer. Macro-economists are divided
over the potential for consistent rapid growth -- believers in the new economy
(Congressional Budget Office) versus doubters (Godley). Micro-economists do not
understand why the economy managed to carry off the low unemployment with no
inflation of the late 1990s (Katz and Krueger). My dismal science intuition is that some
of the 1990s changes in the US economy have made it easier to maintain full
employment, but that eventually a negative shock coupled with the huge trade deficit,
reliance on foreign capital, and substantial private debt and wealth dependent on the
vagaries of the stock market will eventually produce a significant recession, whose costs
will fall heavily on the lower half of the income distribution. In such a situation the US
Model will lose its lustre as candidate for single peak. But I could be as wrong as my
macro colleagues were in forseeing the late 1990s US economic boom. Maybe
technological progress has raised productivity at new rates and the Internet will improve
market efficiencies enough for the US to keep the late 1990s boom going and going and
going like the Energizer Rabbit.
But if the US model falters in the next several years, who will replace itt? Cool
Brittania? A revived French economy? If Canada does well, some wierdoes may even

21

start touting the Maple Leaf Model /Modele Feuille d’Érable. Sounds unlikely, but a
decade ago no one would have predicted that Ireland or the Netherlands would the great
successes of the EU, or that the US would look like a winner and Japan a loser in the War
of the Models. There are a lot of alternative capitalist institutions out there, and every
decade some economy leads the pack. In any case, I expect that whichever model
emerges as the next candidate for peak will find a way to do what the US did so well in
the 1990s – increase opportunities for women in the job market and expand shared
capitalist institutions.

22

Bibliography
Bernstein, Jared, Lawrence Mishel and John Schmitt. 1999. The State of Working
America: 1998-99 (Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute).
Blank, Rebecca and David Card. 1993. “Poverty, Income Distribution and Growth: Are
They Still Connected?” Brookings papers on Economic Activity 2 (Fall).
Blanchflower, David “Globalization and Labor Market” April 2000, Dartmouth College
unpublished paper
Bruno, Michael and Jeffrey Sachs. 1985. The Economics of Worldwide Stagflation.
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Card, David, Francis Kramarz, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Changes in the Relative
Structure of Wages and Employment: A Comparison of the United States, Canada
and France,” NBER WP 5487 (March).
Card David and Alan Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of
the Minimum Wage (Princeton, NJ: Princeton).
Congressional Budge Office, 1999 “The economic and Budget Outlook: Fiscal Years
2000-2009. Washington D.C. Government Printing Office.
Ellwood, David. 1999. “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Other Social
policy Changes on Work and Marriage in the United States”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives.
Freeman, Richard .2000 “The Rising Tide Lifts ...” delivered at Understanding Poverty in
America Conference, Madison Wisconsin, May 22, 2000
Freeman, Richard and Ronald Schettkat. 1999 “The Role of Wage and Skill Differences
in US-German Employment Differences”, in Qualifikationsstrukture und
Arbeitmarktflexibilitaet special issue of the Jahrbuecher fuer Nationaleckonomie
und Statistik. NBER
Freeman, Richard and Joel Rogers. 1999. What Workers Want, with Joel Rogers. (NY:
Cornell University Press, 1999).
Freeman, Richard. 1997. When Earnings Diverge: Causes, Consequences, and Cures for
the New Inequality in the U.S. (NPA Report #284). (Washington, DC: National
Policy Association)
Godley, Wynne 1999 “Seven Unsustainable Processes” Special Report, Levy Institute
(Annandale-on-Hudson)
Gottschalk, Peter and Timothy Smeeding. 1997. “Cross-National Comparisons of
23

Earnings and Income Inequality,” Journal of Economics Literature (June).
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Robert Topel. 1991. “Why Has teh Natural Rate of
Unemployment Increased Over Time?”
Katz, Lawrence and Alan Krueger. 1999, “The High Pressure U.S. Labor Market of the
1990s,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (Spring).
Kreps, David. 1990. Game Theory and Economic Modelling (NY: Oxford University
Press).
OECD. 1999. Employment Outlook, June. (Paris: OECD)
Porter, Michael. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations (NY: Free Press).
US Department of Commerce. 1999. US Statistical Abstract. (Washington, DC:
USGPO).
Vogel, Ezra. 1985. Japan As Number One: Lessons for America. (NY: Harper & Row).

24

25

Exhibit 2:
Evidence for Judging the Shape of the Institution-Outcome Landscape

Characteristics of N*
1 N* dominates on several key aggregate outcomes
2 N* has higher well-being in much of distribution
3 N* dominates over extended period
Landscape Near N*
4 Near neighbors are also high
5 Movements toward N raise well-being
Landscape Away from N*
6 Big Jumps Cost Little
7 Institutions Converge (or Outcomes Diverge)

26

SINGLE
PEAK

MULTIPLE
PEAK

FLAT
PEAK

YES
YES
YES

NO
NO
NO

NO
NO
NO

YES
YES

NO
NO

YES
NO

YES
YES

NO
NO

YES
NO

Exhibit 3:
Employment, Unemployment and Hours Worked, 1998

E-P

Une

Hours

U.S.

73.8

4.5

1957

UK

71.2

6.2

1737

Canada

69.0

8.4

1777*

Australia

67.2

7.9

1861

New Zealand

65.4

7.6

1821

Eire

59.8

7.9

--

Japan

69.5

4.2

1879

Germany

64.1

8.6

1580

France

59.4

11.9

1634*

Italy

50.8

12.2

--

Belgium

57.3

9.4

--

Netherlands

69.8

4.3

1365*

Austria

67.4

5.5

--

Sweden

71.5

8.4

1551

Finland

64.8

11.5

1693

Norway

78.2

3.2

1401

Denmark

75.3

5.1

--

Source: OECD, Employment Outlook, July 1999, table B and table F

27

Exhibit 4:
Per Capita Income by Position in the Income Distribution,
Relative to U.S. Per Capita Income, 1996

Per Capita

Lower Decile

Upper Decile

U.S.

100

36

208

Switzerland

91

52

168

Norway

88

49

139

Japan

84

39

161

Denmark

81

44

126

Belgium

79

46

129

Canada

77

36

141

Austria

77

43

144

Germany

76

41

131

Netherlands

75

43

130

France

74

41

143

Australia

73

33

141

Italy

72

40

127

Sweden

69

39

110

Finland

68

39

107

UK

67

29

138

New Zealand

63

34

119

Source: Income per capita, US Statistical Abstract, 1998 table 1355. Income Distribution estimates
based on percentile figures relative to median for household income, Gottschalk and Smeeding
(1997), usually 1991-1992 figures.

28

Exhibit 5:
The Increasing Diversity of Labour Institutions, 1980-1994

DENSITY

COVERAGE

1980

1997

1980

1994/97

Declining Density & Coverage
UK
US
Japan
New Zealand
Australia

50
22
31
56
48

30
16
21
30
35

70
26
28
67
88

44
18
18
31
80

Declining Density & Stable/Rising Coverage
Austria
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal

52
22
36
50
35
52

39
10
29
37
24
30

98
85
91
85
76
70

98
95
92
82
81
71

Stable Density/Coverage
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Norway
Switzerland

53
36
79
55
31

53
38
76
55
23

90
37
69
75
53

90
36
69
74
50

Rising Density & Stable/Rising Coverage
Finland
Spain
Sweden

69
8
78

88
17
86

95
76
86

95
78
89

#5 Relative to #15

1.6

2.3

1.3

1.8

Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1997, Table 3.3, with updates from Blanchflower, 2000

29

Exhibit 6:
Employment-Population Ratios in the US 1973-1998

1973

1998

Change

All

65.1

73.8

8.7

Females

48.0

67.4

19.4

Males

82.8

80.5

-2.3

Source: OECD Employment Outlook, July 1996, table A and June 1999, table B.
Changes in OECD-Europe over the same period were:
all, from 65.1 to 60.1
females from 43.2 to 49.0, a 5.8 percentage point increase
males, from 86.7 to 71.3, a 15.4 percentage point decrease.

30

Exhibit 7:
Estimates of the Percentage of Employees
With Pay Related to Company/Group Performance

Based on Worker Representation and Participation Survey

54%

Based on Diverse Surveys of Programs *
Stock Ownership Programs ....
.25%
.25%
Profit/Gain-Sharing
.....
Defined Contribution Pensions
Invested heavily in Company Stock .... .11%

45%

Source: Dube and Freeman 2000
* If workers were covered by only one form of variable pay, our estimate would be the sum of the
estimates for the bold categories in the table: 61%, of which 50 percentage points consists of
ownership and incentive pay. But there is considerable overlap in coverage. On the basis of
overlaps in the Worker Representation and Particiation Survey, Ie estimate that the proportion of
workers with any form of performance pay and ownership exceeds the sum of the proportions
covered by each form separately by 33% = (41.9+29.6)/53.8. Thus, I reduce the 50% to 38%. I do
not have data on the overlap with the estimated 11% of workers with 401k or other plans with
sizable amounts of company shares, but anticipate that this will be modest, giving the 45% in the
text.

31

Endnotes
By contrast, the employment to population rate for men fell over the period, though
much less sharply than in Europe. Part of the difference among men is due to large
increases in enrollments in school in Europe, where students are less likely to work than
in the U.S. Part is due to more rapid movement of older men to early retirement in
Europe. Among prime age men, those between say 25 and 54, employment-population
rates in the US and OECD-Europe are quite similar.
1.

2.

US Department of Commerce, US Statistical Abstract 1999, table 659

32

