NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BORROWING CONSTRAINTS AND
THE RETURNS TO SCHOOLING

Stephen Cameron
Christopher Taber

Working Paper 7761
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7761.

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2000

Forhelpful comments wethank JoeAltonji, TimConley, LanceLochner, Bruce Meyer, Larry Kenny, CraigOlson,
and seminarparticipants atBrighamYoung University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorlç MiT, Northwestern,
Princeton, University of Florida, and the University of North Carolina. We thank Tricia Gladden for superior
research assistance and thoughtful comments. We also thankJeff Kling for providingus with his data. Forfinancial
support, Taber acknowledges NSF Grant SBR-97-09-873, and Cameron acknowledges NSF Grants SBR-97-30657. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

02000 by Stephen Cameron and Christopher Taber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.

Borrowing Constraints and the Returns to Schooling
Stephen Cameron and Christopher Taber
NBER Working Paper No. 7761
June 2000

ABSTRACT
To a large degree, the expansion of student aid programs to potential college students over
the past 25 years in the United States has been based on the presumption that borrowing constraints
present an obstacle to obtaining a college education. Economists and sociologists studying schooling
choices have found empirical support for college subsidies in the well-documented, large positive

correlation between family income and schooling attainment. This correlation has been widely
interpreted as evidence of credit constraints. Recently, however, Cameron, and Heckman (1998,
2000), Keane and Wolpin (1999), and Shea (1999) have questioned whether borrowing constraints
plays any role on college choices.
Over the last 30 years, a separate literature in economics has aimed at estimating measured
returns to schooling purged of various biases. One potential source of bias arises when students have
differential access to sources of credit for educational investments. The connection between credit
access and returns to schooling-first articulated by Becker (1972)- has been recently explored by
Lang (1993) and Card (1995a, 2000). Lang and Card term this bias "discount rate bias," and argue

it can help explain anomalously high instrumental variables estimates of returns to schooling
documented by a multitude of empirical researchers. This argument implicitly suggests borrowing
constraints are important for schooling decisions.
Our paper attempts to integrate and reconcile these two literatures. Building on the seminal

work of Willis and Rosen (1979), we develop a framework that allows us to study schooling
determinants and returns together. Identification of the effect of borrowing constraints arises from
the fact that foregone earnings-the indirect costs of school-and the direct costs of schooling affect
borrowing constrained persons differently from unconstrained individuals. We apply this idea using
least-squares, instrumental variables regression, and a structural economic model to measure the
extent of borrowing constraints on schooling choices. Because returns to schooling and quantity of
schooling are jointly determined, the structural approach allows us to explore the importance of credit
market constraints on schooling choices once the influences of ability and relative wages are parceled
out. This type of experiment cannot be done in standard models of schooling-attainment. None of
these methods produces evidence of borrowing constraints.

Stephen Cameron
Department of Economics
Mail Code 3323
Columbia University
2960 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
sc337@columbia.edu

Christopher Taber
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
ctaber@northwestem.edu

1 Introduction
Do borrowing constraints influence education outcomes of children? The importance of
the answer to this question for the design of education policy and a number of economic
phenomena goes without saying. Numerous studies by economists and sociologists have
attacked this question almost exclusively through studies of the correlation between family

income ( or other family characteristics) and schooling attainment or specific levels of
attainmentl'college entry in particular. The positive correlation between family income
and schooling has been widely interpreted as evidence supporting the idea that borrowing
constraints hinder educational choices. Howeverl" the step from correlation to causation

is a precarious one as family income is also strongly correlated with secondary school
achievement and other characteristics associated with college entry.
Recent work by Cameron and Heckman (19981"2000)1"Keane and Wolpin (1999)I'and

Shea (1998) has attempted to better understand the determinants of schooling choices,
Using very different methodsl"these researchers have found little evidence that favors the
idea that borrowing constraints hinder college-going or any other schooling choice.

Over the last 20 yearsl"a separate literature in economics has aimed at estimating the
return to schooling purged of "ability bias." One would expect unobserved ability to upwardly bias least-squares estimates of returns to schooling. Howeverl"using instrumental

variables methods to correct for the biasi' researchers have employed a variety of different instruments and have generally found that instrumental variables produces estimated
schooling returns that are largerl' not smallerl" than least-squares estimatesThe connection
between access to credit and measured returns to schooling—a connection noted by Becker
(1972)—has been explored recently by Lang (1993) and Card (1995a1'2000)[' who argue that
"discount rate bias" can explain the anomalously high instrumental variables estimates.

This argument implicitly suggests that borrowing constraints are important for schooling
decisions.1

Our paper attempts to integrate and reconcile these two literatures. Identification of
borrowing constraints in all of our empirical approaches builds on the following implication
1We use the term "borrowing constraint" broadly. It does not necessarily include only hard constraints.
We interpret a borrowing rate higher than the market interest rate as a borrowing constraint.

1

of the model. When educational borrowing constraints are operatingF opportuni costs of
schooling (foregone earnings) and direct costs (such as tuition) influence schooling choices

differently for credit-constrained and unconstrained individuals. As direct costs need to
be financed during schooll' they impose a relatively larger burden on credit constrained
students. Foregone earnings generally do not need to be financed during school and do not

place a higher burden on credit-restricted students.

We make three contributions in this paper. FirstFwe present an empirically-tractable

economic model of human capital accumulation under credit constraints. The model is
novel in several ways made clear below. Secondl'we develop the econometric methodology

to estimate the model. By articulating our behavioral assumptions with simple economic
theoryl'we clarify the economic assumptions needed for empirical identification of credit

constraints. We then formally demonstrate the manner in which these exclusion restrictions deliver identification in our structural model. We then explicitly use this theory to
guide our econometric approach to estimating the model. The econometric methodology
nests recent empirical work that studies heterogeneous returns to education as a local average treatment effect problem (Angrist and ImbensFl993) and extends these ideas into a
structural specification.
The third contribution of this paper is empirical. Working from the economic modelP ie
present evidence on the importance of borrowing constraints from five different estimation

techniques—linear regression estimates of returns to schoolingFinstrumental variable estimates of returns to schoolingFa simple discrete-choice analysis of schooling determinantsF

and two structural econometric models. We discuss the instruments we use to identify
both foregone earnings and the direct costs of schooling and show they are powerful predic-

tors. Our findings are consistent across the approaches: we find no evidence of borrowing
constraints.
It is important to highlight that we cannot address whether students have perfect access

to credit. During the period covered by our datal' there are large subsidies to shool already

in place in the United States. Given the policy regime['we find no evidence that credit
constraints restricts investments in secondary school and college. Our evidence suggests
that on the marginl' policies aimed atimproving access to credit will have little impact on
overall schooling attainment.
2

This paper unfolds as follows. Section two provides a review of the literature. Section
three presents the economic model on which we base our empirical strategy and discusses

identification of borrowing constraints. Section four overviews the datal'and section five
presents empirical evidence on the question of borrowing constraints from linear regression

and instrumental variable estimates of the returns to education and from regression and
discrete-choice analyses of schooling attainment. Section six discusses estimation of the
structural model. The model jointly imposes the implications of borrowing constraints on

the schooling returns and schooling attainment choices. Empirical findings follow. The
paper concludes with a summary.

2 Background and Significance
Few empirical studies have integrated educational attainment and returns to schooling in a

coherent framework. An important exception is Willis and Rosen (1979)F whih our paper

builds upon in a number of ways. Most research relevant to the question of educational
financing constraints comes mainly from research on the determinants of schooling but
also from research on the returns to education. The relevant parts of both literatures are
discussed below.

2.1 Literature on Educational Attainment Returns to Schooling
A ubiquitous empirical regularity that emerges from the literature on determinants of
schooling is that family income is strongly correlated with schooling attainment. This
correlation has been found in legions of U.S. data sets covering the entire 20th century (see

Hauser l993FKane 19941'Mayer 19971'Manski l993FManski and Wise l983FMare 19801'
Duncan and Levyl'l999FCameron and Heckman 1998Fand Cameron and Heckmanl'20001'

to name a few) and in data from dozens of other countries in all stages of political and
economic development (see Blossfeld and ShavitF 19911' for instance)Educational financing

constraints has been the most popular behavioral interpretation of the schooling-family
income correlation.

HoweverFlimited credit access is only one of many possible interpretations of this cor-

relation. Family income and other family background measures have been found to be
3

correlated with achievement test performance in elementary and secondary school as well

as with schooling continuation choices at all levels of schooling from elementary school
through graduate school. Cameron and Heckman (2000 and 1998) adopt a 'life-cycle' view
of the importance of family income and other family factors and find that family income

is a prime determinant of the string of schooling-continuation decisions that lead to high
school graduation and college entry. They conclude that the measured influence of the correlation between family income and college continuation is largely a proxy for its influence
on earlier achievement.

Shea's findings (1996) support this interpretation of the data. Shea examines unpredictable components of family income and finds little or no correlation with children's
schooling and future earnings.2 Keane and Wolpin (1999) take a different approach. They

estimate a rich discrete dynamic programming model of schoolingF world' and savings.
Model simulations reveal that relaxing borrowing constraints has almost no effect on school-

ingl'though borrowing constraints are important determinants of working during school.

2.2 Returns to Education Literature
A large literature in labor economics has been concerned with estimating the causal effect
of schooling on earnings. Ordinary least squares regressions of earnings on schooling have
long been believed to be biased upward as a result of "ability bias:" individuals who attain

higher levels of schooling do so because they are smarter and earn a return on their higher

ability as well as on their additional years of education. Omitting measures of ability
in a regression study of wages or earnings biases estimated returns to schooling upward.
EmpiricallyF evidence for this idea has been found in virtually etry data set with pre-labor-

market measures of scholastic abilityl' suh as standardized test scores. Including both test

scores and schooling levels in the regression leads to a decline in the measured effect of
schooling. Neverthelessf scholastic test scores are imperfect measures of earning abilityl'
and these measures leave substantial scope for bias from other unobserved components of
ability.
2Shea studies extracts from the Panel Study of Income Dynamicsfl and finds jio effects in the full sample.
He finds modest evidence of a relationship in the low-income subsample. This finding is not inconsistent
with Cameron and Heckman's (2000) interpretation that family income effects operate at the earliest stages
of schooling.

4

To correct for ability biasPresearchers have used instrumental variables techniques to
recover returns to schooling purged of bias. Anomalouslyl' instrumeital variable estimates of

the return to schooling have typically been found to be larger than their OLS counterparts.

Lang (1993) and Card (1995a) explore borrowing constraints as one of several possible
explanations for this patternl' whih Lang terms "discount-rate bias." If returns to schooling
vary across individuals because of differential access to credit for educational investmentsl'
the pattern of estimates produced by instrumental variables estimators may be explained by
the fact that many of these estimators identify the causal effect of schooling for borrowing-

constrained individuals who receive returns to schooling at the margin that are higher than
the population average.
Much recent work uses instrumental variables or related techniques to address the problems caused by omitted ability measures. Card (2000) provides an extensive survey of this

literature. Contrary to the intuition of ability biasl'he documents that researchers often
find that the coefficient on schooling rises rather than falls when instrumental procedures
are used. Building on Becker's Woytinsky model (1972)1'Lang (1993) and Card (1995a)
argue that "discount rate bias" is one potential explanation for this counter-intuitive result.
In the standard Becker modell' a studert invests in schooling until her return from schooling

human capital is equal to the inthrest rate she faces. If borrowing constrained individuals

face a higher personal interest ratel'the model implies they will have higher returns from
schooling at the margin.
If there is no heterogeneity in the returns to schoolingi' instrumeital variables provides

a consistent estimate of the return. HoweverFif there is heterogeneity in returnsFthen the
IV estimate of the causal effect of schooling must be interpreted with care. EssentiallyF this
story follows the logic of "local average treatment effects" exposited by Imbens and Angrist

(1992). They show that IV measures the treatment effect of schooling (that isfthe causal
effect) for groups whose schooling decisions are most seiisitive to changes in the instrument

used in estimation, Suppose that borrowing constrained individuals are most sensitive in
their schooling choices to changes inFsayl'college tuition. Because of their higher costs of

borrowing funds for schooling costsF borrowing constrained individuals also demand the
highest returns to continue. Thusl'the [V estimate of schooling returns will be an average

5

of returns for this group and will be higher than the true population average of returns.3
This argument may also explain estimates obtained from studies of "selection" models

of schoolingrwhich have focused on taking account of ability bias and not discount rate
bias. These studies often find lower estimated returns to education in selection-corrected

models (see[' for instancef Willis and Rosenl' 1979F or Taberl' 1999). The argument for
discount rate bias would not necessarily apply in these cases.

2.3 Basic Methodology
This paper takes both the returns to education literature and schooling determinants liter-

ature a step further. The hypothesis that borrowing constraints affect educational choice
cannot be separated from other mechanisms in a study of returns alone or a study of

schooling attainment that does not explicitly account for returns. This paper develops a
structural model of schooling choice that nests both returns and school choices and allows

us to estimate the importance of borrowing constraints.

Returns to education are assumed to be heterogeneous. We introduce two types of
exclusion restrictions for college costs—one for foregone earnings and one for direct college
costs. A rise in the direct cost of college is more costly for borrowing constrained individualsF

so when we relax these costs the individuals who are induced to attend college are more

likely to be borrowing constrained. Thus we may suspect that when we use this type of
exclusion restriction the measured returns to schooling will increase. On the other hand if

we examine the opportunity cost of school (i.e. foregone earnings)I'there is no particular

reason to expect these to be more important for borrowing constrained individuals than
others. We use both instrumental variables methods and structural estimates to measure
the extent of borrowing constraints. We prove that these two exclusion restrictions are
enough to identify the influence of borrowing constraints.
We use these different sources of variation in costs to examine the effects of borrowing
constraints on the returns to schooling using four econometric methods. (1) We use each
type of cost as an instrumental variable and examine the differential impact on the returns
3fieckman and Vytlacil (1998) present a more complete description of the econometrics behind Card's
(1995a) model. Angrist and Krueger (2000) also embody the idea of discount rate bias into their econometric
framework.

6

to schooling. Since direct costs of schooling affect borrowing constrained individuals more

stronglyFwe may expect that instrumenting for schooling using these costs will lead to IV

estimates of the returns to schooling that are higher than OLS. On the other handl'there
is no particular reason to expect much discount rate bias when we use foregone income as

an instrumental variable. If the ability bias dominates in this casel'the coefficient on IV
would actually be lower than OLS. While one cannot tell with certainty which direction
the bias in each case will gol'IV models based on the direct costs of schooling should lead
to a higher estimate of the return to schooling than with foregone earnings. (2) The story
above relies on interactions between access to credit and costs of schooling. We can look
for borrowing constraints directly by examining interactions between costs and observables

that are likely to be related to borrowing constraints. (3) We then develop a structural
version of the model and test more formally for evidence of borrowing constraints. We show

that the identification of the different interest rates comes through the type of interaction

between costs and observables as in the previous method. We show how the structural
model generalizes standard schooling attainment models. Schooling attainment models
cannot separate the influence of relative wages and other factors on schooling choices. (4)

Finally we combine the methods using the structural model to look more formally for
unobserved heterogeneity in credit constraints. The basic intuition for identification is that

as a result of the interactioni' direct costs of schooling are a relatively more important
determinant of schooling for individuals who face credit constraints. Thus the form of
selection bias will be different for individuals who face different direct costs.

We follow Card (1995b) by using an indicator for whether there is a two- or four-year
college in the individual's county as a measure of the direct costs of schooling. For students

from families with low and moderate incomesFthe ability to live at home while in college

may lead to substantial savings. The data reveal that the probability of living at home
while in college is about 55% for students with a college in their county[' and only 34%
for others. Furtherl'even for students living on campus the transportation costs and the
convenience of having parents close at hand may lead to a substantial financial advantage.
As a measure of the foregone earnings of schoolingi' w use measures of income in low skill

industries in the county of residence.

7

3 The Model
The model begins with a specification of individual utility. Individuals derive utility from

consumption and tastes for nonpecuniary aspects of schooling. These tastes represent
both the utility or disutility from school itself as well as preferences for the menu of jobs
available to individuals at different levels of schooling. Assuming agents have power utility
over consumption in each periodl' lifetime utilip for a given level of schooling S is given by

v3=6tft+T(s),

(1)

where Ct 5 consumption at time tFT(S) represents tastes for schooling level SF6 is the
subjective rate of time preferenceFand -y is a parameter of utility curvature with a value
in (—, 1). Defining the set of possible schooling choices by SFindividuals choose S out
of this set so that

S=argmax{VsSeS}.

(2)

Much of the schooling literaturel' including Becker (1972)F Rosen (1977)1' Willis and
Rosen (1979)1' Willis (1986)1' Lang(1994) and Card (1995)1' captures heterogenilin credit

access by differences in the rate of interest r at which a person can borrow and save
throughout life. A credit constrained person faces a high rI' which means educational
financing is more costly. An unattractive feature of this approach is that high r also
implies high returns to savings after labor market entry. This unattractive feature of the
model can have important implications.4 We adopt the simple but novel assumption that
individuals borrow at different rates while in school but face a common market interest
rate for all borrowing and lending once they enter the labor market. The market rate is

normalized for convenience such that (1+r)' = 5. Confining borrowing-rate heterogeneity
to the schooling years is a natural assumption if one considers the borrowing rate to be
determined by the ability to collateralize loans with personal or family assets during school.
4For example assuming that a single r prevails throughout a persons lifetime gives rise to a separation
result. Given rF individuals ôoose schooling to maximize the present value of lifetime earnings. Thusi' in
the standard modelF holding the iiterest effect fixed and ignoring nonpecuniary tastes[' family income has
no effect on schooling. In our setup an increase in parental income transfers to children raises the value of
further schooling.

8

Letting II = 1 + rI'students maximize utility subject to the budget constraintl'
18,

(:)tct+

(3)

where S is total years of school and I is the present value of income net of direct schooling

costs. The first-order conditions of this problem arel'
Ct

= (8R)co

Ct = (5R)Tico

t<S,
t>S.

Plugging these levels into the budget constraint yields
s—i

00

=

+ (R6)

Finallyl'solving Ct in terms of 1s and plugging into the utility function leaves us with the
following expression for lifetime utility of a person choosing 5 years of schooll'
V5 =

i; (>J1JRis4 +(R5V*yi55t)7 +T(S).

(4)

Equation (4) is a conditional indirect lifetime utility function as it depends on the choice
variable S.5

We next solve for the present value of income. To focus on borrowing constraints and
abstract away from uncertain earnings we assume full certainty of earnings streams,6 Let

Wts be earnings at time t for an individual with S years of schooling. Individuals have
zero earnings while in school and pay tuition Tt at time t — 1 to attend schooling level t.
Abstracting from labor supplyl'we have the following expression for the present value of
income at t = 0:

Si

=
=

(5)

(_) w5_(_) t+i,

51t may seem surprising that a rise in R raises Vs. Holding S fixedP a rise in!? lowers both the present
vajue of earningsrl5r and the presS value of consumption expenditures. In the derivation abovefl5 is
fixedt' so a rise in!? means consumption expenditures must rise so its present value stays on par with I.
6Uncertainty in the returns to education introduces an option value to further education even when
predicted returns are low.

9

where W5 is the present value of earnings for schooling level S discounted to time 8.

To illustrate the implications of the modelF consider how changes in direct costs and
opportunity costs affect schooling choices and their returns in a simple version with only
two levels of schoolingi'S = 0 and S = 1. Let r1 be the direct cost of S = Wand assume
there are no nonpecuniary tastes for education and no direct cost of S = 0. Values of S = 0

and 8 =

1

are given by

=

vi=

wJ(-)'
(W1/R — T)

(i + (R5) L=L at)

7
A person chooses S = 1 when D V1 — Vo > 0 and S = 0 otherwise.
Consider two individuals indifferent between attending and not attending school (that
isP V0 = 1/i). One person borrows at the market rate (R = 1/5); the other is credit

constrained and borrows at R >. 1/5. Consider each person's reaction at time zero to a
dollar increase in foregone earningsPW0f and alternatitly to a dollar increase in
For the
person borrowing at the market rateP a dollar is a dollar: V0 = V1 implies
W1/5 —
and a dollar rise in W0 and a dollar rise in T1 have the same effect on the relative value of

8=1:
3D

—

7V1

—

(SW1—n)

7V03D
—
Wo

6

OW0

—
For the credit constrained student to be indifferent it must be that W0 >
This implies the shadow value of a dollar during school is higher than after labor force

entry:

3D

yVo

3D

OT1(*Wi_Ti) w0

3w0

-yV1

(7)

More generallyl'if the constrained and unconstrained students have identical values of

W0 and the same utility functions (that isP7 is the same)F then (6) and (7) imply the effect

on D of a dollar rise in foregone earnings is the same for both personsl'but a dollar rise in
T1 reduces D more for the credit-constrained student:

10

Dr1 R>1/J

(8)

@TjR=l/S

Because the cost of attending school is higher for credit constrained studentsfit follows
in turn that credit-constrained individuals choose S = 1 only when they receive higher
returns to schooling than the marginal person borrowing at the market rate.

The main testable implications of the model can be stated more generally. Note first
that a rise in 1? reduces the likelihood a person chooses S =

1

as long as she is not a net

saver while in school:7

tJ1-L

(9)

fl.L1

where c0 is optimal time 0 consumption.

Firstithe borrowing rateFRFinfluences the schooling decisions through its interaction
with direct costs r1 in V1. A dollar rise in r1 diminishes the value of V1 more for individuals

with higher R. ThusFgiven that a person is not a net saver during schoolF

=

—[(co+ri)(1 —) +co(RS)1

]

<0.

(10)

SecondF opportuni' costsl'W0, operate only through V0Fso there is no interaction with IL
HenceF a dlange in W0 has the same influence on the schooling decisions of the constrained

and unconstrained student:
(11)

ThirdFthe return to education for borrowing constrained persons is higher than it is for
unconstrained and otherwise identical individuals.
For studying returns to schooling using an instrumental variables (IV) frameworkf both
the schooling choice S and the returns to S a person receives depend on R. In the populationf returns to thooling is a random variable rather than a one-dimensional parameter.
Imbens and Angrist (1992) show in this situation that IV recovers the average return on
schooling for the subset of the population that is induced to change status by the change
7This is true as long as c0 > —r1 and always true as long as schooling costs are positive.
11

in the instrument.8 More specificallyF when one instrumeits for school choice using college

costsFlV estimates recover the average return to college for the group of individuals who

attend college only when college costs are low. The model above implies that the group
that is induced to change will depend on whether it is the opportunity cost or direct costs of
schooling that fall. Since direct costs have a relatively large effect on borrowing constrained

studentsF the group that changes with direct costs should have a higher concentration of
borrowing constrained students. Among those students close to indifference about attending collegel' individuals with higher interest rates will average higher returns to college.
Thusi' an IV estimate of the returns to shooling should be higher when endogenous school-

ing is instrumented with direct costs than with opportunity costs. Using the language of
Lang(1993) and Card (1996) the "discount rate bias" will be higher when direct costs are
used as an instrument relative to when opportunity costs are used.
While it is intuitively appealing and suggestiveFthis argument is not precise since the
actual coefficient on schooling depends on the full joint distribution of variables close to the

margin and depends on the other regressors. The structural model below uses this same
basic idea for identificationF butjustifies it formally.

4 The Data
Our analysis is based on BlackI'HispanicFand White males from the 1979-1994 waves of

the NLSY (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth). We exclude from the analysis the
military subsample and the non-Black non-Hispanic disadvantaged sample. We use only
male samples because their schooling decisions and labor supply are less complicated by
fertility and labor market participation considerations.
Because the NLSY collected detailed information about school attendance and comple-

tion starting from January of 1978Fit is ideal for our study. Schooling observations begin

at age 15 and extend at least through age 29 for all individuals included in our sample.
Because information before 1978 is retrospective and limitedFwe confine our extract to
males between age 13 and 17 in January of 1978 in order to have reliable information on
81n the language of Imbens and Angrist (1992)1' instrumental variables estimators converge to the
expected treatment effect for those individuals induced to change status by the change in the instrument.
In our model the treatment is school and the treatment effect is the returns to schooling.

12

parental income and county of residencel'which is used to construct a number of measures
of labor market conditions and college proximity.

Instruments for foregone earnings are created from county-level labor market measures taken from Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) data merged with NLSY countyof-residence identifiers. Opportunity cost of schooling is proxied by average local earnings
("local" is defined as the county of residence) in industries overrepresented by unskilled

workers. Since the BEA data are reported by industry and not occupationl' e use average
earnings per job in serviceFagriculturel' and thewholesale and retail trade industries. One
large component of these industries is retail food establishments. For transitions into collegeF the set of industries for whih average wages is constructed includes the aforementioned

set together with manufacturingl'constructionFmining and extractionFand transportation
and public utilities.
College costs are instrumented with identifiers for the presence of two-year and fouryear colleges in the county of residence at age 17. College identifiers were extracted from

the Department of Education's annual HEGIS and IPEDS "Institutional Characteristics"
surveys. From this data we were able to determine the presence of a two-year collegeF
a four-year collegeFor either in the county of residence, A number of specialty collegesF
generally with small enrollments less than lOOFwere excluded. Federal institutionsFsuch

as the Naval Academyfwere also excluded. This variables can be measured at any age.
For our analysisfhoweverFthey are measured at age 17 to avoid the obvious problem that
people who attend college generally reside in the same county the college is located. We
present summary statistics of the main variables used in the analysis in Table 1.

5 Regression and Instrumental Variable Results
5.1 Methodological Issues
Our first empirical goal is to use the instrumental variables approach discussed above using

the two costs of schooling as exclusion restrictions. There are a few problems that arise
in implementation of our approach. The first potential problem is that since high school
graduates leave school earlierf our data coitain more observations on high school graduates

13

than college graduates. We solve this problem by focusing on men of age 22 and older.9

The second problem arises in the use of the local labor market variables. Our goal is

to use the opportunity cost of college as an instrumental variable. We measure this by
using income in the county that the student lived at age 17. A problem with this variable
is that labor market variables at age 17 are likely to be correlated with local labor market
variables later in life. To deal with this potential problem we include a measure of the local
income in the wage regression itselfF

log(w1) = /3 + SJ31 + £jtfi2 + Xj33 + u,
where Wt is the hourly wage1'S is schoolingF andJ? is a measure of the local income in the

county in which individual i lives at time t. This seems to potentially solve the problem

since it is reasonable to believe that conditional on current labor market couditionsl'the
local labor market conditions at age 17 are unrelated to earnings directly.
The use of this variable leads to an additional potential problem. Moving is endogenous
and is related to schooling outcomesFparticularly for college. if this is the caseI't is also

endogenous. A natural instrument in this case is the local income rate at time t in the
county in which i lived at age 17. Since many individuals do not switch countiesFor do
not move far when they doFthis instrument is strongly correlated with local income at t.
SecondlyF since it is determined ly the county in which the student lives at age 171' it does
not depend on moving after schooling completion so is not endogenous.

A third potential problem is the endogeneity of experience. We assume that experience

is equal to age minus education minus six. Howeverf as other authors have pointed outF

if education is endogenousF then experience is endogenous as well. We instrument for
experience and experience squared using age and age squared in some of our specifications.

5.2 First Stage Results
In this model the first stage regression is not particularly meaningful. Since we have more

than one observation per individual in the wage dataFwe also have more than one observation per individual in the first stage. Secondlyl'since the dependent variablefschoolingF
9We have experimented with higher age cutoffs and find that the basic results are not sensitive to this
choice.

14

does not varyl'but the local income measure does the regression is hard to interpret. In
an attempt to convey the content of the first stage regressions we construct the average of
the local income variable in the county at age 17 across the years in which the respondent

works. We then regress schooling on our standard variables as well as this averagel'the
local income at age 17F and theindicator for whether there is a college in the county. The
results of these regressions are reported in Table 2.
In Column (1) we present the regression of schooling on a number of covariates including

the dummy variable for a college in the county. This effect of this variable is large implying

that individuals with a college in their county complete almost one half year more of school

on average. The other covariates in the regression have signs and magnitudes similar to
other work (see e.g. Cameron and Heckmanl' 2000).In column (2) we present results where

we include the local income variable at age 17 in the regression. It has the expected signi'
but is not significant. HoweverFin column (3) we control for the mean local income over

working life. The results here are as expected. The coefficient on this new variable is
positive indicating that richer counties are likely to have more students attend college.'°
This leads the coefficient on the opportunity cost of school to be negative as expected.
There are two potential explanations of this resultFboth of which seem to be important
for the result. Firstl'individuals could be more likely to attend school during temporary
downturns. Secondl'individuals in counties in which the economy is improving could be
more likely to attend college. In terms of the model aboveFwe would expect both of these
effects to influence schoolingl' and it is not importait which. Intuitivelyl' the first possibili%'

is perhaps more appealing as a source of identification since it does not seem to embed
essential features of the county itself. HoweverFwe will present some evidence below that

we do not see a pattern when we look at observable ability measuresl'so it seems plausible
that it isn't related to unobservable ability differences. In the final column we combine the

two variables and show that both remain strong predictors.
10Perhaps as a result of superior schools or peer effects.

15

5.3 IV Excluding Foregone Earnings
We first examine the returns to schooling when we use the local labor market variable as an

instrument in Table 3. Given that this variable does not necessarily have a larger impact
on borrowing constrained individualsl'we would not particularly expect the coefficient on

schooling to increase when we use it as an instrumental variable. However['we see in the
first three columns that the IV point estimate is substantially above the OLS estimate. One

should keep in mind that the standard errors are large enough so that we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the OLS estimates and the IV estimates are the same. In columns
4-6 we perform the same exercise but do not include test scores and family income in the
model. The point estimates are higher in this caseFbut the pattern is quite similar. In
experimenting with other specifications we see similar patterns. These results are similar
to Arkes (1998) who uses state unemployment rates in a similar design and also finds IV
estimates that are higher than the OLS estimates.
This result that the coefficients increase when excluding foregone earnings is not neces-

sarily inconsistent with the notion of discount rate bias above. It may happen to be that
the people at the margin tend to be borrowing constrained and that their marginal return
exceeds the OLS estimate. If this were the case]Tthen we would expect the coefficient to
increase even more when we use the presence of a college as an instrument.
One potential problem with the model above in addressing schooling decisions during
recessions is that there is no role for the family. In this case it may be that when local labor
market conditions are poorl' borriwing constrained families have more trouble sending their
children to college. This would reverse the direction of the effect; schooling would increase

during a boom particularly for children whose parents are borrowing constrained. If we
incorporated this possibility into our modell'the effects of local labor market conditions
on schooling attendance would no longer be monotonic. We might expect borrowing con-

strained families to be more likely to send their children to college during a booml'while
non-borrowing constrained families would be less likely (as a result of the foregone earn-

ings). Given that we find a negative association between county income and schoolingF
this second effect appears to dominate. This makes these results perhaps more surprising.
Suppose borrowing constrained families have higher marginal returns to schooling and that

16

the students from these families are led to decrease schooling during a recession. This
effect should lead to smaller values of the IV estimate. The fact that the IV estimate is
higher than the OLS estimate appears even more counterintuitive if credit constraints were

important. We formalize this argument in the AppendixFsection A.

5.4 IV Excluding Direct Costs of Schooling
The results using presence of a local college are presented in Tables 4a and 4b. The first

three columns present results that do not control for the local income variable. These
estimates yield very large effects of the causal effect of schooling. Howeverl'controlling for

the local income variable yields striking results. The estimates of the returns to schooling
decline enormously so that they are very similar in magnitude to the OLS results. In Table

4b we present additional specifications. In the first set of results we control for the AFQT

score from the NLSY instead of the four test scores. These give IV estimates that are
substantially lower than OLS. When we include no controls for test scores or family income

we get results similar to the last three columns of Table öa. The fact that the results decline
so much when we control for the local wages indicate that presence of a college seems to be

positively correlated with wealth in the county. Most importantlyl' thelV point estimates
are not higher than the OLS estimates.
Combining the results from the two tables we see the opposite of what the borrowing
constrained model predicts. Instrumenting with measures of direct costs of college rather
than the opportunity cost does not lead to higher estimates of the returns to college. Thus
we find no evidence that discount rate bias is important in this exercise.

5.5 Validity of the Instruments
In generalFwithout a maintained assumption that one of our instruments is validl'it is
impossible to test them. In additionl'since we allow the treatment effect to be randomFa
standard over-identification test will not work. lloweverl'it is often informative to examine

the relationship between the excluded variables and the observables in the wage equation.
While the lack of a relationship between observable measures of ability and the instruments

does not prove that there is no relationship between unobservable measures of ability and

17

theml' itdoes lend some credence to their use.

In Table 5 we present regressions of the two instruments on various observables. The

dummy variable for presence of a college in the county is the dependent variable in the
first column. The results in this regression are somewhat discouraging. The math score
from the ASVAB test does seem to be positively related to whether there is a college in
the county. Given the importance of this variable in both the schooling equation and the
wage equationl'this seems potentially problematic. Fathers education and the automotive

knowledge score also are related to this instrument. This result makes our finding even
more surprising. Presence of a college seems to be positively correlated with observable
ability. If it were positively correlated with unobservable ability as well then the schooling

estimate is biased upwards.11 The good news however is that conditional on the average

wage during working lifeFtest scores do not help predict the local labor market variable
at age 17. These results are shown in the second column of Table 5. While certainly
not conclusiveFthis result is favorable to the use of the local labor market variation as an
instrument.

The fact that test scores help predict the presence of a college in the county is not
necessarily problematicF since we control for these variables in our regression. Table 6
presents results that are more favorable for the use of the college in county as an instrumental variable. In this table we present results frOm probit models of our standard set
of regressors (from e.g. Table 2) on college attendance and high school dropout status. If
the college in county variable is exogenous it should have a much stronger effect on college

attendance than dropping out of high school.12 HoweverFif college in county is picking
up "pro-schooling" aspects of the community rather than just the reduction in the cost of
collegeFthen we would expect it to predict high school graduation as well. Our results in
Table 6 show that presence of a college in the county has a large effect on college atten-

dance but a statistically insignificant effect on high school graduation. While the point
estimate of the dropout effect is not zeroF these results seem to suggest that the instrumeit
is affecting school choice as we would have expected. Again while this is not conclusivel'
'1Altonjil' ElderF and äber (2000) provide a model that justifies this type of argument.
'2Tt should have some effect on high school dropout status by changing the option vaJue of high school
graduation.

18

it does suggest that the instrument is working in the manner we would expect if it were a
valid instrument.

5.6 Interactions between Observables and Direct Costs
The argument about identification above relied on the relationship between access to credit

and the direct costs of schooling. We used the model to show that the direct costs of
schooling place a larger burden for individuals who are credit constrained. If we could
observe individuals in the data who were credit constrained we could test this directly
since we expect the presence of a college in their county to have a larger impact on their
schooling decisions. While we cannot observe credit constraints directlyFwe can observe
some variables that we would expect to be related. In particular we can look for interactions

between the presence of a college and racel' family bakgroundl' and family income riables.
Card (1995b) and Kling (1999) also look for these interactions in the National Longitudinal

Survey of Young Men and show that individuals from low family background are affected
more by the presence of a college. Our results are different.
In Table 7 we present the results of schooling regressed on our standard set of covariates

and interactions between the presence of a college and different variable. The first column

interacts the dummy variable with racial dummies for black and Hispanic. Since it is well
known that blacks tend to have less wealth for the same amount of incomel' it miglt make

sense to expect blacks to be credit constrained. In fact we find that the interaction is
negative showing that the presence of a college seems to be more important for whites than

for blacks (although it is statistically insignificant). The sign on the Hispanic interaction is

also the opposite of what we would expect if they had less access to credit. In the second
column we interact the dummy variable with parents education. In this case the interaction

with father's education is positive and the interaction with mother's education is negative.

It is hard to interpret this as evidence of credit constraints. In the next two columns we
present the results for family income and number of siblings. Once again the interactions
are insignificant and of the wrong sign. We see essentially no evidence of credit constraints

in this table.
There are a number of reasons why our results may differ from Card (1995b). Perhaps

the largest difference is that our cohorts are much younger than theirs. Our results are
19

consistent with the idea that credit constraints may have been important when the NLS
Young Men were making their schooling decisions in the 1960'sI'but much less important

when the NLS Youth were making their decisions in the early 1980s. Of coursel'the data

sets differ in a number of other ways so this may not be the explanation. Discovering
whether this is actually the case is an important avenue for future research.13

6 Evidence From The Structural Model
6.1 The Econometric Model
In this section we extend the model above into a specific econometric framework which we

take directly to the data. Let wages for person i take the formF

log(w3) = 'y + x,1/3 + x;i3, + ej3 + 6ufie2 + U8i,
where

is experienceI'XM consists of local labor market variables at time tFX4 is a

vector of non-time varying variables that influence wagesF andu31 represents an error term

orthogonal to the observed covariates. Wage effects are captured through a level effect
y and a schooling-specificl'person.speciflc series of shocks {u3}. If individual i chooses
schooling level SFhis present value of earnings dated at the time he leaves school isi'
ot_se7s+xwi$w+xht+eitfie+epe2+uoit

Until a person enters the labor marketl'he has partial information about the stream

of shocks {u8}. Once in the marketFa person with schooling level S observes the shock
t4sit' at time period V. Abstracting from uncertainty about the shocks {u3t}I'we assume
students choose schooling to solve the certainty equivalence problem. Let E0 denote wage
131n results not reported in the version of his paper that we citer Kling also ran regressions using NLSY
data. In contrast to us he found results similar to Card in a relationship between poor family background
and schooling. Kling kindly provided us with the code he used to generate his data and we attempted to
uncover the difference. Even though the variables we used were very sirnilarl' the difference in the results
seem to come from both the differences in the definition of college in county and the fact that we are using
a younger sample. Both Card (1995b) and Kling(1997) focus on parents education in these interactions.
When we used Kling's variable and interact it with racer iumber of siblingsr and family income as in our
specification we get found no interactions (except for race which goes in the unexpected direction as in our
results). We also repeated our IV estimates described above using Kling's measure of presence of a college.
It yields point estimates that are very closer but with substaitially higher standard errors.

20

expectations at time zero when schooling decisions are made. Decisions are made based on
the expected present value of incomel'

;
'Si

= (k)53'"' (Est_SeeitPe+ev3e2+Eo(4tf3t)+Eo(uI))

(l)t

where R represents the individual borrowing rateFwhich is discussed belowl'and costs of

schooling (t) are parameterized to depend on observables as
For empirical implementationFwe further simplify the model in three ways. Firstl'we
assume that u3 = O + w where O is a person-specificFtime-invariant component of the
error term known to the student when schooling decisions are made but not observed by the

econometrician. The component w is orthogonal to time 0 informationF soO = E0 (u3t)

Secondfwe approximate E0 (Xfit) by a linear function of local labor market variables
known to the students when schooling decisions are made. Denote these variables by
with coefficient vector flu. To simplify the notation we incorporate the intercept
into

f3 so thati'
= E0

(x;) + + log (E ot_S6eItPE$E2)

Finallyfwe simplify the model by using log utility.'5 Solving for the value of S under
log utilityF and pluggingI8 from above yieldsf
vsj

=
=

S—i

1

(
&t log

(log (I) + log(1 — 6))

5+1

+ [Stt + (f ) s] 1og(8R) +XTS + Vj
—

t (1)txt;)

+a2(S) + £3 (5) log(R) + XTIJJTS + v3,

where X35 + v3 represents the nonpecuniary benefits or costs associated with schooling
level S. Though complicatedl' this expression is try close to a standard linear index model.

The only nonlinearity arises from the term inside the logarithm. From this expression one
'4Notice that we have assumed that costs depend oniy on observables. This was chosen for computational
conveniencer' but se see no reason why this should bias the findings in either direction.
'5We see no reason why this should bias the results in any particular direction.

21

can see the interaction between interest rates R and costs

There is no such interaction between interest rates and foregone earnings. This aspect of the modell'discussed
in the theory section abovel'delivers identification of the parameters of interest.

6.2 Sketch of Identification
To convey the basic mechanism by which identification is achievedi' begin by assuming
again there are only two levels of schooling and no direct cost for level 0. Tn the empirical

implementation of the modell' shooling is divided into four levelsl' but more lels only aids
identification. The values of each level of schooling are

=

c

+ + a1

+

+XflTQ + TOi

=

a1 log(e_

Xw113w+X;JLl.-1-91i —

Xp) + a2

+a3 log(R) + X13Tl + I'ni.
We

estimate two versions of the model. The first allows for heterogeneity in R1 by

letting it depend on particular observables such as race and family income. The second
version treats R as a variable unobserved by the econometrician.
To beginF w show how the model generalizes the schooling models discussed in Section

5.6. Firstl' suppose there is no unobserved heterogeneity (O = 0) and that local labor
market variables and wage variables are not determinants of schooling value (that isl'set
+ X5fi15 = 0 for S = 0 and S = 1). Let R be parameterized by (Ri) =
and assume costsI'X1firvary only with the presence of a college in the county. Testing
for interest rate heterogeneity in this specification ( fi = 0) is equivalent to the test for an
interaction between the presence of a college and XR performed for the simple regression
model of Section 5.6. The main difficulty with that approach is that we had no way to parcel
out the effects of wage variables and the local labor market variables on schooling decisions.

With no selection in model['/3 and fi can be estimated from the wage equation when
some assumption is made about how agents predict future local labor market variables.
Now consider the more complicated case in which R is unobserved. Taking the differ-

22

ence and combining the parameters yields the latent variable representationl'

=

= ai log(e"H — Xj3) + XJ'2 + 62i,
whereF

x1r1 = x,,,Jiw +
=

— log(R)

XiF2 =
=

—a
a3 log(R)

+ x;00) + a2 — a1 — XTO

+ Tli —

— V'Toi.

Individuals choose schooling option 1 if 1? > 0, and choose option 0 otherwise.
Assume (Xi, X1) is observable while

°Oj log(R1), T1i, uro) is unobservable and in-

dependent of the observables. Looking at the selection equation we have essentially three
indicesl'

(xr'1, xj'2,
and two error terms

c21) These three degrees of freedom allow us to trace out this

joint distribution.
Howeverfthe schooling equation alone is not sufficient for identification of the distribu-

tion of R as one cannot separate it from
Additional data on wage earnings is needed
to distinguish between these error terms. We have data on wages whereF
log(w1i) =

y+

+ Xfi + Ejj/JE + E3E2 + flu.

Theorem 1 in the Appendix proves nonparametric identification of the joint distribution
of

e21, u1) using the two types of exclusion restrictionsi' one for wages and one for

direct costs. Given this joint distribution we can identify the conditional expectation
—
= F (O
of F (u11
log(R)). We also show in the appendix that we can use
this conditional expectation to estimate the distribution of R1 when R is independent
of °Lj Thus we can identify the distribution of interest rates faced by students up to a
normalization that we discuss in the appendix.
23

The identification result crucially depends on the fact that we have two different types

of exclusion restrictions: local labor market variables that affect students school choices
but not
and the presence of college which influences only costs.16 This gives us essentially two degrees of freedom which allow us to trace out the two dimensional distribution

(si, s2).'7 Combining this information with the wage data allows us to separate R from
—

log(Rj) since only 91i influences wages.

The basic intuition for identification in practice comes from examining the dependence

of the form of selection bias on whether there is a college in one's county or notF

E (o1 a1 log(6X -f-Oi1og(R) —

+ X]T2 + &2, XJ'1, X;/3, xr'2)

In general this expression is complicated and will depend on the full joint distribution of
R, s2j) . As an exampleF suppose that iiterest rates are independent of the other error

terms. Following exactly the same logic as in Section 3 aboveF because the log () expression

is nonlinear the term — log(R) will be relatively more important when costs of schooling
are high. If borrowing constraints were not important this means that since O is relatively
more important when a college is costlyFthere will be more selection bias in counties that

do not contain a college. HoweverFif R is relatively more important than O, then when
costs are high schooling decisions will be dictated by the extent of borrowing constraints.
This would imply that there is less selection bias when no college is present. This basic
intuition is extremely close to that for identification in the Instrumental Variables model.

6.3 Evidence from observables
We parameterize interest rates so thatl'
= exp [exp (X/3R + log {— log(6)fl].

where Xft are variables that may determine the borrowing rate. This functional form was
chosen for two reasons. FirstFR is restricted to reasonable ranges: it will be strictly greater
'6lJsing the notation abovefl the first 'pe of exclusion restriction affects xr2, but not X,r1or Xj3and
the second enters X/3 but not xr2 or xr'1.
'7The appendix requires full support of XJ3. This is clearly not true in our dataF but our goal is simply
to test for the presence of borrowing rate heterogeneity not to identify the hill joint distribution. The

goal of the formal identification section is to demonstrate the manner in which multiple types of exclusion
restrictions can facilitate identification.

24

than one but can be arbitrarily large. Secondl'it facilitates comparison between borrowing

constrained individuals and others that are not constrained. In this specification when
Xfl = 0, R is equal to the market interest rate and these individuals are not constrained.
We do not include an intercept in XR, so we can normalize a subgroup of the population to

be able to borrow and lend freely by setting the value of

to zero for those individuals.

For example we will test for racial inequality in access to credit by using dummy variables.

In this case XR consists of only a dummy variable for black and a dummy variable for
Hispanics. Thus for whites both dummy variables are zerol'which imposes that for them

In this section we ignore the selection problem so that in the notation above Oj = 0
and UT5i is independent of u. We relax this restriction in the next subsection. ThuslTthe
parameters are estimated by OLS and the estimated values are inserted into the value
function (the standard errors of the value-function parameters are adjusted appropriately).
The cost indexI'X1/3, consists of only the distance from college and a constant. The vector

of taste variablesI'XT contains most of the variables entering the schooling decisions as

in Table 2 above.'8 The local labor market variables enter the model through the index
The first is the
X8J3. We incorporate two measures of local labor markets into
income at age seventeen and eighteen of the county in which the individual lived at age
17. This is restricted to affect only the earnings of high school graduates and high school
dropouts. The second variable is the long run average income in the county of residence at
age 17. This variable enters all four equations.
We assume that there are four levels of schoolingFhigh school dropouts(S=0)I' high
school graduates(S=2)F some college(S=4)F and college graduates(S=6). During high
school there are no direct pecuniary costs of schoolingf but they must be incurred for
students who attend some college and for college graduates.
We assume that UT3i has a Generalized Extreme Value distribution (GEV) so that the
model can be estimated as a nested logit. We use two levels of nesting first nesting all high

school graduates together and then nesting college attenders together. The observable
college in

county indicator and the local labor market variables are not included in XT.

25

components of the utilities take the forml'
/1i0

= c (x;1fl +

+ a2(O)

Pi2 = aL (—2 log(R)+ x,J3 + x2) + a2(2) + a3 (2) log(R1) + X2/3T2
=
Pi6

a1 log

= ailog

((k)

eX;W$W+X;4i$24

(k) x) + a2@) + a3 (4) log(R) + XJ3T4

—

(1)tx?) +a2(6) + a3(6)log(R)+X6

—

((k)6e2÷x;6_t6

2=2

The nesting yields the following schooling probabilitiesi'
Pr(S =

6S>2,pop6)=

Pr(S = 2j S> O,/-o,}'6)—

Pr(S

=

exp (LM)
"C
exp

() + exp (aL)

exp(a)
pp
PH
+
+
exp
exp
() [exp (ps)
(±&)]
exp (Po)

Op0p6)=

La

PH

exp(p)+ (exP(ia) + [exp('1) +exp()J)
The model is estimated by maximum likelihood restricting PH and Pc between zero and one.

This nested logit can also be interpreted as incorporating uncertainty in tastes for schooling.
In this case it has the form of a forward-looking discrete choice dynamic programming model
(see TaberF2000).
There are a number of normalizations necessary for identification. We assume that fiTs

is zero for dropouts which normalizes the location as in a standard in polychotomous choice

models, In the high school equations we cannot separately identify the intercepts in I3Tg
from the intercept in fi so we set the latter to zero. In a feature that is more unique to
our model we normalize the /3 coefficient on distance from college to one in the equations

for college. This normalization is needed because we cannot separately identify the scale
of the indices from the intercept in the tastes for schooling index.'9

It turned out that in practice the intercept in the cost equation was very difficult to
identify empirically so we fixed it to two in the simulations we present2° We experimented
'9Normalizing this coefficient seems to work better computationally than the alternatives.
20The idea being that by living at home one can cut the cost of schooling in half.
26

extensively with other values for this parameter and the results are not sensitive. In practicel' w also had trouble identifying the coefficient on the local earnings variable in the two

college states. A reduced form regression yields a value of approximately 0.3 for itFso we
fixed it to this value for the last two schooling equations. We again explored the sensitivity

of our results to this assumption by trying alternative values and found our results to be
very robust. We have also assumed that 6 = 0.97 which yields R =
1.031.
The log-likelihood function for the model estimated without heterogeneity in access to

credit is -2547.69. The parameters are presented in Table 8. For the sake of brevity we do
not provide a general discussion of the parametersFbut they seem reasonable to us.
The first case we examine is heterogeneity in interest rates across racial-ethnic groups.
As mentioned above we include two dummy variablesF onefor African Americans and one

for Hispanics. The results of this model are presented as the second group of results in
Table 9. The point estimates go to the boundary in the unexpected direction and in the
pseudo-likelihood ratio test21 we see no evidence that these are significant.

We next examine parental education. In this case we include variables for father's
education and mother's education. These are presented as the third set of results in the
table. Once againFwith a likelihood ratio test we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no
heterogeneity in interest rates. In this case the point estimates go in the expected direction

for mothers educationF but in the unexpected direction for fathers. The parameter for
fathers seems to dominate in the simulations. Our next set of results interacts family
income with access to credit. In this case we divide the data into three groups according
to parental family income. We assume the top third to be not borrowing constrained and
estimate the relative effect borrowing constraints influence the other two groups.

The estimated borrowing rates for the middle and bottom third are barely distinguish-

able from the rate for the topi' and again the results are statistically insignificait Perhaps
the case one might expect to find the strongest evidence for heterogeneity in credit access

is family size. HoweverFthe borrowing rate turns out to be insensitive to the number of
children in the family (see "Number of Siblings" at the bottom of Table 9); the P-value of
2tWe call it a "pseudo likelihood ratio test" because the test depends on parameters the wage parametersF
which are estimated outside the model. Correcting the standard errors for the first stage estimates made
very little differencer so se suspect that to be the case for the likelihood ratio test as well.

27

an interaction between family size and borrowing rates is .99.

6.4 Evidence of Heterogeneity in Unobservable Borrowing Rates
Failing to find evidence of heterogeneity in borrowing rates in the observablesFwe extend

the structural model in order to look for evidence in the unobservables. To beginl' assume

there are two types of individualsl' those borruving at the market rate R1 = 1/S,and those

borrowing at a higher rate R2 > 1/S. We estimate both the borrowing rate (R2) and
the fraction of the population of each type (PRI, i = 1,2). We assume the distribution of
borrowing rates is independent of the other error terms and the observables.

Heterogeneity in ability is assumed to enter the model through a single normally distributed factor O which is known at the time schooling choices are made. The error term
in the wage equation is defined as

= ws9 + $it,
where W3ft is orthogonal to G. Ability may also be correlated with unobserved tastes for
schooling which are now defined asP
Vsi = 4'T°i + V8,

where iv has a GEV distribution yielding a nested logit model as in the previous section.

In this modelf economic identification guides the implementation of the model. This
suggests that identification of the distribution of R should come from the behavioral interaction between interest rates and costs and not from arbitrary functional form assumptions

about the distribution of the error terms. These type of assumptionsl'while common in
structural modelsfhopelessly obscure the importance of estimated behavioral parameters.
Avoiding this path leads us to two nonstandard strategies. FirstPbecause we have no presumption about the form of the selection biasl' w are very flexible in modeling it, IdeallyP
we would place no restrictions on the joint distribution of (v21, V41 v, w0, w2, w0, w21). In

practicel'the full distribution proved difficult too general to estimate and often led to a
singular Hessian so standard errors could not be calculated. Neverthelessl' estimation of
the distribution of .Rj was still possibleFso we performed likelihood ratio tests to test for
borrowing constraints. Full nonparametric estimation of the seven dimensional distribution
28

was too general to be computationally feasible. Even though we have restricted the error
terms to be normal with a one factor representationfthere are still seven parameters that
determine the form of the selection bias: the corresponding seven factor loading terms on

O. Even after restricting these parameters further we could not obtain standard errors.
Keep in mindFthoughl'we purposely chose to over-parameterize the form of the selection

bias to force identification to come from the interaction between the bias and the college
costs index.

Our second nonstandard strategy came from our desire to force identification of the
distribution of R to come from the form of selection bias as was suggested in the iden-

tification section above. We originally attempted to estimate the model by maximum
likelihood. After extensive experimentationl'we concluded that this approach does not
work well. Allowing general flexible forms to characterize the distribution of all of the error

terms proved computational difficuitFand when restrictions were made on the functional
formF theestimated results appeared sensitive to the functional forms used. In particularF

we could not relax the distribution of w5 sufficiently so that we could really distinguish
the distribution of R1 from a more flexible functional from for the school choice equation.

This is not at all in the spirit of our identification result above in which we showed that
nonparametric identification of the distribution of O comes from the form of the selection
bias in the wage equation.
Insteadfwe applied an iterative procedure to force identification of the distribution of

R and other parameters to come from the variation in data that we prefer to use. In
particularl'we partition the parameters of our model to those we want to identify from
the selection equation (W1) and those that we want to identify in the wage equation (iIt2).
Denote all observables by X1 and let £ (W1, 1112, X1) be the log likelihood from the schooling

choice. We estimate the model using the following iterative procedurel'
1. Fix 1112 and solve for the value of 'I's that maximizes the likelihood of the school choice
model.

2. Fix t1 and solve for the value of 'P2 that minimizes the nonlinear least squaresi'

NT
(log(w) — E(log(w) Xj W, 'I'2))
i=1 1=1

29

We iterate this procedure until convergence.22 This procedure is equivalent to a GMM
model with moment conditions

F

0t1(w,x1)
OW1

aE(1og(wx,w1,'2) (log(w) —
E(log(w)

X,

—
—o

P2))

The decision of which parameters to use in which equation was straight forward. The

parameters of the wage equation we estimated from the regression model and the parameters

of the tastes for schooling we estimated using the schooling choice model. Following the

logic of the identification result we want the distribution of the borrowing rates to come
from the wage equationi' so the distribution ofR was estimated from the regression model,

Following the first strategy aboveF the goal is to ep the form of the selection bias flexible

so we estimate the factor loading terms on O in the wage equation as well. That led us to
the following partitionF

=
=

PH, Pc,

& E {0, 2,4, 6}))

(13w, 13 I3E' IJE2, PR, 1?2, (,y, Ts'

a

E {0, 2,4, 6}))

We experimented with a wide variety of specifications and starting values and found the
model did not typically converge when we no restrictions were placed on the c5TS parameters

(factor loading on heterogeneity in taste for schooling). We restricted the model so that
= 0T2) and the taste for the two
the taste for dropout and high school are the same
schooling types are the same (T4 = T6) Again this restriction did not appear to affect
the basic result but did aid convergence substantially.23

The main result can be seen in the first two rows of Table 10. The model becomes
degenerate finding that no individuals are borrowing constrained. We estimated the model

using a large number of starting values and a number of different specifications and con-

sistently found no evidence of heterogeneity in borrowing rates. The model estimates a
borrowing rate of 1.071 for the borrowing constrained group (compared to 1.030 for the un-

constrained group) but converges to a corner solution where the fraction of the population

borrowing at the higher rate is zero. Because we are at a corner solutionfstandard errors
of the parameters could not be calculated.
22j11 practice we use a damping parameter to aid convergence.
23A linear specification for this parameter gave the same basic result.

30

The wage parameters yield a strange pattern in that "some college" workers tend to
have low wages although the schooling effects are monotonic otherwise. It is somewhat
hard to interpret the results on the factor loading terms. The four factor loading terms are
positive as one would expectFalthough the point estimate of the college graduate factor
loading term is substantially smaller than the others which is somewhat surprising. To
get an idea of the precision to which these parameters are estimated we ran a simple OLS

regression on the selection terms and the estimates of E(8

S, X1; 'I') ignoring the fact

that we simultaneously estimated the parameters 'I'. By design this yields exactly the same

point estimates as in Table 10 and yields standard errors on the factor loading terms (Ø8)
of approximately 0.12. The rest of the parameters of the model are similar to our estimates

without heterogeneity presented in Table 8.

7 Discussion and Conclusions
This paper develops a model showing that direct costs of schooling affect borrowing constrained individuals in a fundamentally different way than opportunity costs of schooling.

It then uses these two sources of variation to test for borrowing constraints in four different waysfl) instrumental variablesF 2) regressionmodels allowing for interactions between
observables and presence of a collegel' 3) structuralestimation allowing borrowing rates to
depend on observablesr 4) structural estimation alliwing for unobservable heterogeneity in
borrowing rates. We find no evidence of borrowing constraints using any of the methods.

One issue that inevitably arises with this type of finding is power. Have we found no
evidence of borrowing constraints because there are not borrowing constraints or because

we do not have enough precision to measure their significance? It is never possible to
separate a claim that data or method lack power to identify a phenomenon from a claim
that the phenomenon does not exist. In the endl'the answer a person chooses depends
on her prior beliefs about the size of the effect. Our view is that power is much less of a
concern in the regression framework and in the specification of the structural model that
does not include unobserved borrowing rate heterogeneity. The college in county variable
is very strongl' so if the iiteraction with it were important we would expect to have power.
In contrastl' the instrumeital variable estimates of the returns to schooling are imprecise.
31

It is less clear how much power we have in this case. In interpreting our resultsF there are a
number of things to keep in mind. FirstF the evidence in support of discouit rate bias is also

weak. There are a number of studies that find 117 estimates are larger than OLS estimatesF
butF consisteitlyl' the IV standard errors in these studies are also large.Secondl' a few recS
studies instrument schooling with a variable like presence of a college. Our results show the

sensitivity of these results to inclusion of the local income variable. Our findings suggest
that proper inclusion of this variable in the analysis would weaken or eliminate the pattern

of consistently finding IV estimates that are higher than OLS estimates. Thirdl' our result

is not based on particularly poor standard errors. In facti' point estimates consistently
turn up with the wrong sign. Fourthl'potential problems with the instruments seem to
bias things in the wrong direction. The regression results in Table 5 suggest that the
estimate using presence of a college may be biased upwardsF while the argument about
family contributions during economic recessions suggest that the IV estimates should be
biased downwards. While these IV results in themselves may not be convincing evidence

that borrowing constraints do not exist; at the very leastl'they cast some doubt on the
discount rate bias story for higher IV estimates. This is particularly true when these
results are combined with the other cent evidence on borrowing constraints in schooling
decision (e.g. Cameron and lleckmanl'2000FKeane and Wolpinl' 19991' anheaF2O0O.24

Given the problem in calculating standard errors in the structural selection model it is
even harder to obtain a sense for the power in this model. Once againl'it is important to

keep in mind that it is not just that we fail to reject the nullI' but the pout estimates show
no evidence of heterogeneity in access to credit. We believe this basic approach is useful
for examining this issue and hope it leads to additional studies on this topic.
In general our results are consistent with Cameron and Heckman (2000)FKeane and
Wolpin (1999)1' and Shea (2000) in that in all four methods w find no evidence of borrowing

constraints. Once againl' it is import ait to keep in mind that this does not necessarily mean

that credit market constraints would not exist in the absence of the programs currently

available. It implies instead that given the large range of subsidies to education that
24Ashenfelter and Harmon (1999) have an alternative argument for the IV findings in the literature.
They argue that the pattern may be due to a troubling specification/publication bias. Since IV standard
errors are often highi' if researhers prefer specifications in which the t-statistic is greater than twofl there
will be a bias towards publishing studies with high IV estimates.
32

currently existF there is no evidenceof inefficiencies in the schooling market resulting from
borrowing constraints.

References
Altonjil'J.FElderFT.Fand TaberFC.F "Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic SchoolsF"unpublished manuscriptl'2000.

AngristFJ.Fand KruegerFA.F "Empirical Strategies in Labor Economicsf"in Ashenfelter
and Card eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, 2000.

ArkesF J.F "Using State Unemployment Rates During Teenage Years as an Instrument
to Estimate the Returns to SchoolingF" unpublished manuscriptf Center for Naval
AnalysesFl998.

Ashenfelterf 0.1' and Harmon[' Ci' "EditorsñàluctionF"Labour Economics (special issue
on education)Fforthcoming 1999.

BeckerF Gary S.F Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
Reference to Education, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press)F1975.

BlossfeldFH. and Shavitl'Y.I' 1993. Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational Attainment in Thirteen CountriesFBoulderF Co:Westview PressFl993.
CameronFS.Fand HeckmanFj.F "The Nonequivalence of High School EquivalentsF" The
Journal of Labor EconomicsF 11(1993)F1-47.

1998a. "Life Cycle Schooling and Educational Selectivity: Models and ChoiceF" F
Journal of Political Economyf AprilF 1998.

_J998b. "The Dynamics of Education Attainment for BlacksFWhitesfand HispanicsF"
Columbia University manuscriptf 1998.Presented at NBERFApr11 1997.
CardF DaridF "EarningsF Smolingl' and Abili4' RevisitedF"Research in Labor Economics
14, 1995aF 23-48.

33

Cardl'Davidl' "Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return

to Schoolingi" in Louis N. Christofldesl'E. Kenneth Grand' and Robert Swidinskyl'

eds. Aspects of Labor Market Behavior: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp,
(Toronto:University of Toronto Press)I'1995bF201-222.

Cardl'Davidl' "Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econo-

metric Problemsl" unpublishedmanuscriptfl999.
Cardl' Da'idl' "The Causal Effect of Education on Earningsl" in Ashenfelter and Card eds.
Handbook of Labor Economics, 2000.

Hauserl'R.I'1993. "Trends in College Attendance Among Blacksl'Whitespand Hispanics['." in Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education. C. Clotfelter and M.
Rothschildl' eds. University of Chicago Press.

HeckmanF J.17 and Singed' BIT "A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
Assumptions in Economic Models for Duration Datal"Econometrical7 52(1984)17 271320.

Heckmanl'J. and Edward Vytlacil]T "Instrumental Variables for the Correlated Random

Coefficient Model: Estimating the Average Rate of Return to Schooling when the
Return is Correlated with SchoolingF" forthcomingF Journal of Human Resources,
1998.

Imbensl'G.lTand Angristl'J.I' "Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
Effectsl" Econometrical 62(1994).

KaneFT. 1994. "College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College CostsFFamily

Background and the Returns to Educationi" Journal of Political EconomyFlO2F 878911.

Keanel' MIT and Wpinl' Kr' 'The Effect oftental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints
on Educational AttainmentF" unpublishedmanuscriptFl999.
Klingl'JeffreyF "Interpreting Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Returns to SchoolingF" Princetonlndustrial Sections Working paper no. 41517 1999.
34

LangFKevinl' "Ability Biasl'Discount Rate Biasl'and the Return to EducationF" unpublished manuscriptF BostonUniversityfl994.

Manskil'C. and D. Wisel' 1983. College Choice in Americal' Harrd University Press.
Manskil' C.F 1993. "Income and Higher EducationlFocus (University of Wisconsin-Madisoni'

Institute for Research on Poverty) Vol 141' No.3.

Marel'R.D. 1980. "Social Background and School Continuation Decisionsi" Journal of
The American Statistical Associationl'75 (June)I'295-305.
MayerFS.1'1997. What Money Can't Buy, Harvard University Press.

Orfield[' GI' 1992. "Moneyl' Equityl' and College Accessl" Harvard Educational Review
72(3)1' (EEl' 19921):337-372.

Rosenl'Sl' 19771' "Human Capital A Survey of Empirical Researchi" Research in Labor
Economics Vol. 1, ed. R. Ehrenbergl'3-39.

SheaF J.I' 2000. "Does Parent's Money Matter?" forthcomingl' Journal of Public Economics.

TaberFC.IT "The Rising College Premium in the Eighties: Return to College or Return
to Ability?" unpublished manuscriptF Nortlwestern Universityl'1999.

WillisI' RI' "M.e Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital Earnings Functionsl" in 0. Ashenfelter and F. Lward eds.]Pffandbook of Labor Economics]?

Amsterdaml' NorthHollandl' 1986.
WillisI' Rand RosenFS.I' "Education and Self- SelectionD" Journal of Political Economyl'
871' 1979.

35

Appendix
A. Downward Bias of Schooling Returns when Instrumented with
Foregone Earnings
This section demonstrates how discount rate heterogeneity can bias downward the estimated return to schooling. Applying the methodology of Imbens and Angrist (1994)1' suppose schooling is binary with S equal to either zero or one (looselyF college or high shool).

Local labor market conditionsF repressed by RI' are binary withR = 1 representing temporarily bad labor market conditions. Let d (R) be an individual specific dummy variable
equal to 1 if this individual would choose schooling level 1 in labor market condition R;
that isF defined(1) to indicate whether a person would attend college in a bad labor marketi'
and d(O) to indicate attendance during a boom.
Let W5 represent the wage a person would receive for schooling level SF and letW denote

the unconditional wage. Assume R is a legitimate instrument; that isFit is uncorrelated
with (W1, W0, d(1), d(O)) The Wald estimate takes the formf

E(WR=1)—E(WR=O)

Pr (S = 1 R = 1)— Pr (S = 1 R = 0)
E(W1 R = 1, d(1) = 1) Pr(d(1) = 1) + E(W0 R = 1, d(1) = 0) Pr(d(1) = 0)
Pr(d(1) = 1) — Pr(d(0) = 1)
E(W1 R = 0, d(0) = 1) Pr(d(0) = 1) + E(W0 R = 0, d(O) = 0) Pr(d(0) = 0)
—

= 1) — Pr(d(0) = 1)
E(W1 d(1) = d(0) = 1) Pr(d(1) = d(0) = 1) + E(W1 I d(l) > d(0)) Pr(d(1) > d(0))
Pr(d(1) = 1) — Pr(d(0) = 1)
=
=
=
+ E(W0 d(1) < d(0)) Pr(d(1) < d(0)) + E(W0 I d(1) = d(0) 0) Pr(d(1) = d(0) 0)
Pr(d(l) = 1) — Pr(d(0) 1)
E(W1 d(1) = d(0) = 1) Pr(d(1) = d(0) = 1) + E(W1 I d(1) < d(0)) Pr(d(1) < d(0))
Pr(d(1) = 1) — Pr(d(0) = 1)
Pr(d(1)

E(W0 d(1) > d(0)) Pr(d(1) > d (0)) + E(W0 d(1) = d(0) = 0) Pr(d(1) = d(0) = 0)

Pr(d(1) = 1)
E (W1 — W0

—

Pr(d(O)

= 1)

d(l) > d(0)) Pr(d(1) > d(0)) — E (W1 —
I d(1) c d(0)) Pr (d(1) < d(0))
Pr(d(1) >d(0))—Pr(d(1) <d(0))

Our data show enrollment rises in bad labor markets. In this contextF Imbens and
Angrist's (1994) monotonicity assumption implies people are induced to increase schooling
only during a recession. That isi' there is no one in the population who stuld attend school
36

during a boom who would not also attend during a recession: Pr(d (1) < d (0)) =

0.

Under

this conditionf the Mld estimate reduces to E(W1 — Wo I d(1) = 1,d(0) = 0). As argued
in the textf if changes in foregone earnings have little differential effect on borrowing-

constrained and unconstrained personsl' then this estimate of the returns to schooling is
not likely to be strongly influenced by "discount rate bias."
Now consider relaxing the monotonicity assumption. Suppose instead some borrowing
constrained families cannot afford to send their children to college during a recession but

would do so during a boom. In this case the monotonicity assumption is violated so
Pr(d (1) C d (0)) will be positive. To be consistent with the observation in the data that
schooling rises during bad timesf it must be the case that Pr(d(1) = 1,d(0) = 0) >
Pr(d (1) = 0, d (0) = 1). Under the discount rate bias hypothesis[' students from these
borrowing constrained families have high marginal returns to college. This means that
E (W1 — W0 d(1) <d(0)) would be large. Notice however that in this example this term
enters the expression for the Wald estimate negatively. Thus in this case discount rate bias
will bias this estimate downward.

B. Identification of Structural Model
Nonlinear models that impose linear index assumptions can often avoid the use of exclusion

restrictionsl'so to focus on the variation arising from the exclusion restriction we consider
nonparametric identification of the model. Specifically we consider identification off

S=
log(w) =
log(wo) =

1(log(e91

1 + g2(Zi)) H- g3(X) + g4(Z2) + s2 > 0)

7s + gi(X) + g(Z) + Ct3E + ;/3E2
'Ys

+ IL1

+ gi(X) + g(Z) + Cj13E + e1iE3 + Ito,

where 2'2 represents the exclusion restriction from local labor market conditionsl'Z1 repre-

sents the exclusion restrictions that represent direct costs of schoolingFZt represents local
labor market variables at time t, and X represents other regressors that influence wages and
the tastes for schooling.25 The econometrician can observe (X, Z2, 2'2, Z1, et) and schooling
25The one type of variation we have not included in this specification is the local labor market variables
that influence college choice. For this exercise we can fix them to a constant and only consider variation

37

choice S. When S = 1Fw is observed and when S = 0, WO is observed.
Before one can show identificationF there are some normalizations that mist be imposed.
First notice that we can always normalize g3(0) = g4(0) = 0 by modifying the location of

the error term E2. We need a scale normalization for 92. As long as g2(0) $ 0,we can
normalize g2(0) = 1. To see why we need a scale normalizationfnotice that for any r we
can multiply 92 by eT,add r to s1,and subtract r rom s2 without changing the expression.
Under these normalizations and standard assumptions about support conditionsF the model
is identified.

Theorem 1 Normalize gi(O) = g(0) = 94(0) = 0 and g (0) = 1. Assume that (a) the support of X does not depend on(Zi,Z2), (b)(g2(Zi),g4(Z2))has support R2, and(c) the error
Then gi, g, g3,and

terms (si, E2, U1, u2) are independent of the observables (X, 2'2, 2'2,

g4 and the joint distribution of (e1, s2, ui) are identified.

Proof: First notice that we can use a standard identification at infinite argument (see
e.g. Heckmanf 1990) to ideilLify 91. That is send g4(Z2) —* oo,and we can identify the form
of the wage equation.

Now suppose the model is not identified so that there are two distinct models that
explain the dataF thetrue model

1(log(e911 + g2(Z1)) + 93(X) + 94(Z2) + s2> 0)
and an alternative model['

1(log(e + g(Z2)) + 9;(X) + g(Z3) +

0).

We will show that these two models are equivalent.

Taking g to the other side of the inequality sign and exponentiating both sides one can

see that the distribution ofF

= e91

g3H-i+s2 + g2(Zi)e

from the variables that influence local labor markets during college. We are assuming that Z2 help predict
local labor market levels Zt during college.

38

must be the same as the distribution ofF

= f (eY (X)+9 X)+e+e +

I

where f is defined so that c_94(x) = f (c9(X)) . Notice that

log (8wi 1X1Z1Z4) = log(g(Zi))+gs(X) + log(E(e€2))
which is separable in Z1 and X. The only way that log (E (wi X, Z1, Z2)) can take this
separable form is if f is linear. The fact that g4(X) has full support and that 94(0) is
normalized to zero implies that g. = g.
Since

log(g (32)) + g3(X) + log(E(e62)) = iog(g' (2')) + g(X) + log(E(e6))

g and g can only differ by a location parameterFso since 93(0) is normalized to zerol'g3
is identified.

Since g1and g are identified it must be that

g(Z1) = E(el)
E(E)92(Z)
92 = g. Thus gi, 92, g31and g are all identified.
Now consider identification of the joint distribution of the error terms. Fixing X = UI'

But since 92(0) = g2 (0) =

1,

Z1to a particular value z1F and varying g4(Z2) we can identify the joint distribution of
(_log(cdl +g2(zi)) —s2,ui)from

Pr(s = 1, u1 <y) = Pr (— log(e€1 + g2(z1)) — E2 <g4(Z2), u1 <y).
Thus for any (t1, t2) E W we can identifyl'
E (exp {i (1Iog(ee1+92(z1))+e2 + t2ui) })

= E (exp {i (t1edl+62 + tlg2(ZL)c62 + t2ui) })
= w(ti,tig2(zi),t2),

where w characteristic

function of (c612i, ee2i, u11) . By varying t1, t2,and g2(z1 )we can
identify the characteristic function and thus the joint distribution of (e12, es2, ui) . From

this we can identify the distribution of (er, &2, u1) .
39

7.1 C. Identification of log(R) from E(01

— log(R))

We suspect that this result is not new although we have not found a source that proves it.
Proposition 2 Suppose that (a) R is independent of 8, (b) the distribution of (01—log(R))
is identzfied and (c) E(01 01 — log(R)) is identified. Then the distribution of R and 0 are
identified.

Proof: Let We and WRbe the characteristic functions of 0 and log(R) respectively.
Then we can identifyF

E

= We(t) WE (—t).

We can also identify

E (E(91 01 — log(R))dt(O1_b0) = E (e1&t(0i_bo(R)))
= E (0ieut(01)) wn (t)

Thus we can identify the ratioF
iE (0ie(°')) Wn (—t)
We (t) WE (t)

—
—

We

—

But this means that

E (iOie"91)
(t)

Blog(ço9 (t))

at

and thus the distribution of 01 is identified. Given this and

We(t)WR (—t), then WE and thus the distribution of log(R) are identified.
U

Table 1
Variable
Years of Schooling
College in County
Local Income at 17
Black
Hispanic
AFQT Score
Math Score
Word Knowledge
General Science
Automotive Knowledge
Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings
Family Income
Experience
Local Income

Summary Statistics
Primary Variables
Mean Standard Deviation Sample Size
12.802
0.867
12.845
0.314
0.186
0.579
0.181
0.172
0.098
0.039
10,503
10.780
3.734
3.356
7.536
13.919

2.487
0.340
2.385
0.464
0.389
22.140
8.439
8.439
5.388
5.443
4.103
3.211
2.626
2.065
3.169
3.479

2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
2404
13762
13762

Table 2
First Stage Regression of
Schooling on Explanatory Variables
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Variable
College in County

Local Income at 17
Mean Local Income over
Working Life
Black
Hispanic

Math Score
Word Knowledge
General Science

Automotive Knowledge

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings
Family Income

Constant
Geographic Controls

Cohort Controls
Sample Size

(1)
0.417
0.152)

0.688
0.124)
0.334

0.138)
0.167
0.010)

(2)

(3)

(4)
0.435
(0.148)

-0.023
0.021)

-0.183

0.723

-0.182
( 0.074)
0.130
( 0.058)
0.691

( 0.124)

( 0.123)

0.359

0.348

( 0.143)

( 0.141)

0.168

0.167
( 0.010

( 0.010)
0.050
0.050
0.010) ( 0.009)
0.065
0.066
0.015) ( 0.015)
-0.065
-0.069
0.011) ( 0.010)
0.051
0.053
0.016) ( 0.016)
0.038
0.039
0.022) ( 0.022)
-0.044
-0.047
0.016) ( 0.016)
0.090
0.094

0.050
( 0.010)

0.066
( 0.015)

-0.065
( 0.011)

0.052
( 0.016)

0.039
( 0.022)

-0.047
( 0.016)

0.095
(0.022)

(0.022)

(0.022)

11.320

11.710
( 0.335)

( 0.371)

Yes

Yes

0.273)
Yes

11.993

(0.074)
0.123
(0.058)
0.677
(0.124)
0.345
(0.141)
0.166
(0.010)
0.050
(0.010)
0.065
(0.015)
-0.066
(0.011)
0.050
(0.016)
0.039
(0.022)
-0.046
(0.016)
0.095
(0.022)

11.886
(0.321)
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2404
2404
2404
2404
The standard errors are constructed to allow for arbitrary correlation
between individuals from the same county at age 17

Table 3
Results for Log Wage Regressions

OLS and IV Estimates
Using Foregone Earnings as Instrument
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Schooling

Local Income

Experience

Experience Squared
Black
Hispanic

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings

Math Score
Word Knowledge
General Science

Automotive Knowledge

OLS
0.058
0.004)
0.027
0.003)
0.054
0.006)
-0.002
(0.000 )
-0.063
0.024)
-0.020
(0.030 )
-0.003
(0.004 )

Geographic Controls
Cohort Controls
Instruments:
Local Income at 17
Current Local Incl"County 17
Age and AGE2
Number of Individuals
Number of Wage Years

1V2

0083

0.110

( 0.042)
0.035

( 0.086)

( 0.018)

0.036
(0.005 )
0.091
(0.023 )

-0.002

-0.004

( 0.000)

-0.033
( 0.029)
-0.005
(0.005 )

(0.001 )
-0.115
( 0.061)
-0.041
(0.034 )
-0.008
(0.010 )

-0.005

-0.008

-0.012

(0.005 )
0.002
(0.003 )
0.010
(0.002)
0.002
0.002)
-0.004
(0.003 )
0.012

( 0.006)
0.003

(0.011 )
0.005

( 0.004)

( 0.005)

0.007

0.002

( 0.005)

( 0.014)

0.001
(0.002 )
-0.005
(0.003 )
0.014
(0.003 )
0.034
(0.005 )
Yes
Yes

-0.000
(0.004)
-0.006

( 0.002)

Family Income

lvi

0.036
0.005)
Yes
Yes
•

( 0.006)

0.065

-0.085
( 0.031)

Yes
Yes

No
2225
13762

2225

OLS
0.074

(0.004)
0.025
(0.003)
0.055
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.000)
-0.148
(0.022)
-0.061
(0.030)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.005)

Wi

11/2

0.107
(0.034)
0.031
(0.005)
0.074
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.162
(0.022)
-0.074
(0.029)
-0.005
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.007)
0.001
(0.004)

0.134
( 0.061)

0.034
( 0.005)

0.083
( 0.022)

-0.004
( 0.001)

-0,178
( 0.028)

-0.085
( 0.032)

-0.013
( 0.014)

-0.015
( 0.014)

0.005
( 0.007)

( 0.006)

0.016
(0.007
0.031
( 0.007)

0.042
(0.005)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
2225
13762

13762
§ The standard errors are constructed to allow for arbitrary correlation
between individuals from the same county at age 17

2225
13762

0.039
(0.006)
Yes
Yes

0.034
(0.005)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

2225
13762

2225
13762

Table 4a
Results for Log Wage Regressions
OLS and IV Estimates
Using Presence of Local College as Instrument

(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Schooling

Local Income

Experience
Experience Squared
Black
Hispanic

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings

Math Score
Word Knowledge

General Science
Automotive Knowledge

OLS
0.062
0.004)
0.054
0.006)
-0.002
(0.000 )

Geographic Controls
Cohort Controls
Instruments:
College in County
Current Local InciCounty 17
Age and AGE2
Number of Individuals
Number of Wage Years

1V2

0.228
( 0.109)

0.193
( 0.084)

0.124

lvi

1V2

0.061
0.076)
0.035
0.005)
0.102

0.018
(0.006 )
0.032
( 0.007)

-0,002
(0.000)
-0.063
(0.023)
-0.020
(0.026)
-0.003
(0.004)
-0.005
(0.005)
0.002
(0.003)
0.010
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.012
(0.002)
0.036
(0.005)

0.057
(0.115)
0.035
(0.006)
0.054
(0.049)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.073
(0.063)
-0.028
(0.037)
-0.003
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.010)
0.003
(0.005)
0.010
(0.013)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.012
(0.005)
0.035
(0.006)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.010
(0.013)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.005)
0.012
(0.005)
0.034
(0.007)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
2225
13762

Yes
Yes
Yes
2225
13762

( 0.001)

0.075
(0.020 )
-0.004
(0.001 )

-0.029

-0.111

-0.119

0.026)
0.009
(0.035 )
-0.003
(0.004 )

( 0.066)

( 0.067)

-0.023
-0.014
(0.009 )

-0.020
(0.044 )
-0.015
(0.010 )

-0.002

-0.016

-0.017

(0.005 )
-0.001
(0.004 )
0.010
(0.002)
0.003
0.002)
-0.005
(0.003 )
0.009

( 0.010)
0.003

(0.011 )
0.005

( 0.005)

( 0.005)

-0.008

-0.010
(0.014)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.013

0.O02)

Family Income

lvi

0.039
0.005)
Yes
Yes

( 0.047)
-0.003

( 0.045)

( 0.013)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.012
(0.006)
0.017
(0.005 )
0.033
(0.007)
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No

( 0.006)

OLS
0.058
(0.004)
0.027
(0.002)
0.054
(0.006)

Yes
No
Yes
2225
2225
2225
2225
13762
13762
13762
13762
§ The standard errors are constructed to allow for arbitrary correlation
between individuals from the same county at age 17

( 0.019)

-0.005
0.001)

-0.082
( 0.059)

-0.029
( 0.036)

-0.003
( 0.008)

-0.006
( 0.010)

0.003
( 0.005)

Table 4b
Results for Log Wage Regressions
OLS and [V Estimates
Using Presence of Local College as Instrument

(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Schooling

Local Income

Experience

Experience Squared
Black
Hispanic

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings

AFQT Score
Family Income

Geographic Controls
Cohort Controls
Instruments:
College In County
Current Local IncFCounty 17
Age and AGE2
Number of Individuals
Number of Wage Years

OLS
IV1
0.054
0.027
0.004) ( 0,095)
0.026
0.035
0.002) ( 0.006)
0.054
0.042
0.006) ( 0.046)
-0.002
-0.002
(0.000 ) ( 0.001)
-0.081
-0.077
0.021) ( 0.066)
-0.040
-0.043
(0.026 ) ( 0.040)
-0.004
-0002
(0.004 ) (0.009 )
-0.006
-0.005
(0.005 ) ( 0.008)
0.002
0.003
(0.003 ) ( 0.004)
0.005
0.006
(0.000) ( 0.004)
0.036
0.036
0.005) (0.006 )
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1V2

0.042
( 0.060)
0.034
(0.006 )
0.106
(0.017 )
-0.005

(0.001 )
-0.087
( 0.062)

-0.043
(0.040 )
-0.001
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.008)
0.003

( 0.004)
0.006
( 0.003)
0.036

OLS
0.074

(0.004)
0.025
(0.002)
0.055
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.000)
-0.147
(0.021)
-0.061
(0.026)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.003)

( 0.006)

0.042
(0.005)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
2225
2225
2225
2225
13762
13762
13762
13762
The standard errors are constructed to allow for arbitrary correlation
between individuals from the same county at age 17

lvi

1V2

0.052

0.065
( 0.046)
0.031

(0078)
0.031
(0.006)
0.043
(0.044)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.154
(0.026)
-0.065
(0.032)
0.001
(0.010)
0.001
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.006)

( 0.006)

0.104
( 0.016)

-0.005
( 0.001)

-0.160
( 0.026)

-0.064
( 0.033)

0.002

( 0.010)
0.000
( 0.010)

-0.001
( 0.006)

0.044
(0.009)
Yes
Yes

0.043
(0.009)
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
2225
13762

Yes
Yes
Yes
2225
13762

Table 5
Regression of Instrumental Variables

on other Determinants of Schooling and Wages
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Dependent Variable
College in Local Income
Covariate
at Seventeen
County
0.038
College in County
(0.091)

Local Wage at 17
Mean Local Income over
Working Life
Black
Hispanic

Math Score/b
Word Knowledge/b
General Science/lU
Automotive Knowledge

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings
Family Income
Sample Size

0006
(0.014)
0.013
(0.011)
0.032
(0.035)
0.005
(0.037)
0.030
(0.016)
0.014
(0.014)
0.023
(0.024)
-0.053
(0.017)
0.006
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
2413

0.748
(0.017)
-0.094
(0.070)
-0.007
(0.078)
-0.052
(0.033)
0.022
(0.054)
0.022
(0.054)
-0.006
(0.043)
-0.004
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.007)

0.007
(0.007)
0.035
(0.012)
2413

Table 6
Determinants of College Attendance
and High School Dropout
Average Derivatives from Probit Model
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Dependent Variable
High School
College
Covariate
Attendance
Dropout
0.166
-0.035
College in County
Local Income at 17

Mean Local Income over
Working Life
Black
Hispanic

Math Score
Word Knowledge

General Science
Automotive Knowledge

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings
Family Income

Geographic Controls
Cohort Controls
Sample Size

(0.036)
-0.043
(0.022)
0.035
(0.017)
0.170
(0.037)
0.144
(0.041)
0.032
(0.003)
0.017
(0.003)
0.010
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.003)
0.013
(0.004)
0.010
(0.007)
-0.016
(0.005)
0.011
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
2404

(0.030)

0.028
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.013)

-0.109
(0.023)

-0,034
(0.024)

-0.020
(0.002)

-0.007
(0.002)

-0.006
(0.003)
0.002
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.004)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.023
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
2404

Table 7
Schooling Regressions
on College in County interacted with
Alternative Covariates
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Covariate
College in County
Local Income at 17

(1)
0.596
(0.166)
-0.102

(2)
3.149

(3)
0.103

(4)
0.592

(0.072) (0.236) (0.229)
-0.074

-0.107

-0.104

(0.059) (0.038) (0.059) (0.058)

Mean Local Income over 0.067
0.038
0.068
0.065
Working Life
(0.046) (0.031) (0.046) (0.046)
Black
0.968
0.333
0.690
0.689

(0.211) (0.086) (0.125) (0.125)
Hispanic

Math Score

0.914

0.018

0.347

(0.379) (0.105) (0.142)
0.165

0.077

0.166

(0.010) (0.006) (0.010)
Word Knowledge
General Science

0.050

0.013

0.050

(0.010) (0.007) (0.010)
0.067

0.042

0.065

(0.015) (0.012) (0.015)
Automotive Knowledge

Highest Grade Father
Highest Grade Mother
Number of Siblings
Family Income

Blackx
College in County
Hispanicx
College in County
Highest Grade Fatherx
College in County
Highest Grade Motherx
College in County
Family Incomex
College in County
Number of Siblingsx
College in County
Sample Size

-0.067

-0.031

-0.066

(0.011) (0.007) (0.011)
0.051

-0.040

0.051

0.344
(0.142)
0.166
(0.010)
0.050
(0.010)
0.066
(0.015)
-0.066
(0.011)

0051

(0.016) (0.028) (0.016) (0.016)
0.038

0.074

0.038

0.038

(0.022) (0.053) (0.022) (0.022)
-0.046

-0.013

-0.046

-0.012

(0.016) (0.011) (0.016) (0.038)
0.092

0.068

-0.008

0.095

(0.022) (0.017) (0.068) (0.022)
-0.330
(0.220)
-0.635
(0.390)

0.071
(0.030)
-0.065
(0.055)
0.111
(0.067)

-0.039
(0.041)
2404

2404

2404

2404

Table 8
Results From Structural Schooling Model

Estimated Without Borrowing Constraints
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)

V. = cri

log ((k)es<wsw+<ioLs

—

+a2(S) + a3 (S) log(R) + XIT13TS + iTS•

log(w3) = 7s + Xi/3w +
Black
Hispanic

AFQT Score

Father Dropout
Father Some Coll

Father Coll Grad
Mother Dropout
Mother Some Coil

Mother Coll Grad
Number of Siblings
Family Income
Region

+ Eji/JE + E /3E2 + agO + iij,

Graduate

Attend

Graduate

High School
0.855
(0.169 )
0.136
0.187)
0.045
0.005)
-0.055
0.144)
0.076

College

College
1.570

( 0.258)

0.445
0.349)
-0.142
0.140)
0.077
0.295)
0.200
(0.396 )
-0.029
0.042)
0.162
0.043)
Yes

1.215

( 0.202)

0.488
( 0.212)

( 0.252)
0.539

0.054

( 0.279)
0.101

( 0.008)

( 0.019)

-0.123
(0.158)
0.233
(0.273 )
0.618

-0.028
( 0.198)
0.603
( 0.293)
1.322

( 0.359)

( 0.357)

-0.227

-0.392
(0.209)
0.376
(0.319)
0.907

( 0.157)

-0.162
( 0.318)
0.332
( 0.406)

( 0.417)

-0.092

-0.124

( 0.047)
0.121

( 0.055)
0.136

( 0.045)
Yes

( 0.054)
Yes

(Continued on Following Page)

Table 8 (Continued)
Local Labor Market Parameters (j3)
Attend
Graduate Attend Graduate
High School High School College College
Intercept
Local Income 17-18

0.044
0.009
(0.047)
( 0.022)
Mean Loc Inc over
0.302
0.293
Working Life
(0.017)
( 0.008)
Additional Parameters
Scale
1.281
(0.140)
0,452
High School Nesting (PH)
(0.146)
1.000
College Nesting (Pc)

5.689
(0.417)

(0.338)

0.300

0.300

(

-)

5.236

( -)

(—)

In this set of estimates we fixed the interest rate so that 1/(l + r) = S = 0.97.
Since this model over-parameterized the standard errors are likely to be misleading
The high school wage is the local Income at ages 17 and 181 the Long 'frm Income
is the average income during working age in age 17 county

Table 9
Results for Tests of Borrowing Constraints
From Structural Model
(P-value of Pseudo Likelihood Ratio Test in Parentheses)t
Rate of
Negative
Returnt Log-Likelihood
Specification
Unrestricted:
2547.69
1.031
Everyone
2547.35

Racial Groups:
Whites

1.031

Blacks
Hispanics

1.000
1.000

Parents Education:
Both College Educated
Father l2fMother 12
Father l2FMother Coll
Father CoUP Motherl2
Family Income:
Top Third
Middle Third

Bottom Third
Number of Sibling?:
Zeros
Two

1.031
1.000
1.000
1.034
1.031
1.032
1.037

(0.712)

2546.41
(0.278)

2546.90
(0.454)

2547.68
(0.990)

1.031
1.031
Four
1.031
These p-values are not strictly correct since we have not corrected for
the fact that the coefficients of the wage regression were estimated
* The "market rate of return" is fixed to be 1.03
*
In the other cases we interacted the rate with dummy variables. In
this one we just interact it with the number of siblings.

Table 10

Results from Structural Schooling Model
Allowing For Unobserved Heterogeneity in Borrowing Rates
= aiiog

(E)8(S) log(R4 + Xj3rs + ujrs.
()x;C)
wI3w+Xtois —

+a2(S) + a3

log(w3t) = 7s

+ Xiyfi + X/3 + Ejj)3E + E/3E3 + a56 + Vjj,

Distribution of Borrowing Rates (Ri)
Rates
Probability

1.030
1.00

1.071
0.00

Wage Equation
AFQT Score
Local Income
Black
Hispanic
Experience
Experience2
Intercept-Dropout
Intercept-HS Grad
Intercept-Some Coil
Intercept-Coll Grad
Factor Loading-Dropout(a0)
Factor Loading-Dropout(a1)
Factor Loading-Dropout(a2)
Factor Loading-Dropout(a3)
Family Background
Geographic Controls

0.007
0.027
-0.095
-0.047
0.064
-0.002
1.046
1.139
1.031
1.324
0.176
0.155
0.153
0.069
Yes
Yes

Taste Parameters (/3T)
Attend
High School College
Graduate

Black
Hispanic
AFQT Score

Father Dropout
Father Some Coil
Father Coll Grad
Mother Dropout
Mother Some Coil
Mother Coll Grad
Number of Siblings
Factor Loading (ST)
Region

0.632
0.057
0.043
-0.144
0.051
0.317
-0.166
0.144
0.198
-0.265
0.000
Yes

1.725
0.838
0.088
-0.235
0.678
1.243
-0.482
-0.271
0.650
-0.113
2.130
Yes

(Continued on Following Page)

Graduate
College
1.873
0.793
0.128
-0.108
0.900
1.683
-0.662
0.336
1.244
-0.099
2.130
Yes

Table 10 (Continued)

Local Labor Market Parameters (i)
Attend
Graduate Attend Graduate
High School High School College
2746

Intercept
Local Income 17-18
Mean Loc Inc Work Life

0.408
0.245

0.258
0.172

College
3.225

0.300

Additional Parameters
Scale
High School Nesting (PH)
College Nesting (Pc)

0.231
0.452
1.000

In this set of estimates we fixed the interest rate so that 1/(1 + r) = S = 0.97.

0.300

