                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                QUALITY OF BUREAUCRACY AND
                                OPEN-ECONOMY MACRO POLICIES


                                               Chong-En Bai
                                               Shang-Jin Wei


                                           Working Paper 7766
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w7766



                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 2000




We thank Yi Wu for superb research assistance, Leonado Bertolini, Steven Levitt, Natalia Tamirisa, Gian Maria
Milesi-Fenetti, and seminar participants at the World Bank, Florida International University, and the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York for helpful comments, Bill Easterly, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, and Natalia T.
Tamirisa for some of the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research, the World Bank, or any other organization that we are associated with.

   2000 by Chong-En Bai and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.
Quality of Bureaucracy and Open-Economy Macro Policies
Chong-En Bai and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 7766
June 2000
JELNo. F38, F4

                                           ABSTRACT
       Bureaucratic quality in terms of the level of corruption varies widely across countries, and
is in general slow to evolve relative to the speed with which many economic polices can be
implemented such as the imposition of capital controls. In this paper, we study the possibility that
quality of bureaucracy may be an important structural determinant of open-economy macro-policies,
in particular, the impositionlremoval of capital controls, and financial repression. We first derive
a model that delivers such a result. Bureaucratic corruption translates into reduced ability by the
government to collect tax revenue. Even if capital controllfinancial repression is otherwise
inefficient, as long as the government needs the revenue for public goods provision, it would have
to rely more on capital control/financial repression. For all countries for which we can obtain
relevant data, we find that more corrupt countries are indeed more likely to impose capital controls,
a pattern consistent with the model's prediction. The result of this paper suggests that a premature
removal of capital controls mandated by outside institutions could reduce rather than enhance
economic efficiency.


Chong-En Bai                                                  Shang-Jin Wei
School of Economics and Finance                               Kennedy School of Government
906 K.K Leung Building                                        Harvard University
The University of Hong Kong                                   79 JFK Street
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
baic@hku.hk                                                   and NBER
                                                              shang-jin_wei@harvard.edu
 1. Introduction

          Quality of bureaucracy varies widely across countries. In this paper, we examine its
 implications for open-economy macro policies. Specifically, we focus our discussion on the
 imposition of capital controls and financial repression as an example.
          Capital controls and financial repression in developing countries were once considered a
 severe hindrance to economic development (McKinnon, 1973; and Shaw, 1973). Recently, in
the aftermath of the 1997-98 Asian economic crisis, there is an interesting twist in the intellectual
wisdom. Most economists now say that capital account liberalization without a proper domestic
financial supervisory and regulatory structure in place is a recipe for financial disasters. Several
prominent economists go one more step, arguing that the benefits of capital account
liberalization are probably negligible (e.g., Rodrik, 1999), or that restrictions on capital
movement can serve useful policy functions if one believes that international portfolio flows and
short term credits are excessively volatile (Wyplosz, 1986; Rodrik, 1999; Rodrik and Velasco,
1999).
         We choose to look at capital controls/financial repression from a different angle, namely,
bureaucratic quality as a potential determinant. An important but sometime less appreciated fact
is that quality of bureaucracy evolves slowly relative to the speed with which a government can
implement many economic policies, such as to impose or remove capital controls. Widespread
bureaucratic corruption in a country results in a loss in the ability by the government to collect
fiscal revenues from the formal tax channel. Or more precisely, the marginal cost of collecting
tax revenues rises with the level of corruption. As a consequence, to finance the provision of
public goods, it would have to rely increasingly more on the otherwise inefficient capital control
/financial repression. In this case, a premature removal of capital controls (such as what may be
mandated by the International Monetary Fund) could reduce rather than enhance economic
efficiency. This is a separate point from the possibility that a premature removal of capital
controls may increase the likelihood of a financial crisis.
         There are two relevant strands of the literature. First, a number of papers have examined
the consequences or determinants of bureaucratic corruption, including Rose-Ackerman (1978),
Shleifer and Vishny (1993), Mauro (1995), Ades and Di Tella (1997 and 1999), and Wei
                                                              3



     (1997)1. Second, there are also a humber ofpapers that have examined consequences or
     determinants of capital controls, including Alesina and Tabellini (1989), Epstein and Schor
     (1992), Dellas and Stoclcman (1993), Dooley and Isard (1980), Lane and Rojas-Suarez (1992),
     Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez(l 993), Alesina, Grilli and Milesi-Ferrettj (1994), Aizenman and
     Guidotti (1994), Bartolini and Drazer (1997), and Grilli and Miles-Ferretfi (1995).
            As far as we know, none of the previous papers has directly looked at the connection
    between corruption and capital controls. Of course, those papers that emphasize the public
    finance motivation for capital controls are direct predecessors to this paper. Our contribution is
    to argue (and to provide the first model and first piece of evidence) that bureaucratic corruption
    may be the underlying reason for the difficulty in tax collection and in turn for the greater
    reliance on capital controls.
            It is possible that the existence of capital controls breeds corruption as firms/individuals
    find it necessary to pay bribes in order to circumvent the control. Indeed, we need to take into
    account this possibility when we turn to the empiridal examination. The central focus of this
    paper is on the reverse question: how the imposition and severity of capital controls are affected
    by the extent of corruption in the country. In other words, we take the extent of bureaucratic
    corruption as an exogenous "state of nature," in the sense that it is part of the public institutional
    infrastructure that is slow to evolve. More precisely, a government or top political leader is
    assumed to be able to impose/remove capital control or change its severity much more swiftly
    than she can with the extent of bureaucratic corruption in the country2.
           While we use the term "bureaucratic corruption" in the paper, we actually have in mind
 various dimensions of the quality of bureaucracy, including government efficiency and burden of
regulation, and not just bribe-taking by officials. Unfortunately, there does not existseparate
data that allows us to measure separately the different dimensions of bureaucratic quality. What
we can feasibly gather are measures of bureaucratic corruption based on the perceptions of
experts, firm managers or citizens. Our suspicion is that the different dimensions of bureaucratic
quality are highly correlated. Nonetheless, it is useful to keep this broad perspective in mind in
interpreting our results.



2
  See Pardhan (1997) and Wei (2000) for a more complete review of the literature.
  A possible extension of the model is to allow corruption and capital controls (or policy distortions in general) to
influence each other, possibly leading to multiple equilibria.
                                                     4


            Our paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 presents a model that formalizes

 our story. Section 3 describes the data that are used in the empirical analysis. Section 4 reports
 the empirical evidence on our hypothesis. Finally, section 5 concludes.


 2. A Theoretical Model


           In this section, we present a theoretical model in which capital control is endogenously
 determined by the government in a way that is related to the level ofcorruption in the country.
 Our model assumes a welfare maximizing government (top leader) who collects revenue to
 provide public goods, but our central story would go through if the top leader simply collects
 revenue for her private consumption.


 2.1 Setup of the Model
           We consider a model with a representative investor in the private sector, a bureaucrat,
 and a government. The representative private investor's utility increases with the amount of the
public good provided by the government, denoted by X, as well as his private consumption,
denoted by Y, whose price is normalized to be one. Specifically, we assume that the expected
utility fimction is
                  U=
where> 0 andy>0.
        The investor is endowed with a fixed wealth "toO His consumption depends on tax T and
investment opportunities. We assume that he can invest his net wealth Y0 — T in a portfolio of
domestic and foreign assets. Denote the return to the domestic asset by Rd and that to the foreign
asset by       The two returns can be different for reasons we will discuss later. Suppose the
investor allocates a share of his net wealth to the foreign asset. Then his consumption will be
                          -
                 Y = (Y0 T)[aRf+ (I-a)Rd]

        For simplicity, let us say that both the domestic and foreign assets are risk free. In the
absence of capital controls, both are equal to the world interest rate, Rf Li = r*. Of course, in
this case, the representative domestic agent is indifferent between domestic andforeign assets,
and the optimal a is undetermined.
                                                     5


          In this model, we recognize that capital control is an instrument of financial repression.
  It has two effects. First, because circumventing capital control is costly, it reduces the rate of
  return on investing aboard that is available to domestic investor, so that now R C r*. Second,
  because circumventing capital control runs the risk of being caught and punished, the effective
 rate of return on the foreign asset faced by the domestic agent now becomes risky, and in
 equilibrium would on average be somewhat higher than the domestic (still risk-free) interest rate,
 E{Rf} > R To be simple and concrete, we will assume (rather than derive) a specific functional
 form linking the extent of capital control, denoted by k, and the equilibrium domestic and foreign
 rates of return.

                 R4r*pk
                 R1 = rt - pk + p1k + kv

 where p is the effectiveness of capital control, v is a random variable with a normal distribution
 N(O, a2) and represents the risk that capital control causes to investing in foreign assets, and p
 indicates that capital control is less effective in depressing the return to foreign assets than to
 domestic assets. Ideally, we should assume a distribution for the random variable, v, that is
 bounded from above. For simplicity, we make it an unbounded normal variable.
         The amount of public good provided by the government, X, depends on its available
 resources, denoted by Z.
                X=f(Z),
where f is an increasing and concave fl.mction.
        The government raises tax T. Due to corruption, part of the tax revenue is stolenby the
bureaucrat. Suppose the bureaucrat's stealing is
                S = S(T, 0)

where 0 is a parameter representing the weakness ofgovernance, or the degree of corruption.
We assume that S is increasing in T and 0 respectively and is convex in T. Furthermore, 5T8 > 0.
In other words, as either the total amount of tax or corruption increases, stealing by bureaucrats
also increases. Furthermore, as either total tax or corruption increases, marginal stealing per unit
of tax collected also increases. In Appendix A, we offer a plausible justification for these
assumptions. We label the fraction of formal taxes that disappears as "stealing" by the
corruption-prone bureaucrats. Alternatively, we could also interpret it as "waste" of government
resources by the inefficient and corrupt bureaucrats.
                                                         6



           The government's total usable fiscal resources, Z, consist of two components: an explicit

 tax revenue net of stealing (or waste), and an implicit tax revenue derived from financial
 repression. One possible example of implicit revenue is the saving by the government in its cost
 of borrowing from the domestic capital market when the domestic interest rate is artificially
 suppressed to below the world interest rate3. We assume that the implicit revenue from the
financial depression depends on the reduction in domestic interest rate as a result of capital
controls, pk, and the total amount of domestic savings, (Yo — T). Then,
                  Z = [T — S(T, )] + [4pk(Yo — T)]
In Appendix C, we employ an alternative assumption in which the implicit tax revenue is
$pk(l-a)(Yo — T). In other words, it depends only on the amount of domestic savings that is not
invested aboard. We show that while this complicates the mathematical derivations, the basic
qualitative conclusion of the model is still the same.
          We consider a sequential game in which the government moves first, choosing explicit
tax T and the degree of capital control k to maximize the social welfare, taking as given the
weakness of the public institution (i.e. the extent of corruption), the bureaucrat's stealing
flmction, and the private investor's reaction function. The representative private investor moves
next, choosing an optimal allocation between capital flight and domestic investment, taking into
account the tax and capital control. We solve the game with backward induction.


2.2 The Private Investor's Decision
          Given his portfolio choice a, the private investor's consumption is
                  Y=(Yo_T)(r*pk+aptk+akv).
Then, his expected utility is


where
                 CE = (Yo — T)(r* - pk + apik) — O.5öcz2k2(Yo —
is   his certainty equivalent consumption level. Then, an expected utility maximizing investor
should choose a to maximize CE. The first-order condition for a is


 One could also think ofseigniorage revenue as another source of implicit revenue. Giovannini and de Melo (1993)
made a conceptual distinction between financial repression and seigniorage, but also showed that the two are
positively correlated across countries.
                                                            7



                  (Y0 — T)p - Sczk2(Y0 —                 =0
 and the optimal choice of a is
                     = [kp1J / [6k2c2(Yo —
                                                    T)j = pt/[6ka2(Y0 — T)j.
 a* is the proportion of after tax wealth invested in foreign assets, or the extent of capital flight.

 The above equation implies that capital flight decreases with the risk ofthe flight, k2a2 and with
 the rate of risk aversion, 6, but increases with the premium ofinvesting aboard, kpr
         Given the optimal portfolio choice a", the private investor's utility level is
                    = -exp{-yf[T —
                                   S(T, 8) + 4pk(Yg — Tj] - 6(Y0 — T)(r* - pk) — 0.5p//a2}.


 2.3. The Government's Decision
        The government chooses k and T to maximize the above utility level of the representative
 private investor, or equivalently, the governnent maximizes
                 Ug(k, T) = yf[T — S(T, 0) + $pk(Y0 — T)] +               — T)(r* - pk) +


Lemma 1: Suppose *" <1 and Gis not too smalL Then, the optimal T is determined by

                Si(T,8)=1Ør*                                                                        (1)
and the optimal k is determined by

                T— S'T 9)       çbp/q'Yo
                                           —
                                               T)   = QJ'[8/(y4)].
                                                                                                    (2)


Proof: The government's objective fUnction U5 is not necessarily concave in T. Therefore, it is
not clear whether or not the first order conditions of the optimization problem are sufficient. To
circumvent this problem, we maximize the objective function in two steps.
        First, for any given T, U5 is a concave function of k and the optimal k satisfies the first-
order condition
                yf'[T — S(T, 8) + $pk(Yo — T)]4p( Yo — T) - öp(Yo — T) = 0,
or
                yf'[T — S(T, 8) + 4pk(Y0 — T)]4 - 6 = 0,

which implies
                T — S(T,   8) + pk(Y0 — T) = (f')'[ö/(y$)j           Zt
                                                              8



             Then, the government's problem becomes to maximize Ug subject to the above first-order
     condition for k; that is,
                     Max TUg(k, T) = yffT — S(T, 9) + $pk(Y0 — 1)] + 6(Yo — T)(r* -
                                                                                    pk) + O.5p/a2
                     subject to: T — 5(1, 0) + +pk(Yo — T) =        Z.
  From the constraint,

                     pk(Yg —1) = [Z* — T + 5(1, 9)]I.
  Substitute the above equation into 1g• Then

                    U5 (T) = yf(Z*) + Sr*(Yo — T) - Spk(Y0 —1) + O.5p?1a2
                           = yf(Zt) + Sr*(Y0 — -                    I
                                               T) S[Z* — + S(T, 0)J/c + O.5p?/o2.
 By the assumption that 5(1, 0) is convex in I, the reduced form ofUg is concave in T. Then the
 optimal T is determined by the first-order condition that
                    Ug'(T) = 6r* +           - 3ST(T, 0)/i   = 0,
 or

                    ST(T, 0) =   1   - r*.
                                                                                                 Q.ED.

 Remark 1: If$ is so large that 1 - $r* <0, or in other words, if financial repression is
                                                                                              very
 effective at raising revenue for the government, the optimal T = 0. To see this, note that U5'(T) <
 O   for all I if I - r* <Q
Remark 2: Suppose 1 - 4r* > 0. If corruption is negligible arid hence stealing by the bureaucrat
is negligible, then it is optimal not to have any capital control. Specifically, ff0 is so small that
ST(T, 9) < 1 -    r* for all T C '0, then Ug(T) > 0 for all I C Y0 and it is optimal to choose las
large as is necessary to fulfill the need for public good provision and to choose k 0.


           The lemma implies that both direct taxation and capital control are used for the
government to obtain resources to finance public good provision. The intuitive reason for this
mixture to be optimal is as follows. The stealing function 5(1, 0) is convex in T. Therefore, the
marginal cost of T increases. On the other hand, the marginal cost of capital control— depressed
return to investment — is a constant. Then, the marginal cost of T is higher than that of k when T
is too high, and is lower when T is too low. As a result, only part of the expenditure for public
good provision should be financed by direct taxation T.
                                                     9




 2. 4. Comparative Statics



 Proposition 1: The optimal capital control k increases with the level of bureaucratic corruption
 6 while the optimal tax collection T decreases with the corruption level 8.


         The proofs for this proposition and the next are provided in Appendix B. The results in
 Proposition I are not difficult to understand intuitively. As corruption increases, more tax
 revenue will be stolen, then it is more desirable to finance the public good by capital
 controllfmancial repression rather than by direct taxation.


Proposition 2: (z) The optimal tax T is independent of the degree of risk aversion p but the
optimal capital control k decreases with p. (ii) The optimal tax T decreases with 0but the
relationship between the optimal k and 0 is ambiguous. (iii) The optimal T is independent of r
and c5 but the optimal k increases with yand decreases with c5, where 7is the importance of the

public good in the representative private investor s' utility while S is that ofprivate consumption.
(iv) The optimal T and k are both independent of pj and ci.


        Intuitively, as p increases, the returns to investment decrease, and the government
resources from capital control increase, at the same proportion. This implies that the level of
public good provision and T should not change. With the increase in the government's ability to
extract resources from capital control, there is less need for the control in order to obtain the
given level of resources for public good provision; that is the optimal Ic decreases. This is the
reason for part (i) of Proposition 2.
        The intuition for (ii) is as follows. As $ increases, the government can get more resources
from capital control and therefore has less need for direct taxation, resulting in lower T. The
increase in has two effects on k. The positive one (similar to the substitution effect) is that
more resources should be extracted from capital control and the negative one (similar to the
income effect) is that less control is needed in order to extract a given level of resources. It is not
clear which one of these effects dominate.
                                                    10



          As the public good becomes more important to the investor's
                                                                          utility relative to private
 consumption, i.e., asy increases or S decreases, the benefit of capital control — increasing the
 resources available for public provision — becomes larger and the cost of capital control —
 decreasing the returns to private investment — becomes smaller. Therefore, k should increase.
 The effect of y and S on T is not so straightforward. When thepublic good becomes more
 important, it seems that more tax should be levied to increase public good provision. A larger T,
 however, reduces the opportunity for the government to obtain resources from capital control,
 thus reducing public good provision. The two effects of T happen to cancel with each other in
 this model. As a result, the optimal T is independent of y and S. This is the reason for (iii).
          To understand (iv), note that Pr and a2 enter into the government's objective ifinction
 Ug(k, T) only through a term that is independent of k and T. Therefore, the marginal effects of k
 and T on Ug(k, T) are independent of Pr and a2. Consequently, the optimal k and T are both
 independent of p and a2


3. Data


        The detailed definition and source for the data as well as theirmanipulation are explained
in Appendix D. Here, we provide a brief description on the most important variables in our
empirical analysis.


3.1 Capital Control
        Our capital controls are derived from the annual issues of the IMF's. There are five
categories of restrictions on foreign exchange transactions that the JMF has consistently coded
throughout our sample, 1984-1997. They are (1) existence of multiple exchange rates, (2)
payment arrears and bilateral payments arrangement, (3) controls on payments for invisible
transactions and current transfers, (4) controls on proceeds from exports and/or invisible
transactions, and finally, (5) controls on capital account transactions. For each category, the IMF
source indicates whether the country has restriction or not.
       We derive a discreet-valued measure of the severity of capital control by aggregating the
five categories. Thus, the measure can take one of the six values from zero to five, with zero if
                                                   II

 the country has no controls in any of the five categories, and five if it has controls in all five

 categories. The exact definitions of the six categories provided in Appendix B.


 3.2 Bureaucratic Corruption
         We use four different measures of corruption: ICRG, OCR, WDR, and TI indexes. In
 addition, we use two variables as instrumental variables for corruption: legal corruption and
 democracy.


(A) International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) Index.
        Produced every year since 1982 by Political Risk Services, a private international
investment risk service. The ICRO corruption index is apparently based on the opinion of
experts and supposed to capture the extent to which "high government officials are likely to
demand special payments" and to which "illegal payments are generally expected throughout
lower levels of government" in the form of "bribes connected with import and export licenses,
exchange controls, tax assessments, police protection, or loans."


(B) Global Competitiveness Report (GCR Index
        Unlike the ICRO indices, the OCR Index is based on a 1996 survey of firm managers,
rather than experts or consultants. Sponsored by the World Economic Forum (WEF), a Europe-
based consortium with a large membership of firms, and designed by the Harvard Institute for
International. Development (FIIID), this survey asked the responding firms about various aspects
of "competitiveness" in the host countries where they invest.           2381 firms in 58 countries
answered the question on corruption which asked the respondent to rate the level of corruption
on a one-to-seven scale according to the extent of "irregular, additional payments connected with
import and export permits, business licenses, exchange controls, tax assessments, police
protection or loan applications." The OCR corruption index for a particular country is the
average of all respondents' ratings for that country.


(C) World Development Report (WDR) Index
       Similar to the OCR Index, the WDR index is based on a 1996 survey of firms conducted
by the World Bank for its 1997 World Development Report. Every respondent was asked a long
                                                     12



  list of questions, one of which was on perceived level of
                                                            corruption. The question is essentially
  identical to the one in the OCR survey. The WDR survey covers over 70 or so countries (many
  of which are not in the WDR sample, and the reverse is also true). The WDR survey tend to
  cover more medium and small firms whereas the OCR survey had more large firms.


 (D) Transparency International (TI) Index
       Produced annually since 1995 by Transparency International, an international non-
 governmental organization dedicated to fight corruption worldwide, the index is based on a
 weighted average of approximately ten surveys of varying coverage. It ranks countries on a one-
 to-ten scale.
         As a survey of surveys, the TI index has its advantages and disadvantages. If the
 measurement errors in different surveys are independent and identically distributed (lid), the
 averaging process used to produce the TI index may reduce the measurement error. But iid
 assumption may not hold. Moreover, since different surveys cover different subsets of countries,
 the averaging process may introduce new measurement errors when cross-country rankings are
 produced. One should also note that, as the TI indexes in different years are derived from
 potentially different set of surveys, they should not be used to measure changes in corruption
 level over time for a particular country.


B. First IV for Corruption: Democracy
        The measure of democracy is derived by adding up an index for civil liberties and
another for political rights, both are composed by the Freedom House. Liberties indexmeasures
the extent to which people are able to express their opinion openly without fears of reprisals and
are protected in doing so by an independent judiciary. Though this index reflects rights to organize
and demonstrate as well as freedom of religion, education, travel and otherpersonal rights; more
weight was given to those liberties that are most directly related to the expression ofpolitical
rights. This variable is an index and not in logs.
        Political rights index measures rights to participate meaningfully in the political process on
a scale of one to seven where lower numbers indicate greater political rights (see Gastil, 1989). A
high ranking country must have a fully operating electoral procedure, usually including a
significant opposition vote. It is likely to have bad a recent change of government fromone party
                                                     13



 to another, an absence of foreign domination, decentralized political power and a consensus that
 allows all segments of the population some power. The index was constructed on the basis of
 satisfaction of the above and other related criteria by the countries inquestion. This variable is an
 index and not in logs.
         Both Index range from 1 to 7. Smaller number means higher degree of freedom.
 Democracy is defined as (7-civ)+(7-pol).


 F. Second IV Variable for Bureaucratic Corruption: Corruption in the Judicial System
         Corruption in a country's judicial system is based on the same OCR survey that produced
 the OCR bureaucratic corruption measure. Question 8.09 in the survey asked the respondents to
 rate the level of corruption in the judicial system based on the extent to which"[i]rregular
 payments to judges or other officials involved in the enforcement and execution ofjudgements
 are not common and do not influence the outcome of court proceedings" (lstronglydisagree,
 7=strongly agree). We rescaled the index (7 - original score) so that a larger number means more
corrupt judicial system.
         Tables la and lb report summary statistics for the key variables and their pairwise
correlations.


4. Statistical Analysis


        Since our measure of capital controls can take seven discrete values from a minimum of
zero to a maximum of five, we employ an ordered Probit specification:


        Capital Control in Countryj = k
        if      Dk< y.* Dk+[
        where Yj*= eCoptio+x+ej

k = 0, 1,2,..., 5; D0 = -. and D6 = D1 D5 are parameters to be estimated together with
scalar B and vector f3; X is a vector of control variables other than corruption; and ej is an
independently and identically distributed normal variate with a zero mean.
                                                    14



          Table 2 presents simple regressions of the measure of
                                                         capital control severity on
  corruption and a dummy indicating membership in OECD. OECD membership in recent years
  often requires capital account liberalization (which was the case when Mexico and Korea
  obtained their membership in 1994 and 1996, respectively). The first four columns use four
 different measures of corruption: TI, OCR, WDR and ICRG, respectively. In each of these
 regressions, the extent of capital controls is positively related to the countries' perceived level of
 corruption.
         By using the ICRU corruption measure over 1982-96, we could implement a quasi-fixed
 effects panel regression where year and region dummies are included as additional regressors.
 The result is reported in Column 5. The coefficient on the ICRO-corruption measure is smaller
 than the corresponding one in the cross-sectionregression in Column 4. But it remains positive
 and significant at the ten percent level, again consistent with the hypothesis that capital controls
 are more likely in more corrupt countries.
         One may be concerned that the four measures of corruption so far can be tainted by
 reverse causality. More precisely, since illegallirregular payments made to circumventexchange
 controls are part of the criteria used to assess the degree ofcorruption, in a very direct sense,
 countries with a more severe capital controls would also be rated as having more corruption. To
deal with this, we employ an instrumental variable approaáh with variables that are related with
the extent of corruption in a country but arguably not directly a consequence of capital controls.
Two such variables are considered. The first is a measure ofcorruption in a country's judicial
system. When a country's legal system is corrupt, officials who ethbezzle government tax
revenues or otherwise corrupt are less likely to be punished. The second variable is a measure of
the degree of democracy (civil liberties and political rights). Democracy enhances
accountability. Lack of democracy breeds corruption and embezzlement. Neither legal
corruption nor democracy is likely to be directly influenced by the imposition or severity of
capital controls.
        In the last column of Table 2, we use these two variables as instruments for the OCR-
corruption measure. As we can see, the point estimate on corruption is somewhat smaller than
the corresponding regression without the IVs (column 2in Table 2). However, the coefficient
remains positive and statistically significant. So this is stronger evidence thatmore corrupt
countries are more likely to impose capital controls.
                                                             15



           In Table 3, we add three regional dummies to the regression (in addition to the OECD
 membership dummy). Sub-Sahara African countries always have a positive sign in all six
 regressions (indicating a tendency to have more severe capital controls), whereas East Asian and
 Latin American countries mostly have a negative sign (indicating a tendency to have less
 controls). However, for each regional dummy, the coefficient is often insignificantly different
 from zero in many specifications. For our purpose, the most important observation is that the
 coefficient on corruption remains positive in all specifications and significant in five out of six
 specifications (including one in which corruption is instrumented by legal corruption and
 democracy).
          Grilli and Miles-Ferretti (1995) and Miles-Ferretti (1998) have argued that government
 consumption-to-GDF ratio and government debt-to-GDP ratio are proxies for a government's
 preference for spending. This could be perfectly consistent with our theoretical model: other
 things constant, if the goverliment prefers to spend more money, it would want to collect more
 revenues both from the formal tax channel and simultaneously from the financial repression
channel with tightened capital controls4. In addition to the government's preference for
spending, these authors also propose proxies for the (marginal) cost of capital controls. In
particular, they, argue that an independent central bank makes it difficult for the government to
rely on senioiriage revenue, and hence reduces its incentive to impose capital controls.
Following Cukieman, Edwards and Tabellini (1992), they use an index of legal independence of
central banks and a count of average annual turnover rate of the central bank governors as two
measures of central bank independence. Related to this, the rate of inflation can be a more direct
measure of the degree of fmancial reptession the government is willing to exercise. These
authors argue ifirther that a government is less likely to impose capital controls if it has been
experiencing a current account deficit.
         It is useful to note that, while these variables were used by these authors in their
regressions, one could argue that most of them are also related to the underlying corruption in a
country in a way that is consistent with our model. For example, rather than viewing central
bank independence as exogenous, a corrupt country may be more inclined to choose a non-zero
inflation rate and at the same time not to have an independent central bank5.

 In our. model, the equilibrium capital control, k, rises with an increase in the relative importance of the public
goods in the government's objective ftrnction, y/ö. See Proposition 2 in the model section.
  See Huang and Wei (2000) for a model and some evidence.
                                                     16


           In any case, as a robustness check, we include these variables in our specification
                                                                                             as
   additional regressors. The results are reported in Table 4. Since the number of
                                                                                  countries that
   have non-missing values for these variables is small (among those countries that also
                                                                                         have
   corruption measures), we have between 23-30 observations in the current regressions, less than
  half than the corresponding regressions in Tables 2 and 3. In the first three columns
                                                                                             of Table 4,
  where a different measure of corruption is used in each column, we see that there is
                                                                                         some
  evidence that countries with high
                                    government consumption-toGDP ratios also tend to impose
  capital controls. However, there is no systematic support in our regressions that current account
  deficit, high inflation, and high government debt-to-GDP ratios tend to be associated with
                                                                                                  more
  severe capital controls (once corruption and other variables are taken into account). In fact, the
  signs on the coefficients for inflation and
                                           government debt are negative. Importantly, even in
  this very small sample, corruption measure continues to exhibit a positive and
                                                                                 statistically
  significant sign.
         With the ICRG measures of corruption, we experiment with two versions of panel
 regressions. The first is a quasi-fixed effects regression in which regional dummies in addition to
 year durnnies are included. The second is a random-effects regression in which random country
 effects in addition to year dummies are included. In the first panel regression, there is
                                                                                        some
 support for a positive association between inflation andcapital controls. In both regressions,
 corruption continues to enter positively and significantly.
         Finally, we use the extent of legal corruption and the degree of democracy as instruments
 for general corruption (the last two columns), we find that the coefficients on
                                                                                corruption are
positive and statistically significant. Therefore, even in a small sample such as this and with
more control variables, there is robust evidence that more corrupt countries are more likely to
impose capital controls.
        Since 1997, the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions (AREAER) has given substantially more detailed information on a country's
restrictions on up to 50 items of capital account transactions (and
                                                                    similarly detailed information
on restrictions on current account transactions). This in principle would enrich our analysis.
However, the tradeoff is that such detailed information is only available for 41 countries, many
of which do not have data on corruption
                                          ratings. Given our already small number of countries in
the sample, this could be a significant cost.
                                                    17



         In any case, we relate two separate measures of current account and capital account
 restrictions based. on the detailed information to the measures ofcorruption in Tables 6 and 7.
 The results are interesting. When the dependent variable is current accountrestrictions, the
 coefficient for corruption is insignificant in four of five regression (Table6). However, when the
 dependent variable is capital account restrictions, corruption has a positive and significant
 coefficient in three out of five regressions including the one with instrumental variables (Table
 7). To the extent that it is primarily the capital account restrictions rather than current account
 restrictions that help to generate financial repression in the country, these fmdings are also
 consistent with our hypothesis.
        As a cross-validation, we take a look at our hypothesis from a different perspective. Our
 central story in the model is a revenue loss mechanism: the government has difficulty in
 collecting revenue from the formal tax channels and hence has to rely more on capital controls
 and financial repression. Therefore, one would think that if tax evasion in a country can be
 measured, it should be positively correlated with corruption. In the Global Competitiveness
 Report survey, respondents were asked to assess the extent of tax evasion in the country. We use
 the mean response for each country as a (subjective) measure of the extent of tax evasion. In
Table 8, we regress tax evasion on corruption and statutory tax rate. We fmd that tax evasion is
more pervasive in a country with a higher tax rate and a high level of corruption, exactly as our
hypothesis would suggest.


5. Conclusion


    This paper studies bureaucratic corruption as a determinant of capital controls. In our model,
capital control is an instrument of fmancial repression. While it entails efficiency loss for the
economy, it also generates implicit revenue for the government. The more severe the
bureaucratic corruption in a country, the more difficult it is to collect formal taxes. As a result,
the government has to rely more on capital controls/financial repression. In cross-country
regressions, we find that more corrupt countries, measured by any of the four corruption indexes,
or instrumented by the degree of democracy and legal corruption in a country, do tend to impose
more severe capital controls.
                                                  Is

    If our story is true, then as countries gradually develop better public institutions along their
development trajectory, including reducing bureaucratic corruption over time, they will choose
to gradually liberalize their capita! accounts. However, a premature removal of capital controls
forced upon by external organizations could reduce economic efficiency.
                                                 19



 References

        Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella, 1999, "Rents, Competition, and Corruption,"
 American Economic Review 89(4): 982-993.
        Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella, 1997, 'National Champions and Corruption: Some
 Unpleasant Interventionist Arithmetic," The Economic Journal, Vol. 107 (443): 1023-42, July.
        Altshuler, R., H. Grubert, and T.S. Newlon, 1998, "Has U.S. Investment Abroad Become
 More Sensitive to Tax Rates?" NBER Working Paper 6382, January.
        Alesina, Alberto, Vittorio Grilli, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1994, "The Political
 Economy of Capital Controls," eds, By Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin, Capital Mobility:
 The Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth, Cambridge University Press for the Centre
 for Economic Policy Research.

        Bai, Chong-En, David Li, Yingyi Qian, and Yijiang Wang, 1999, "Limiting Government
Predation through Anonymous Banking: A Theory with Evidence from.China." Unpublished
working paper.
        Bardhan, Pranab, 1997, "Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues," Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. )Q(XV (September): 1320-1346.
        Bertolini, Leonardo, and Allen Dra.zen, 1997, "Capital Account Liberalization as a
Signal," American Economic Review, 87W: 138-154.
       Cukierman, A. S. Edwards, and U. Tabellini, 1992, "Measuring the Independence of
Central Banks and Its Effects on Policy Outcomes, " World Bank Economic Review, 6, 353-98.
       Giovamiini, Alberto, and Martha de Melo, 1993, "Government Revenue from Financial
Repression," American Economic Review, 83(4): 953-963.
       Grilli, Vittorio, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1995, "Economic Determinants of
Capital Controls," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 42(3): 517-551. September.
       Li, Wei, 1999, "Optimal Financial Repression and Asset pricing: Theory and Evidence
from China," working paper, Duke University.
       Huang, Haizhou, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2000, "Corruption, Inflation, and Central Bank
Independence," in preparation, IMP and Harvard University.
       Johnston, Barry and Natalia Tamirisa, 1998, "Why Do Countries Use Capital Controls?"
IMF Working Paper WP/98/1 81, December.
                                               20



        Johnston, Barry, with Mark Swinburne, Alexander Kyei, Bernard Laurens, David

Mitchem, mci Otker, Susana Sosa and Natalia Tamirisa, 1999. Exchange Rate Arrangements and
Currency Convertibility: Developments and Issues, Washington: International Monetary Fund.
       Kaufmann, Daniel, and Shang-Jin Wei, 1999, "Does 'Grease Money' Speed Up the
Wheels of Commerce?" NBER Working Paper 7093.
       McKinnon, Ronald, 1973, Money and Finance in Economic Development
       Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, 1998, "Why Capital Controls? Theory and Evidence," in
Sylvester Eijffinger and Harry Huizinga, eds., Positive Political Economy: Theory and Evidence,
Cambridge University Press.
       Rodrik, Dani, 1999, "Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?" in Should the IMF
Pursue Capital Account Convertibility? by Stanley Fischer and others, Essays in International
Finance 207, Princeton University, Department of Economics, International Finance Section.
       Rodrik, Dani, 1999, "Governing the Global Economy: Does One Architectural Style Fit
All?" Brookings Trade Forum, p105-126.
       Rodrik, Dani, and Andres Velasco, 1999, "Short-term Flows," The World Bank Annual
Bank Conference on Development Economics.
       Shaw, Edward S., 1973, Financial Deepening in Economic Development, New York:
Oxford University Press.
       Tamirisa, Natalia, 1999, "Exchange and Capital Controls as Barriers to Trade," IMF Staff
Papers, 460): 69-88. March.
       Wei, Shang-Jin, 1997, "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?" NBER
Working Paper 6030, forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics, February, 2000.
       Wei, Shang-Jin, 1999, "Corruption, Composition of Capital Flows, and Currency Crises,"
Harvard University and the World Bank.
       Wei, Shang-Jin, 2000, "Bribery in the Economies: Grease or Sand?" Harvard University
and World Bank.
       Wyplosz, Charles, 1986, "Capital Controls and Balance of Payments Crises," Journal of
International Money and Finance 5, 167-179.
                                                   21



Appendix A: Justification of the Bureaucrat's Decision
        In this appendix, we derive the properties of function S(T, 9) by considering the
bureaucrat's decision of choosing S. B is a measure of the extent of corruption or the weakness of
public institutions. To simpli& the derivation, we interpret 9 as a measure of the total
resources available for monitoring the bureaucrat. Suppose (GT)' units of resources are devoted
to the monitoring of each unit of tax revenue. Furthermore, the probability that the bureaucrat is
found stealing from any given unit of tax revenue is p(SIT)(BT)', where qi is a convex function
and SIT is the proportion of each unit of tax revenue being stolen. Finally, the penalty imposed
on the bureaucrat for being caught stealing from a unit of tax revenue is C. For each unit of tax
revenue, the bureaucrat steals SIT, and the expected cost (penalty) of his stealing is Cty(SIT)(OTy
  Then the bureaucrat's total expected payoff is

               T[SIT - Cw(SIT)(OT)1] = S - TCqx(SIT)(BTy'.
Suppose the bureaucrat chooses S to maximize the above expression. Then his optimal choice of
S is given by the first-order condition
               1—   Cw'(SIT)(BTI' = 0.
Consequently, the optimal S is
               S = Tt(9TC'),

where t is the inverse function of qi' and is increasing. The derivative of S with respect to8 is
                  = Tr'(9TC')TC' > o.
The derivative of S with respect to T is
                  = t + Tx'BC'> 0.
Differentiate the above expression and rearrange. Then,
                    = 9C1t'(z)[2 + zt"(z)/t'(z)J,
where z = 9TC'. Suppose function t satisfies the condition that
               2 + zt"(z)/'r'(z)> 0,                                                                (4)
which holds for t(z) = A(z+b) + C1 and for t(z) = Ae' + C2, for any A, B, b, C1, C2, and l > 0.
Then, Sn> 0, i.e., S is convex in T. Similarly, we can prove that STe> 0 under condition (4).
                                                      22


Appendix B: Proofs of Propositions 1 and 2


Proof of Proposition I
Differentiate equation (I) in Lemma I with respect to 9. Then
                SUTD+STB=O,
which implies
                To=-STo/Sn<O.
Differentiate equation (2) in Lemma 1 with respect to 8. Then

                To-STTG-So+4p(Yo—T)ke-$pkTeO,
or
                      —
                          T)k8 =   S0
                                        —
                                            T90 - S - 4pk).                                         (3)
By equation (1),
                1 SI$pk=(r* -pk)=4R,j>O.
Since S9 > 0 and T9 C 0, (3) implies
                k8>0.                                                                           QE.D

Proof of Proposition 2
(i) From equation (1),. 1 is independent of p. Then, equation (2) implies that pk is independent of
p. which in turn implies that Ic decreases with p.

(ii) Differentiating equation (1) with respect to $ yields
                    = r*ISyr C 0.

Differentiating equation (2) with respect to 4 and rearranging yield
                4p(Yo -   T) = -pk(Yo - T) - T (1-ST - $pk) - { [(f)i'(6'$)}(S'$2).
On the right hand side, the first term is negative, the second term is positive as T < 0 and by the
proof of Proposition 1, and the third term is also positive because 1' is a decreasing fUnction.
Therefore, the sign of 1c whether the first term dominates, or is dominated by, the other two
terms.
(iii) By equation (1), T is independent of y and S. The right hand side of equation (2) increases
with y and decreases with S as f' is a decreasing function. Therefore, k increases with y and
decreases with S.
                                                  23



 (iv) Both equations (1) and (2) are independent of Pr and a2. Therefore, the optimal T and k are
both independent of p' and a2.          Q.E.D.




Appendix C: Alternative Assumption on the Implicit Revenue from Financial Repression


        In this appendix, we consider the alternative assumption that the implicit tax revenue
from financial repression is pk-a)(Yo-T). With this assumption, the amount of the
government's usable fiscal resources is
               Z = [T — S(T, B)]     [$pk(1-cz)(Y0-T)].
The private investor's choice of a is not affected by this alternative assumption and is still a.
Given
               a = a" = pi/[Ska2(Y0 — T)],
we have
               kat(Ya — T) = pt/(3a2)
and then
               Z = T — S(T, B) + $pk(Yo — T) - 4ppt/a2),
which differs from the value of Z under the original assumption about the implicit tax revenue
only by a constant term - 4ppp'(3a2). Similar to the proof of Lemma 1, we can show that


Lemma 1': The optimal T is determined by
               ST,6)=IØr*                                                                        (1')
and the optimal k is determined by
               T—S(T, 6) + qipk(Y0— T)      (tJ'[S/frØ)] + Øpp/(Sd).                           (2')

Comparative Statics:
        Proposition I is about comparative statics with respect to 0. Lemma 1' and Lemma 1
differ only by the term 4ppja2), which is independent of 9. Therefore, Proposition 1 continues
to hold under the alternative assumption about the implicit tax revenue.
                                                     24


          Parts (i), (ii), and (iii) of Proposition 2 remain the sane. However, the result about k in
part (iv) changes with the alternative assumption about the implicit tax revenue; previously, the
optimal k was independent of p' and a2, but under the alternative assumption, the optimal k
increases with p and decreases with a2. Specifically, we have


Proposition 2': (i) The optimal tax T is independent of the degree of risk aversion p but the
optimal capital control k decreases with p. (ii) The optimal tax T decreases with 0but the
relationship between the optimal k and 0/s ambiguous. (iii) The optimal T is independent of r
and 4 but the optimal k increases with yand decreases with 4 where yis the importance of the

public good in the representative private investor's utility while 5 is that ofprivate consumption.
(iv) The optimal T is independent of pjr and d. The optimal k increases with and decreases
with o.


The proof of Proposition 2' is similar to that of Proposition 2, except that for (i) is different. By
equation (1'), T is still independent of p. By equation (2'),
                $p[k(Y0 — T) - pp'(3a2)j = Z - T + S(T, 9).

On the left hand side
                 k(Y0 — T) - p/(6a2) = k(l-a*)(Yo — T)> 0.

Therefore, V - T + S(T, B) is also positive. Furthermore, V - T + S(T, B) is independent of p.
Then,
                 k(Y0 — T)   - pt/(8a2) = [Z* - T + S(T, 9)]14)p

decreases with p, which implies that k decreases with p.

        Thy inluilipu fui Ptupusiliuu 2' is the sunic as UIUL iw nupuslLWu b, eA¼cpt UIaL iui part
(iv) of the propositions. Under the alternative assumption about the implicit tax revenue, a higher
pç (premium of capital flight) or a lower a2 (risk of capital flight) reduces the amount of
domestic capital that the government can implicitly tax through financial repression. In order to
maintain the level of this source of revenue, the government has to increase the degree of
financial repression, which is positively related to capital control. Therefore, the government
responds to a higher p or a lower a2 by choosing a higher k.
                                                 25



Appendix D: Data Documentation

1. We used two measures of Capital Control. The first one is a based on the presence or absence
of restrictions on foreign exchange transactions in five categories defined in the IMF's Annual
Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER), various issues.
Courtesy of Milesi-Ferretti for data op the last three of the five categories.

Multiple Exchange Rates: mulex
Source: Exchange arrangements and exchange restrictions annual report 1997/1998, IMF.
Dual or multiple exchange rates.
Assign 1 if the specified practice is a feature of the exchange system, 0 otherwise.
If missing replaced with 1995/96 data.

Payment Arrears or Bilateral Payment Arrangement: payarr & bipay
Source: Exchange arrangements and exchange restrictions annual report 1997/1998, IMF,
Arrangements for payments and receipts: payment arrears or bilateral payment arrangements.
Assign 1 if any of the specified practice is present, 0 otherwise.
If missing replaced with 1995/96 data.

Controls on Payments for Invisible Transactions and Current Transfers: rescur
Source: Exchange arrangements and exchange restrictionsannual report 1997/1998, IMF.
Control on payments for invisible transactions and current transfers
Assign 1 if the specified practice is present for either items, 0 otherwise. If missing replaced with
1995/96 data.

Controls on Proceeds from Exports and/or Invisible Transactions: resexp
Source: Exchange arrangements and exchange restrictions annual report 1997/1998, IMF.
Proceeds from exports andlor invisible transactions.
2 items: repatriation requirements, surrender requirements
Assign I if the specified practice is a feature of the exchange system for either items, 0
otherwise.
• Among the two items, if one if missing and the other one is 1, assign 1.
• Among the two items, if one is missing and the other is 0, assign 0, countries include:
Antigua and Barbuda

Controls on Capital Account Transactions: cap
Source: Exchange arrangements and exchange restrictions annual report 1997/1998, IMF.
Controls on capital transactions:
1997 has Controls on 11 items, 1996 has only the first 10 items.
I. Capital market securities
2. Money market instruments
3. Collective investment securities
4. Derivatives and other instruments
5. Commercial credits
6. Financial credits
7. Guarantees, sureties, and financial backup facilities
                                                 26



8. Direct investment
9. Liquidation of direct investment
10. Real estate transactions
 11. Personal capital movements

1997 data: Assign I for each item if the sum of the features>3, 0 otherwise. Treat as missing if
there are >4 missing categories.
        If there are <=3 missing categories, we assign the most common ratings in the rest of the
categories to replace the missing values. These countries are: Algeria, Angola, Barbados, Belize,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Burundi, Canieroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Columbia, Comoros, Congo, Rep. of, Costa Rica, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Grenada, Honduras, Jamaica, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Oman, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Sit.
Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Somalia, Sudan, Syrian, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe

1996 data: Only look at the first 10 items: Assign 1 for each item if the sum of features>3, 0
otherwise. Treat as missing if there are >4 missing values.

1995 andbefore:
Used the data on Southern Yemen (data closer to later data) for Yemen Rep.
Used the data on Belgium-Luxembourg for both Belgium and Luxembourg.

1991 and before:
Used the data on Czechoslovakia for Czech and Slovakia:
Used the data on former Yugoslavia for Yugoslavia, FDR;

Before 1989: Used the data on West Germany for Germany.

        Second measure of Capital Control is more detailed coding of restrictions on close to
50 items of capital account transactions (together with a similarly detailed coding of current
account restrictions), computed by Natalia Tarnirisa for Tamirisa (1999) and Johnston and etc.
(1999),based on the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions (AREAER), 1997. Courtesy of Natalia Tamirisa.

2. Measures of Corruption

ICRG Index
        Corruption in Government from the International Country Risk Guide.
        Bahamas, Malta, Mongolia, Yugoslavia, FR (Serb./Mont.): usd the data from 1986 for
1985; Bahamas, Burkina Faso, Congo, Rep., Gambia, The, Guinea-Bissau, Korea, Dem. Rep.,
Malta, Mongolia, Niger, Sierra Leone, Yemen, Rep., Yugoslavia, FR(Serb./Mont.), used the data
from 1985/86 for 1984. Original scale 0-6, Lower point totals indicate higher risk, rescale as 6 —
original score.
                                                  27




 TI Index
 Source: Transparency International (http://www.gwdg.de/-.'uwvw/jcr.htm), used 1998 index,
which will be the ranking for 1997.
         Transparency International has adopted the approach of a composite index. It is a "poli of
polls'. It consists of credible surveys using different sampling frames and varying
methodologies. The 1998 CPI includes data from the Economist Intelligence Unit (Country Risk
Service arid Country Forecasts), Gallup International (50th Anniversary Survey), the Institute for
Management Development (World Competitiveness Yearbook), the Political & Economic Risk
Consultancy (Asian Intelligence Issue), the Political Risk Services (International Country Risk
Guide), World Development Report (Private Sector Survey) and the World Economic Forum
(Global Competitiveness Report), etc.. Note: TI has corruption indexes for earlier years as well.
However, the underlying methodology changes every year which makes inter-year comparison
misleading. We re-scaled the TI index by subtracting the original numbers from 10 so that a
large number implies more corruption.
GCRIndex
Source: Appendix to Kaufinann and Wei, "Does 'Grease Money' speed up the wheels of
commerce". NBER working paper 7093. Original source: Global competitiveness report 96, 97
         GCR are surveys conducted by the World Economic Forum and Harvard Institute for
International Development for the 1996 and 1997 Global Competitiveness Reports, respectively.
GCR surveys are on 1-7 scales. Corruption rating for a country in this table is the average of all
individual responses for that country. In original surveys, a low number means more corruption,
the rating is re-scaled as S — original rating. GCR97 is published in 1997 and the ranking is for
1996.

WDR Index
Source: Appendix to Kaufinann and Wei, "Does 'Grease Money' speed up the wheels of
commerce" NBER working paper 7093. Original source: 1997 World Development Report,
survey conducted by the World Bank for its 1997 World Development Report. The rating is then
for 1996.
       WDR surveys are on 1-6 scales. Corruption rating for a country in this table is the
average of all individual responses for that country. In original surveys, a low number means
more corruption, the rating is re-scaled as 7 — original rating.

3. Instrumental Variables for Corruption

Civil liberty and political freedom (1993)
Source: Freedom House, Freedom in the World, Freedom House Survey Team, 1993-1994

         CIV is the abbreviation for civil liberties index. Liberties index measures the extent to
which people are able to express their opinion openly without fears of reprisals and are protected in
doing so by an independent judiciary. Though this index reflects rights to organize and
demonstrate as well as freedom of religion, education, travel and other personal rights; more
weight was given to those liberties that are most directly related to the expression of political
rights. This variable is an index and not in logs.
                                                 28



        POL is the abbreviation for political right index. Political rights index measures rights to
participate meaningfiully in the political process on a scale of one to seven where lower numbers
indicate greater political rights (see Gastil, 1989). A high ranking country must have a ffilly
operating electoral procedure, usually including a significant opposition vote. It is likely to have
had a recent change of government from one party to another, an absence of foreign domination,
decentralized political power and a consensus that allows all segments of the population some
power. The index was constructed on the basis of satisfaction of the above and other related criteria
by the countries in question. This variable is an index and not in logs.
        Both Index range from 1 to 7. Smaller number means higher degree of freedom.
Democracy is defined as (7-civ)+(7-pol).

Corruption in Judicial System
Source, "lack of legal corruption," survey in 1996 for the Global Competitiveness Report 1997.
Question 8.09 Legal corruption, "Irregular payments to judges or other officials involved in the
enforcement and execution ofjudgements are not common and do not influence the outcome of
court proceedings" (lstrongly disagree, 7strongly agree).
Rescaled 7- original score Thus a smaller number means less corrupt judicial system.

4. Tax Evasion and Tax Rates

Tax Evasion
Source: survey (in 1996) for the Global Competitiveness Report 1997
2.10 Tax evasion, Tax evasion is minimal in your country. (lstrongly disagree, 7strongly
agree). Re-scaled as 7 - original score

Statutory Corporate Tax Rates
Courtesy of Altshuler for providing the data used in Altshuler, Grubert and Newlon (1998)
Notes: 1. For Bermuda, effective tax rate was used instead of statutory rates. The statutory rate
for Bermuda was zero, but the effective rate was positive. 2. In some cases judgement was
made on the appropriate rate due to the presence of tax holidays.

5. Other Variables

Current Account Surplus
Source: World Bank SimaIGDF & WDI Central
Current account balance (% of GDP)1984-l997, in cross section regression used the average of
1984-96.

Government Consumption
Source: World Bank SimaJGDF & WDI Central
General government consumption (% of GDP)
1984-1997, in cross section regression used the average of 1984-96.

Government Debt
Source: World Bank SimaIGDF & WDI Central
Central government debt, total (Yo of GDP)
                                                             30




                                Table Ia: Summary Statistics

                                                 Ok Mean                   Std. Dev.   Mm      Max
Aggregate capital control                        177    2.44                 1.57       0       5
Currentaccountcontrols                           40        0.13              0.10      0.01    0.33
Capital account controls                    40      0.38                     0.30
                                                                                0.01           0.95
Corruption—TI                               84      5.10           2.41           0       8.6
Corruption—WDR                              72      3.21           0.91           1       4.6
Corruption—ICRO                             122     2.57           1.28          0         6
Corruption—OCR                              58      3.40           1,42         1.3       5.5
Legal Corruption—OCR                        53      1.70           1.47          0       4.53
Democracy                                   175     6.62           3.97          0        12
Note: Democracy is construc ted by summing up the political rights and civil liberties indexes.




                                      Table Ib: Pairwise Correlation
                             Capital Controls                                   Corruption                Legal
                          aggregate     CA        KA              TI         WDR ICRO OCR Corruption
Current account control       0.78         1

Capital account control       0.88        0.83
Corruption - TI               0.58        0.53      0.52               1

Corruption WDR                0.62        0.55      0.65           0.86
Corruption - ICRG             0.44        0.49      0.43           0.85         0.55     1
Corruption - OCR              0.56        0.52      0.60           0.87         0.83    0.65          1

Legal corruption              0.55        0.50      0.58           0.89         0.77    0.80     0.80
Democracy                    -0.44       -0.57     -0.49          -0.68        -0.50   -0.66    -0.57      -0.67
                                                         31


                            Table 2: Bureaucratic Corruption and Capital Controls

 Dependent Variable = capital control

 Specification                                       Ordered probit                 Panel         IV

 Corruption measure                TI         0CR97        WDR97 ICRG96             ICRG        0CR97

 Corruption                     0.275"       Ø44Ø**        0.834"      0,239"      ØQ79**       0.415"
                                 (0.071)     (0.129)       (0.189)     (0.101)     (0.036)      (0.183)

OECD                            -0.665"      -0.747"        -0.465    -1.051"     -2.180"      -0.979"
                                 (0,333)      (0.344)      (0.367)     (0.307)     (0.123)      (0.401)

R2                                0.15         0.16           0.15       0.10        0.29        0.16
No. ofObs                         83            57          71           120          1629        51
1. White-robust standard errors in brackets. , * and # denote significant at the 5%, 10% and the 15% levels,
respectively.
2. Pseudo R2 for ordered probit and IV regressions. Adjusted R2 for panel regression (LSDV, fixed effects with year
dummies).
3. Estimates on the constant and the cutoff parameters are not reported.

          Table 3: Corruption and Capital Controls After Adding Regional Dummies
Dependent Variable = capital control

Specification                                ordered probit                        panel         IV

Corruption measure                T.[        GCR97        WDR97       ICRCi96      ICRG        0CR97

Corruption                      0.308**      0.501"       0.880"      0.210**      0.030      0539*1*
                                (0.074)      (0.135)      (0.201)     (0.103)     (0.035)      (0.204)

OECD                           -0.795"      -0.845"       -0.309      -1.078"    -1.926"      0.887**
                                (0.362)      (0.394)      (0.406)     (0.321)     (0.125)     (0.432)

Sub-Sahara                       0.090        0.906       0.515#      0.540*1*   0.857*1*      1.020
Africa                          (0.365)      (0.807)      (0.325)     (0.269)     (0.103)     (0.820)

East Asia and                    -0.242       -0.257       0.302      -0.030     0.820**      -0.201
Pacific                         (0.373)      (0.412)      (0.546)     (0.324)     (0.128)     (0.420)

Latin America                  -0.789"        -0.498       -0.597     0.5l9*     0.222*1*      -0.402
                                (0.356)      (0.444)      (0.418)     (0.289)     (0.111)     (0.529)

8.2                              0.18         0.18         0.18        0.13        0.35         0.18
No. of Obs                        83           57             71        120        1629          51
                                                             32


                  Table 4: Corruption and Capital Controls with Additional Control Variables

 Dependent Variable: capital control

 Specification                         ordered probit                       Panel                    IV

Corruption measure           TI          OCR,      1CR096          ICRO             ICRO     OCR           OCR

Corruption                0.567" 2.49!"            0.723**         0.124#        0.110*    0.810          0.821"
                          (0.175)      (0.994)     (0.306)         (0.083)      (0.067)    (0.489)        (0.396)

Current Account            0.037        -0.052      -0.008        0.0S7** .0,020**         -0,183#         -0.072
Balance/GDP               (0.064)      (0.188)     (0.060)         (0.018)      (0.009)    (0.117)        (0.095)

Government                0.146"       0.459"       0.084         -0.085"           0016    0.099         O.131#
ConsumptionioDP           (0.071)      (0.203)     (0.061)         (0.024)      (0.024)    (0.092)        (0.086)

Government               -0.013"        -0.017    .0.011**        -0.004        -0.001     -0.005         -0.001
Debt/ODP                  (0.006)      (0.0 13)    (0.006)         (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.008)        (0.008)

Inflation                 -0.001        -0,004      -0.001        0.0l0**       -0.0003     -0.002         -0.002
                          (0.001)      (0004)      (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)

Central bank legal        -0.150        -4.238      1.322         2.l23**       -1.642      -3.430        -1.970
Independence              (1.881)      (4.173)     (2.067)        (0.874)       (2.801)    (2.608)        (2.260)

Central bankers          5.577" 21.868**           3.584**         l.012#      3.271"      8.946"         6.875*
 Turnover                 (1.738)      (7.832)     (1.471)        0.627)        (1.375)    (2.823)        (1.932)

OECD                      -0.963        -0.931    -1.546" -1.669"                          -[.134
                          (0.691)      (1.462)     (0.639)        (0.290)                  (0.856)

Sub-Sahara                 0.374                    -0.043         -0.067
Africa                    (0.769)                  (0.704)        (0.285)

East Asia and             -0.513        -1.169     .1.212*        2.789**                  .1.720*
Pacific                  (0.760)       (1.434)     (0.721)        (0.238)                  (0.909)

Latin America             -0.601        0.514       -1.048        -1.708"                  -1.851
                         (0.919)       (1.595)     (0.899)        (0.357)                  (1.380)

R2                         0.39     0.66        0.33       0.65         0.13      0.36        0.29
No. ofObs                   32       25          33         167         167        25          25
Panel 1: LSDV with year dummies. Panel 2: country random effects with year dummies. Also see footnotes to
Table 2.
                                                           33




                  Table 5: Effect of a Rise in Corruption on Capital Controls
                                                                 P0       P1       P2            P3     P4         PS
(Based on the last regression in Table 3)
Corruption = 4.3 (e.g. Ukrain)                                  0.13     0.26      0.15      0.31      0.10       0.04
Corruption = 1.6 (e.g. Singapore)                               0.64     0.25      0.06      0.05      0.01       0.00

(Based on the second to the last regression
in Table 4)
Corruption =4.3 (e.g. Ukrain)                                   0.04     0.28      0.34      0.33      0.01       0.00
Corruption = 1.6 (e.g. Singapore)                               0.68     0.28      0.04      0,00      0.00       0.00

Note: P0, P1     P5 denote the probability that the aggregate capital control index = 0,     1        5, respectively. Used
average values for explanatory variables other than corruption.


             Table 6: More Detailed Coding of Current Account Restrictions
Dept. Variable: current account control
                                                TI          OCR           WDR             ICRO           GCRIV

Corruption                                     0.006       0.016**        0.003            0.008          0.011
                                              (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.038)          (0.013)        (0.009)

OECD                                          0.l24**     0.l19**       -0.142"         -0.123"         0.I25**
                                              (0.023)      (0.025)       (0.067)          (0.027)        (0.024)

Sub-Sahara                                     -0.037     0.101"          -0.053           -0.023        0.098"
Africa                                        (0.103)      (0.021)       (0.118)          (0.103)        (0.021)

East Asia and                                  0.001        -0.001        -0.015           0.006          0.002
Pacific                                       (0.024)      (0.023)       (0.041)          (0.026)        (0.023)

Latin America                                 -0.036       -0.011        -0.024           -0.032         -0.011
                                              (0.051)      (0.056)       (0.022)          (0.052)        (0.055)

p-value for Flausman test                                                                                 0.99
p-value for test                                                                                          0.06
of overidentification
                                                0.52          0.65         0.55        0.46         0.65
No. ofObs                                        38            32           21          37           32
Note: For the Hausman test, Ho: the differences in the coefficients from the OLS and IV regressions are not
systematic. For the overidentification test, Ho: E[residuals * instruments] = 0. White-robust standard errors in
brackets.
                                                               34



                    Table 7: More Detailed Coding of Capital Account Restrictions
Dept. Variable: capital account control
                                             TI        (3CR        WDR         ICRO                   GCRIV

Corruption                                        0.032#        0.078"          0.160       0.016      ØØg3*
                                                  (0.021)       (0.037)        (0.107)     (0.034)    (0.041)
OECD                                            0.268**. -0.275"               -0.170     -0.335"     0.269**
                                                (0.111)         (0.102)        (0.229)     (0.093)    (0.102)

Sub-Sahara                                        -0.203         0.033         -0.115      -0.199      0.035
Africa                                          (0.205)         (0.077)        (0.336)     (0.184)    (0.076)

EastAsiaazid                                     0.038           0.006          0.167       0.037      0.004
Pacific                                         (0.086)         (0.088)        (0.170)     (0.093)    (0.083)

Latin America                                    -0.066          0.014         0.046       -0.077      0.013
                                                (0.164)         (0.169)       (0.083)     (0.159)     (0.169)

p-value for test                                                                                       0.74
of overidentification
                                                  0.40              0.55        0.47        0.37       0.55
No. of Ohs                                         38                32          21          37         32


                                     Table 8: Corruption and Tax Evasion
Dept. Variable: tax evasion

Measure of                                                                                 legal         legal
Corruption          TI          TI       GCR          OCR           WDR WDR              Corruption   corruption

Corruption       0.33Y*       0.374" Q•597** 0.613" 0.834** 0.841**                       0.505"      0.497"
                 (0.035)      (0.046)   (0.071)      (0.084)        (0.182)   (0.188)     (0.071)      (0.095)

Statutorytax     3.313"       2.719" 3534** 3397** 4.810" 4.776"                          4799**      4.852"
Rate             (1.164)      (1.101)   (0.995)      (1.017)        (1.060)   (1.211)     (1.216)      (1.154)

OECD                          0.320                   0.080                    0.027                   -0.041
                              (0.237)                (0.243)                  (0.3 18)                 (0.293)

R2                 0.7         0.71       0.7          0.7           0.74      0.74        0.61         0.61
No. of Cbs         42           42        42           42             23        23          42           42
