                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EQUITY PREMIUM AND STRUCTURAL BREAKS


                                            Lubos Pastor
                                         Robert F. Stambaugh


                                         Working Paper 7778
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7778



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               July2000




Stambaugh acknowledges support provided by his appointment during the 1997-98 academic year as a
Marvin Bower Fellow at Harvard Business School, where portions of this research were conducted. Pastor
is grateful for research support from the Center for Research in Security Prices and Dimensional Fund
Advisors. Comments from Kent Daniel, Walt Tourous, and seminar participants at the University of
Chicago, the 1999 Western Finance Association Meetings, and the 1999 UCLA Equity Premium Conference
are appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.
The Equity Premium and Structural Breaks
Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 7778
July2000
JELNo. Gb, Cli

                                            ABSTRACT

       A long return history is useftil in estimating the current equity premium even if the historical
distribution has experienced structural breaks. The long series helps not only if the timing of breaks
is uncertain but also if one believes that large shifts in the premium are unlikely or that the premium
is associated, in part, with volatility. Our framework incorporates these features along with a belief
that prices are likely to move opposite to contemporaneous shifts in the premium. The estimated
premium since 1834 fluctuates between four and six percent and exhibits its sharpest drop in the last
decade.


Lubos Pastor                                                   Robert F. Stambaugh
Graduate School of Business                                    Finance Department
University of Chicago                                          The Wharton School
Chicago, IL 60637                                              University of Pennsylvania
lubos.pastor@gsb.uchicago.edu                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
                                                               and NBER
                                                               stambaughwharton.upenn. edu
1. Introduction
One of the most important but elusive quantities in finance is the equity premium, the
expected rate of return on the aggregate stock market in excess of the riskiess interest rate
(the expected "excess return"). It is well known that estimates of the equity premium based
on historical data can vary widely, depending on the methodology and the sample period, and
the imprecision in such estimates can figure prominently in inference and decision making.
Pastor and Stambaugh (1999) conclude, for example, that seven decades of data produce
an equity premium estimate whose imprecision typically accounts for the largest fraction
of uncertainty about a firm's cost of equity. Long histories offer the prospect of increased
precision, and researchers have constructed and analyzed series of U.S. equity returns and
interest rates that begin early in the nineteenth century (e.g., Schwert (1990), Siegel (1992),
and Goetzmann and Ibbotson (1994)). Finance practitioners and academics often elect
to rely on more recent data, however, motivated in part by concerns that the probability
distribution of excess returns changes over time, experiencing shifts known as "structural
breaks." We incorporate various economic considerations in estimating the equity premium
from a long series of returns whose distribution is subject to structural breaks.

   In standard approaches to models that admit structural breaks, estimates of current
parameters rely on data only since the most recent estimated break. Discarding the earlier
data reduces the risk of contaminating an estimate of the equity premium with data generated
under a different mean. That practice seems prudent, but it contends with the reality that
shorter histories typically yield less precision. Equity returns observed before a suspected
break are likely to provide at least some information about the current premium. To take
an extreme example, suppose one is confident that a shift in the equity premium occurred
just a month ago. Discarding virtually all of the historical data on equity returns would
certainly remove the risk of contamination by pre-break data, but it hardly seems sensible
in estimating the current equity premium. Completely discarding the pre-break returns is
appropriate only when one believes the premium might have shifted to such a degree that the
pre-break returns are no more useful in estimating the current premium than, say, pre-break
rainfall data, but such a view almost surely ignores economics.

    A long return series also helps in estimating the current equity premium if one believes
that, across subperiods separated by breaks, there is at least some positive association be-
tween the equity premium and volatility. Such an association might not be represented well
by a specific parametric relation, but it can be represented as a flexible prior belief that,
when combined with a long return history, provides information about the current equity

                                               1
premium. In essence, each earlier subperiod's ratio of equity premium to variance, its "price
of risk," provides some information about the current price of risk and, given current esti-
mated volatility, about the current equity premium as well. The strength of one's prior belief
about the premium-volatility link is characterized simply by the dispersion in the prices of
risk across subperiods. Although he implements the idea differently, using parametric re-
lations, Merton (1980) also proposes that one impose a prior belief in a premium-volatility
link when estimating the current equity premium.

   Basic principles of discounting suggest that a shift in the equity premium is likely to be
accompanied by a price change in the opposite direction. To incorporate this property, we
assume that returns during a transition from one level of the premium to the next are drawn
from a distribution whose mean is negatively related to the premium shift. The strength of
that negative relation is specified using a prior distribution. This feature of our approach
plays a significant role in making inferences about the timing of breaks and in estimating
the equity premium.

    Our estimates of the equity premium also incorporate the fact that the timing of struc-
tural breaks remains uncertain after examining the data. That is, the estimate of the equity
premium on any given date reflects the uncertainty about where that date lies relative to
breaks in the distribution. This feature, which follows Chib (1998), stands in contrast to
the commonly used maximum-likelihood procedure of estimating the dates of the breaks and
then estimating parameters in each subperiod conditional on those dates.

   The approach developed and implemented here is univariate, relying on a single time
series of equity returns. As such, our approach is perhaps best viewed as an alternative
to the popular method, also univariate, of estimating the equity premium by computing a
sample average but using less of the available history. One can also view our approach as
an alternative to modeling a time-varying equity premium as a function of observable state
variables. Rather than specify those state variables and the function defining their roles,
we simply augment the equity return series with the economically motivated beliefs that
changes in the equity premium are unlikely to be extreme, are associated in part with shifts
in volatility, and are likely to be accompanied by price changes in the opposite direction.

   When these beliefs are incorporated, the estimated equity premium since 1834 fluctuates
between roughly four and six percent (annualized). It rises through much of the 1800's,
reaches its peak in the 1930's, and declines fairly steadily thereafter, except for a brief
upward spike in the mid 1970's. The sharpest decline in the premium occurs in the 1990's.
The latter inference is influenced by the prior belief that the premium and the price change

                                              2
in opposite directions. When that aspect of the model is omitted, the estimated premium
instead increases during the last decade. The prior beliefs about shifts in the premium and
about the premium's association with volatility are also shown to play important roles in
estimating the premium. In our model with structural breaks but economically motivated
prior beliefs, the precision associated with the estimate of the current equity premium is
nearly as low as what one would attribute to an estimate based on the long-sample average
when potential breaks are ignored.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the stochastic
setting and the priors used in our Bayesian approach. Section 3 presents the empirical
results, and Section 4 briefly reviews the conclusions.



2. Methodology
This section describes our Bayesian framework for making inferences about the equity pre-
mium in the presence of structural change in the distribution of excess market returns.
Although this framework is newly developed, our analysis shares some features with pre-
vious studies dealing with structural change.' This section first introduces the stochastic
setting, and then discusses the prior distributions for the model's parameters. The general
approach for obtaining posterior distributions is discussed briefly at the conclusion of this
section, but the details of the computations are given in the Appendix.


2.1. Stochastic Framework
The data consist of T observations of excess market returns. Let z1 denote the excess return
at time t, and x =               The sample period is split into 2K + 1 regimes, K of
                        (x,, . .. , XT).
which are transition regimes (TRs), during which the probability distribution of returns
changes. In the K + 1 regimes separated by the TRs, referred to as stable regimes (Sits),
   'For surveys of early studies, too numerous to list, see Zacks (1983), Broemeling and Tsurumi (1987),
Krishnaiah and Miao (1988), and Bhattacharya (1994). Some of the more recent studies in a frequentist
setting include Andrews (1993), Andrews and Ploberger (1994), Bai (1995, 1997), Bai, Lumsdaine, and Stock
(1997), Bai and Perron (1998), Diebold and Chen (1996), Liu, Wu, and Zidek (1997), and Sowell (1996)
Perhaps the first Bayesian study on structural breaks is Chernoff and Zacks (1964), and more recent studies
include Carlin, Gelfand, and Smith (1992), Stephens (1994), and Chib (1998). Markov switching models,
proposed by Hamilton (1989), are studied in a Bayesian context by Albert and Chib (1993) and McCulloch
and Tsay (1994). Recent studies that investigate structural breaks in some financial time series include
Inclán (1993), Chen and Gupta (1997), Viceira (1997), and Aug and Bekaert (1998)



                                                    3
the return distribution does not change. The Sits and TRs alternate in order, beginning
and ending with a SR. The times at which the SRs change into the TRs and vice versa, the
 "changepoints", are unknown and denoted by qi, .. . ,   Let q = 0 and q2K+1 = T. The
time spans for the i-th SR and the j-th TR can then be defined as

                          SR =         {q2_2+1,...,q2_i},          i=1,...,K+1                       (1)
                          TR =         {q2_i+1,....,q2},      j=1,....,K.                            (2)

We denote the duration of the k-th regime as ik = qk — qk—i, so the duration of SR is 12i—i
and the duration of TR3 is l2j• Within each stable regime SRI, the excess market returns
are assumed to be normally distributed with mean and variance o:

                                             tESR.j, i=1,...,K+1.                                    (3)

Define            —
                      p.
                       Later in this section, we incorporate informative prior beliefs about
the magnitude of L1 and about a positive relation between and       Within each transition
regime TR3, the excess market returns are assumed to be normally distributed with mean
 _____ i      an variance
                     •       2
   2


                          N( +j+i +                 Uj1),          TR, j = 1,.. . , K.               (4)

The mean excess return during the transition regime is conditioned on the shift in the
premium. The first term, the average of the premiums in the neighboring stable regimes, is
intented to represent the unconditional expected return during the transition. The second
term, which reflects the conditioning on the premium shift j, allows us to impose a prior
belief that &3 is negative. That is, we expect to see high returns during a TR in which the
premium falls and low returns during a TR in which the premium rises.

   Let = (/i,.       IK+1) denote the vector of equity premiums, let TSR = (ai,
                      ,                                                                   ,aK+i)
                                                                                       ..
denote the vector of standard deviations ("volatilities") in the SRs, let ITR = (ai,2,. ,
denote the vector of volatilities in the TRs, let q = (qi, . .. , q) denote the set of change-
points, and let b =       (br, . .. , bK).   The likelihood function can be written as a product of
(2K + 1) normal densities:
                                   IK+i       I \
                                              1       1   iI K+i    q2j—1   I
 p(x,osR,oTR,b,q)            Cc
                                   f
                                       fi
                                   \i=i (l
                                                      J

                                                  Ijep— 1 t=q22+i °2
                                                                                2

                                   /K        1         1 K q2 IXt — IIki+Pi+1 + b            \\2 )
                                   f fl . ) exp —
                             x                                                      22
                                   \j=i j,j+iJ (  j=U=q2_1+i                        oj,j+i       )
where "o" denotes "proportional to" (up to a factor not involving p, a, aTR, b, or q).

                                                      4
2.2. Prior Beliefs
Bayesian estimators combine the sample information contained in the likelihood function
with prior information about the values of the model parameters and the relations among
them. The prior beliefs used in this study are motivated by economic arguments. First,
we impose a prior belief that the equity premium is positive. This prior reflects a simple
argument that, in an equilibrium with risk-averse investors, the expected return on a value—
weighted portfolio of all risky assets should exceed the risk-free rate of return. Merton (1980),
for example, argues that the non-negativity restriction on the expected excess market return
should be imposed in estimating the equity premium. The rest of this section explains how
our framework also incorporates informative prior beliefs about the relation between mean
returns in the TRs and changes in the equity premium, about the duration of the TRs, about
the premium's association with volatility, and about the magnitudes of the changes in the
premium.


2.2.1. Beliefs About the Transition Regime Parameters and Duration

The TRs are relatively short periods during which the mean and the volatility of equity
returns change. Recall that the expected return during TR3 is (/i + ii+i)/2+           If the
equity premium falls during TR3 ( <0), the rate at which future dividends are discounted
falls, so it seems reasonable to expect that the returns during the TR are high. Analogously,
if the premium rises (z > 0), the TR returns are likely to be low. This motivates our
informative prior belief that b3 <0. Therefore, the prior on b is assumed to be normal with
a mean b < 0 and variance o:
                                 ( (b—\2ì
                         p(b)oexp—'3
                                 i
                                      2 j
                                     2a                 j=1,...,K.                           (6)

The prior mean b is set equal to -15.13. This specification, explained in the appendix, is
based on Campbell's (1991) variance decomposition of aggregate equity returns. The prior
standard deviation 0b is set equal to a third of the absolute value of &, so that virtually all
of the prior mass of &3 is below zero.

   The prior on the TR volatility, aj,i, is an inverted gamma distribution with 'ij          10
degrees of freedom:

                            1           (   I —2 2)
             p(Cj,j+')
                         0j,j+1
                                  exp         2
                                             o_j,j+1
                                                       i+i > 0, j = 1,     .   . , K.        (7)


                                                   5
The parameter a2, equal to the prior mean of jH4' is set equal to 0.000634. This choice
is also based on the results in Campbell (1991), as explained in the appendix. The prior
is informative about        to roughly the same extent as a sample of 10 observations of
returns with a sample variance equal to     Since some TRs can potentially be as short as
one month, some prior information is needed to estimate the TR volatilities.

   We explore a model with K = 15 transition regimes. The explanation for this choice is
postponed until section 3.2. Our inference about the 2K = 30 changepoints is based on Chib
(1998). Chib formulates a multiple changepoint model in terms of a latent state variable
st {1, 2,. . . , 2K + 1}, whose value at time t indicates the regime from which the time-t
observation has been drawn. This state variable follows a Markov process with a transition
matrix P constrained such that, if st_i = k, then sj can only take two values, k or k + 1
(for k = 1, . . , 2K). We need to specify a prior distribution for each diagonal element of P,
Pk,k = Prob(st = klst_i = k), which denotes the probability of staying in regime k. Following
Chib, the prior of Pk,k for k = 1,   .. ,2K is specified as a beta distribution with parameters
ak and c7:
                                       F(ak + Ck) ak—i          Ck—1
                           P(Pk,k) =   1-V   \rV \Pk,k (1 — Pk,k)                           (8)
                                       I a)1 Ck)
Once the state variable reaches the last regime, it must stay there, so P2K+1,2K+1 = 1. Chib
recommends specifying the prior parameters such that they correspond to prior beliefs about
the mean duration of each regime. Given pk,k, the prior density of the duration dk of the
regime k is p(dklpk,k) =p(1     —
                                  pk,k), and its prior mean is E(dklpk,k) = (1 Pk,k)'. The
                                                                               —

duration's unconditional prior density and its moments can also be derived analytically. The
unconditional prior mean is

                                       E(dk)=akll.                                          (9)

For TRs (i.e., for even values of k), we set ak = 11     and k =  These values imply that
                                                                    2.
the prior distribution of the duration of each TR has a mean of 12 months, a median of 5
months, a mode of 1 month, and its 95th percentile is 39 months. This specification seems
reasonable, in that most of the prior mass is on very short TR durations, but the skewness
implies some chance that a TR might instead last for several years.

   For stable regimes (i.e., for odd values of k), we set Ck = 2 and compute ak such that
                                             T - KE(dTR)
                                     E(dSR)=    K+1                                       (10)

Such a specification makes the prior internally consistent, in that the number of the TRs
times their expected duration plus the number of the SRs times their expected duration


                                                 6
equals the sample size, T = 1982. The resulting ak equals 223.25, the expected duration of
each SR is 113 months, and the 95th percentile of each SR's duration is 708 months.


2.2.2. Beliefs About the Premium's Association with Volatility

In a study about estimating the equity premium, Merton (1980) proposes models in which
the equity premium is linked positively to volatility. In motivating such models, Merton notes
that, to preclude arbitrage, the equity premium must be zero if volatility is zero. Moreover,
at positive levels of market volatility, risk—averse investors must in general be compensated
by a positive equity premium. Thus, at least to this degree, a positive relation between the
equity premium and volatility seems likely. Merton essentially proposes a positive relation
as a reasonable prior belief, as opposed to a regularity that one might verify with the data.
Attempts to do the latter, beginning with French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), have
produced mixed results, but such studies have generally investigated the presence of a relation
at higher frequencies than envisioned in our setting.2 One might believe that occasional
changes in the equity premium during TRs, typically separated by a number of years, are
associated to some degree with changes in volatility. At the same time, one might be less
inclined to believe that the equity premium changes with higher-frequency fluctuations in
volatility, which are essentially ignored in the present setting with returns assumed to be
i.i.d. within each regime.3 The prior link between the equity premium and volatility that
we introduce below can take the form of a weak positive association, as opposed to a strict
parametric relation, and we suggest that such priors offer a sensible framework in which to
explore the potential importance of volatility.

   A prior association between the equity premium and volatility is introduced as follows.
For a scalar parameter 'y > 0, let

                                  f1j'y1YiO,        i=1,...,K+1,                                      (11)
   2Some examples illustrate the range of the results. French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), Harvey
(1989), Thrner, Startz, and Nelson (1989), and Tauchen and Hussey (1991) find a positive relation between
the conditional market premium and conditional variance, and Scruggs (1998) finds a significant positive
partial relation. Baillie and DeGennaro (1990) and Chan, Karolyi, and Stulz (1992) find that the conditional
market premium is unrelated to its own conditional variance. Whitelaw (1994) finds a weak negative relation,
and Campbell (1987) and Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993) find a significant negative relation.
   31n parameterized versions of equilibrium models in which moments of the aggregate endowment follow
Markov-switching processes, Kandel and Stambaugh (1990) and Backus and Gregory (1993) show that
the relation between the equity premium and volatility need not be positive. Campbell (1987) considers
conditions under which the intertemporal CAPM implies an approximately proportional relation between
the conditional mean and conditional variance of market returns.



                                                    7
and let t' =   (i, . .. , l'ji).
                             As explained below, the prior on each /.'j is centered at one.
Hence, 'y can be viewed a priori as the average market "price of risk", defined as the ratio
of the equity premium to the equity variance. The prior on 'y is specified as a gamma
distribution with parameters a) and b:

                                                                  >O.                               (12)

The prior parameters are specified using an empirical Bayes approach as           = 18.7 and
   = 0.1. These values equate the prior mean of y to the unconditional sample estimate of
the price of risk from the overall sample (1.98). The prior standard deviation of 'y is equated
to the sampling uncertainty in the price of risk estimate, 0.46, which is computed as the
standard error of the sample mean return divided by the sample variance (this computation
assumes for simplicity that the unconditional return variance is estimated without error).
The 1st and the 99th percentiles of the prior for 'y are 1.07 and 3.20.

   In each stable regime SR, the price of risk is equal to 'j'y, with the '''s assumed to
be independent across subperiods. The prior on each ib is a gamma distribution, with
parameters v/2 and 2/i.',
                                1         (
                                                         >O, i=1,...,K.                             (13)

The prior on '/.' implies that4

                                            E(i) =
                                           Var() =        .
                                                          1                                         (14)
                                                                                                    (15)

The desired degree of association between j and o across the SRs is achieved by specifying
the parameter v. At one extreme, as v -÷ 0, the prior on /.'j approaches a standard diffuse
or noninformative prior, p(b) oc 1/'ib. With a noninformative prior on 1/'j, no association
between the elements of ,u and SR is imposed a priori. At the other extreme, as v —+ oc, it
follows from (15) that Var() —+ 0, so 1/.l'j = 1 for all i, which imposes a perfect link between
   and o of the form = yof. A positive but finite value of v implies an intermediate
degree of association between the equity premium and volatility: the higher the value of ii,
the stronger the prior belief that the equity premium is linked positively to volatility. In the
empirical analysis, a range of values for ii is entertained.
  4The two moment equations follow from standard results for the gamma density, such as in Zellner (1971,
p.370). The moments exist for all ii> 0, but the density has no mode for 1 < 2.



                                                    8
2.2.3. Beliefs About Magnitudes of Changes in the Premium

We use a "hierarchical" prior distribution on , given by

                    p()       oc exp{__/2t)FV1(ii_/2t)},                                             (16)
                      p(/2) oc 1,        p>O,                                                        (17)

where t denotes a (K + 1) x 1 vector of ones. The scalar /2 is a "hyperparameter" that can
be interpreted roughly as a cross-period grand mean of the elements of p The prior for
conditional on /2 is a truncated normal distribution whose location depends on /2. The prior
distribution of /2 is noninformative, except for the positivity restriction. As a result, the
unconditional variance of each element of ,uis large, and the marginal prior for each element
of is noninformative.

   The elements of       can be specified such that (16) is informative about differences between
the elements of . Recall that    = (jt+1 — ij), i = 1,.. . , K, and let = (&, ... ,
The elements of    represent the magnitudes by which the market premium changes in
the TRs. Note that (16) implies that the prior on each Li,, is centered at zero, so the
prior is noninformative about the direction of any shift in the premium. Some might find
it reasonable to believe, as we do, that extremely large shifts in the equity premium are
unlikely. For example, one could believe that the probability is only 5% that the annual
equity premium can shift by more than 6% during any TR. This type of prior belief can
be expressed by specifying a value for the standard deviation of the prior distribution of
each A, denoted by a In the preceding example, a = 3%. At one extreme, setting
     = oc assigns equal prior probabilities to fixed-width neighborhoods around all values
of Lii, however large. One consequence of such a noninformative belief about z is that, in
estimating the equity premium in SR, the data from all other regimes are discarded (in the
absence of other informative prior beliefs). In other words, this prior results in a use of the
data that corresponds to common practice. At the other extreme, setting = 0 reflects a
dogmatic belief that all = 0 and there has never been a change in the equity premium, in
which case data from the entire sample are simply "pooled," roughly speaking, to estimate
the premium. In intermediate cases, the smaller the value of o,the more attention is paid to
  51n the absence of truncation in (16), ji would be the mean of p(i).
  61n general, the literature treats the parameters before and after a structural break as independent of
each other (see Carlin, Gelfand, and Smith (1992) and Barry and Hartigan (1993) for Bayesian examples and
Liu, Wu, and Zidek (1997) and Bai and Perron (1998) for frequentist examples)). An exception is the early
study by Chernoff and Zacks (1964), who, in a simpler setting, place an informative prior on the difference
in subperiod means.



                                                    9
data from other SRs. In order to explore the effect of prior beliefs about on the estimates
of the equity premium, this study entertains a wide range of values of o.

   The value of a is implied by the covariance matrix V in (16). It is assumed that
   =  oIi,   where 'K+l denotes an identity matrix of size K + 1. Conditional on fl, and
in the absence of truncation, the prior variance of each equals o. The unconditional
prior variance of    for any i is equal to a = Var(p+i —            The value of       that
produces a desired value of o is computed by simulation. In the resulting prior, the equity
premium is believed to fluctuate independently across the stable regimes and thereby exhibit
"immediate" mean reversion to a grand mean.

   Let the vector 0 contain the elements of b, YTR, P, y, b, , and  It is assumed that all
the elements of 0, except for and ), are independent a priori, which implies that the joint
prior on all the parameters in the model can be written as
              fK          \fK                   \/2K                        fK+1
     p(9) = ( flp(b3)) ( flp(crj,3+i)) H P(Pk>k))                       P('Y)  H e')) (li) P(P).        (18)
             \j=1   J \j=1             k=i      /                          i=1

The densities multiplied on the right-hand side are given in equations (6), (7), (8), (12),
(13), (16), and (17).


2.3. Posterior Distribution
In a Bayesian setting, a posterior probability distribution for the unknown parameters is ob-
tained by updating a prior distribution with the information in the data, transmitted through
the likelihood function. Substituting for the elements of cTsR from (11), the reparameterized
likelihood from (5) can be written as7

                               IK+1 / /
                               I    I Y(Y
                                            \               (
                                                            J     I K+1
                                                                  -i         q2—i     I   —
 p(x,'yy,b,oT,q)o              i II \—                                 >
                                     Pi /           jJexps—
                                                         I             i1 =q2i—2+l
                          fK                    (      K        q2j     (     (/Jj+Pj+1
                                                                              \                 •
                      x   ( fl        ) exp                                         22
                                                                                                    .   (19)
                          \j=1       J      J        3=1t=q2_1+1                    oj,j+1      )
Multiplying the prior in (18) by the likelihood in (19) gives the joint posterior distribution,
p(O x). Posterior distributions for parameters of interest, such as the equity premium , are
   71n the case with no premium-volatility link (ii = 0), there is no need to substitute for 0SR from (11) and
reparameterize the likelihood, so we work with the likelihood in (5). Such an equivalent specification turns
out to save some computation time.


                                                       10
computed numerically using a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm combined with the algorithm
of Chib (1998) for drawing the changepoints.

   Note that frequentist analyses of structural breaks typically estimate the break locations
and then estimate the remaining parameters of interest conditional on those break locations.
Recent examples include Bai (1995, 1997), Bai and Perron (1998), and Liu, Wu, and Zidek
(1997). The usual argument in favor of such a two-step procedure is that, under certain
assumptions, the resulting parameter estimates are consistent. Treating estimates of the
breakpoints as true values ignores the potential error in those estimates ("estimation risk")
and could thereby compromise inferences in finite samples. In contrast, a Bayesian approach
can account for the uncertainty about the locations of the breakpoints.8 Instead of conduct-
ing inference based on the posterior p(OIx, ), which conditions on the break estimates, we
obtain results based directly on p(Ox), which incorporates the uncertainty. The algorithm
of Chib (1998) allows us to generate the posterior distribution p(qx) of the locations of
structural breaks. A Bayesian approach integrates over this posterior,

                                    p(Ox) = fp(Ox, q)p(qx)dq,                                        (20)

thereby incorporating break uncertainty in estimating 0.

   For the purpose of estimating and plotting a monthly series of the equity premium, we
define the premium in month t as

                                       t_f
                                        — /4j iftESR                                                  21
                                                     if t E   TR
where p (p + Ij+i)/2.             That is, we include only the unconditional mean of the excess
return during the transition regime and omit the portion bL negatively associated with
the premium shift. We estimate by its posterior mean, using iterated expectations:9
                            K+1                               K
                E(tx) = >i=1E(itIx)p(t e SRjIx) + E(p()x)p(t TRx)                                    (22)
                                                              j=1
Since the regime to which a particular month belongs is uncertain, the estimated equity pre-
mium in our framework generally fluctuates at a monthly frequency, as opposed to remaining
constant between fixed estimates of break locations.
  8Examples of earlier Bayesian studies that account for the uncertainty about breakpoints include Chernoff
and Zacks (1964), Hsu (1982), and Broemeling and Tsurumi (1987).
  9The posterior mean is the estimate that minimizes the expected value of a quadratic loss function. For
additional details, as well as alternative posterior estimators, see Berger (1985).



                                                   11
    The posterior variance of p is calculated by decomposing it as the weighted average of
the posterior variance in each regime plus the variance of the posterior mean across regimes:
                            K+1                                       2
           Var(tIx) =             [Var x)+(E(pIx)_E(x)) ]P(tEsRlx)+                              (23)


                        +       [ar( )Ix) + (E(()Ix) — E(Ix)) ] p(t e TRIx).                     (24)

The posterior moments and probabilities are calculated across a large number of parameter
draws from the joint posterior for 9 and the si's. The details are provided in the appendix.



3. Empirical Analysis
3.1. The Market Excess-Return Series
The data used in this study consist of monthly returns on a broadly based equity portfolio
in excess of returns on a short-term riskiess instrument. The equity-return series and the
risk-free return series, described in this subsection, cover the period from January 1834 to
June 1999. The equity series from January 1926 to June 1999 consists of returns on the
value-weighted portfolio of NYSE stocks, obtained from the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP). Equity returns before 1926 are taken from Schwert (1990), who relies on
a variety of historical indexes to construct a series of U.S. monthly returns over the past
two centuries.'0 Up through 1862, his index is based on the returns on financial firms and
railroads from Smith and Cole (1935). For 1863 through 1870, Schwert uses the returns
on the railroad index from Macaulay (1938), and for the 1871 through 1885 period he uses
returns on the value-weighted market index constructed by Cowles (1939). Finally, the 1885—
1925 data consist of returns on the Dow Jones index of industrial and railroad stocks, taken
from Dow Jones (1972) . Schwert adjusts the series for the effects of time averaging present
in the Cowles and Macaulay series. Also, he acknowledges that the returns on the original
Smith and Cole and Macaulay indexes do not include dividend yield and adds the dividend
yield back based on an estimate from the Cowles series.

   Although the series constructed in Schwert (1990) begins in 1802, we use the series back
only to 1834, because the earlier data do not appear to capture aggregate equity returns.
  '°We thank Bill Schwert for providing these data.
  "The four observations for August through November of 1914 are missing, since the stock markets were
temporarily closed due to the beginning of World War II (see Schwert (1989)).


                                                 12
Prior to 1834, the Smith and Cole index is based only on financial firms, whose returns were
much less volatile than returns on a typical industrial company. Through 1814, the Smith
and Cole index is an equally weighted portfolio of only seven banks, and those seven were
chosen in hindsight from a larger group. Also, in their careful historical account of the early
years on Wall Street, Werner and Smith (1991, p. 38) note that "... in periods of speculative
fever, such as 1824 and 1825, trading volume and share prices both rose sharply..." and "Late
in 1825, the securities market bubble burst." An unusual price increase is not evident in the
Smith and Cole data, however, as the annualized mean excess return on the index between
January 1824 and August 1825 is only 1%. Also, there is only a mild fall in the prices of the
financial firms at the end of 1825. Thus, one might suspect that the returns on a small set
of financial companies fail to convey much of the information about overall equity returns in
that period. After 1834, the Smith and Cole data expand to include a portfolio of up to 27
railroad stocks, which were among the most important industrial companies during much of
the nineteenth century. Noting other properties of the Smith and Cole index prior to 1834,
Schwert (1989) also excludes the data up to that point.

    The short-term risk-free return series is based on the data constructed by Siegel (1992).12
From 1926 until 1999, the returns on a one-month Treasury security are obtained from
CRSP. For 1920 through 1925, the rates on three-month Treasuries are taken from Homer
(1963). Prior to 1920, short-term Treasury securities in their current form were non-existent.
As a result, most of the data on U.S. short-term interest rates prior to 1920 are based on
commercial paper rates quoted in Macaulay (1938).13 As Siegel demonstrates, however,
commercial paper in the 19th century was subject to a high and variable risk premium,
which appears to render a raw series of returns on commercial paper a poor proçy for a
risk-free rate of return. In order to remove the risk premium on commercial paper, Siegel
constructs a synthetic "riskless" short-term interest rate series by assuming that the average
term premiums on long-term high-grade securities were the same in the United States as in
the United Kingdom.'4 Monthly returns are derived from Siegel's annual series using linear
interpolation, treating his values as corresponding to the last month of the year. Given that
the volatility of the annual series over this period is substantially lower than that of annual
equity returns, we suspect that the problems induced by this simplification are relatively
   '2We thank Jeremy Siegel for providing these data.
   '3For the period 1857 through 1919, Macaulay uses prime two-month and three-month commercial paper.
For 1831 through 1856, he uses data from Bigelow (1862) on commercial paper with maturity varying between
three and six months.
   '41n the nineteenth cent ury the capital markets in the United Kingdom were far more developed than
those in the United States. Siegel motivates his assumption about the equality of the average term premiums
by noting that real returns on long-term bonds in the U.K. and in the U.S. have behaved similarly over the
past two centuries.

                                                    13
unimportant in the empirical analyses we conduct.


3.2. Structural Breaks
Recall that the framework proposed here includes K transition regimes (TRs), separated
from the stable regimes (SRs) by 2K changepoints, or structural breaks. This framework
will sometimes be referred to as a framework "with TRs." For comparison, we also consider
a case "with no TRs," which can be viewed as special case of our framework in which all
TRs have zero length. In this latter specification, the beginning and ending points of each
TR collapse into one, so there are only K structural breaks.

   Figure 1 displays, for each month from January 1834 through June 1999, the posterior
probability that one of K =     15TRs begins in that month. We sometimes refer to this
probability as the "posterior break probability". The figure contains four plots. The first
plot corresponds to a specification with TRs, no mean-variance link (v = 0),    and =2%.
The sample contains 20 months in which the posterior break probability exceeds 10%. There
is an 83% probability of a TR beginning between May and October of 1940, and a 60%
probability between July and November of 1873. More recently, there is a 74% probability
of a TR beginning between December 1991 and April 1992, a 23% probability between
November 1994 and February 1995, and a 20% probability between April and August of
1996. Note that a very similar plot is obtained in the framework with v = 10 and o = 3%,
which is later referred to as "benchmark prior beliefs."

   The second plot corresponds to the same specification as the first plot but with return
volatility constrained to be equal across the SRs. Fewer TRs are identified than in the first
plot, which implies, perhaps not surprisingly, that changes in volatility are an important
source of structural changes in the return distribution. Nevertheless, even with constant
volatility, the specification with TRs can clearly identify several changepoints. For example,
June 1932 and March 1933 both receive a 100% posterior break probability. The cumula-
tive equity excess return in the two months following June 1932 is 82%. Those months are
followed by several more with negative or low returns, and this pattern leads to the iden-
tification of June 1932 as the probable beginning of a TR. Similarly, the cumulative equity
excess return in the three months following March 1933 is 90%, followed by lower returns
thereafter, so March 1933 is identified as the beginning of a TR. In contrast, the specification
with constant volatility and no TRs is unable to identify any structural changes: all poste-
rior break probabilities in the third plot are below 1.8%. Not surprisingly, changes in the


                                              14
expected return are very hard to detect without additional stochastic structure. Finally, the
fourth plot, which corresponds to the framework with TRs, a mean-variance link (ii = 10),
and =     oo, shows that the presence of the link also helps identify the TRs.

   All the results in the paper are reported for K =           This choice is motivated by
                                                             15.
comparing the plots of the posterior break probabilities for different K's in specifications
with a = 2% and no mean-variance link. We find that the plot with K = 20 looks very
similar to our first plot in Figure 1 with K = 15. The K = 20 framework identifies the
same structural changes as the K = 15 framework, and the five additional TRs receive a
low posterior probability. Therefore, increasing the number of TRs is unlikely to lead to
substantial differences in the estimates of the premium. At the same time, the plot with
K = 10 looks sufficiently different from the K = 15 plot that it cannot justify reducing the
number of TRs from 15 to 10.


3.3. The Equity Premium Over Time
3.3.1. Benchmark Prior Beliefs

As argued earlier, it seems reasonable to believe that extremely large shifts in the equity
premium are unlikely and that, to at least some extent, the premium is related to equity
volatility. This subsection presents results that reflect moderately informative prior beliefs
along these lines. The following subsections report the results for various other prior beliefs
to demonstrate the role of economically motivated priors in estimating the premium.

    Recall that the relation between the mean and the volatility of equity excess returns is
established by specifying the parameter ii in the informative prior on 'ib, defined in equation
(11). Here we specify v = 10, which implies a plausible intermediate degree of the mean-
variance link: there is a 10% prior probability that the price of risk in any SR is less than half
its prior mean (the overall sample value), and there is a 10% probability that the price of risk
is more than 1.6 times its prior mean. Also recall that prior beliefs about the magnitudes
of changes in the premium during TRs are specified by choosing the value of o-, the prior
standard deviation of the shift in the premium. Here we choose               = 3%, whereby we
assign only about 5% prior probability to the event that the annualized premium could shift
by more than 6% during a TR. Note that, with a prior belief in a mean-variance link, one
should not specify too small a value for o. Since data suggest that equity vo1atility changes
substatially over time, a belief that the premium is linked with volatility implies a belief


                                               15
that the premium changes over time as well. A prior specifying a nontrivial mean-variance
association should not simultaneously be too restrictive about shifts in the premium.

   Figure 2 plots the evolution of the posterior mean (solid) and posterior standard deviation
(dotted) of the equity premium over time. The estimated equity premium has been fairly
stable between January 1834 and June 1999. The annualized premium fluctuates between
3.9% in January 1849 and 6% in April 1934, with a downward trend since the mid-1930s.
It is interesting that, although a = 3% allows for fairly large shifts in the premium, the
evolution of the premium is rather smooth. Over the last decade, the premium decreased
by 0.5% to its current level of about 4.8%. Although this decrease is perhaps not large in
absolute terms, it is the most dramatic decrease in the premium over the last 165 years. The
posterior standard deviation associated with the estimate of the current premium is about
1.4%.

   Note that the decrease in the premium is not due to low recent returns, since the average
equity excess return in the 1990s is about twice the long-run sample mean of 5.7%. Rather,
our framework suggests that a significant portion of the recent run-up in stock prices occured
during TRs, so those high returns are consistent with a drop in the premium. Previous
studies that identify a recent decrease in the premium rely on parametric relations between
stock returns and other variables, such as dividend-price ratios, earnings-price ratios, etc.
This paper identifies the decrease based only on a simple model for equity excess returns
and economically motivated prior information.


3.3.2. The Effect of Beliefs About Magnitudes of Changes in the Premium

A simple example can illustrate the effect of informative prior beliefs about the magnitude
of potential shifts in the premium. A common empirical tradition in finance is to estimate
the equity premium using data beginning in January 1926, the starting date for widely used
datasets produced by CRSP and Ibbotson Associates. Given the availability of the earlier
data, using just the post-1925 data is equivalent to specifying a structural break in December
1925 and having noninformative priors about z and 'v'. Table 1 reports posterior moments
obtained using the same 1834—1999 excess-return series as before but in a model with only a
single break, exogenously specified at December 1925. To isolate the effect of an informative
prior on , no association between the premium and the volatility is imposed (i.e., ii = 0).
With a non-informative prior ( = oc), the data before the break is discarded, and the
equity premium for the post-1925 period has a posterior mean of 8.36%, similar to standard


                                             16
textbook values.15 With an informative prior on , the data before the break is useful in
estimating the post-break premium. Because the posterior mean of the premium in the 1834—
1925 subperiod is oniy 3.64% with noninformative priors, specifying an informative prior for
   lowers the mean of the post-1925 equity premium compared to the 8.36% produced with
the noninformative prior. The mean equity premium is lower by 1% with a = 4% and by
2% with r = 2%. Therefore, the common practice of using the average post-1925 excess
return overstates the equity premium if one believes that large shifts in the premium are
unlikely. At the same time, simply averaging the data beginning in 1834 produces too low an
estimate, unless one believes that a shift in the premium did not occur. These two extreme
approaches essentially correspond to the cases in Table 1 for a = oo and o = 0.

    The premium estimate with Oi = 0 is 5.22%, which is slightly below the simple arithmetic
average of the excess returns over the entire sample, 5.71%. The difference arises essentially
because the sample averages from the two subperiods are weighted by the reciprocals of the
subperiod volatilities, in addition to the lengths of the subperiods (the weights applied in
computing the arithmetic average). The mean return is estimated with less precision in the
more volatile second subperiod (the volatility is 18.93% vs. 15.16% in the first subperiod), so
the higher average return from that subperiod is given less weight (much as in weighted least
squares). Also note that the premium's posterior standard deviation with a, = 0 is 1.27%,
less than the 1.53% and 2.19% obtained for the two subperiods when = oo. Naturally,
posterior uncertainty about the equity premium is lower when inference is based on data
from the entire 165-year sample as opposed to just a subperiod. To sum up, a plays an
important role in this simple example with one fixed structural break.

    Prior beliefs about are also important in our framework with uncertainty about the
locations of the 15 TRs. Figure 3 displays the equity premium estimated with            = 2%
(solid) and       = oo (dashed). As in the previous example, no association between the

.
premium and the volatility is imposed in order to isolate the effect of an informative prior on
     The figure contains three plots. The first plot corresponds to the scenario in which the
structural breaks are fixed at their estimates. The breaks are fixed at the highest posterior
probability locations from the framework with no TRs and          = 2%, except that clusters
of adjacent months with high break probabilities are treated as one break. The second plot
also corresponds to the scenario with no TRs, but the uncertainty about the locations of the
15 breaks is incorporated. The third plot incorporates both TRs and break uncertainty. In
all three plots, there are substantial differences between the premium estimates for o = 2%
  1For example, at several places in their popular text, Brealey and Meyers (1996) use an equity premium
of 8.4%, which they report is an estimate based on the 1926—1994 period (p 145)


                                                  17
and = co.      For example, the estimates for o = 2% are much less variable over time.
Also, the estimates of the current premium for o- = 00 in all three plots are implausibly
high, between 19% and 28% per year, mostly due to the high recent returns. In contrast,
with r = 2%, the current premium is estimated between 5.9% and 6.6%. Also note that
a lower a reduces the posterior uncertainty associated with the estimate of the current
premium. Table 2 shows that the posterior standard deviation of the current premium with
    = oo is huge, 10.18%, because the current premium is estimated only based on the data
since the last structural break (whose location is uncertain). With cr = 2%, the posterior
standard deviation is much smaller, 1.73%, as a result of incorporating the earlier data.
These examples demonstrate that informative prior beliefs about magnitudes of changes in
the premium have a big impact on the premium estimates.

   Comparison of the first two plots in Figure 3 reveals the importance of the uncertainty
about the locations of the 15 structural breaks. The second plot, which incorporates the
uncertainty, produces a smoother pattern of the premiums over time than the first plot,
which ignores the uncertainty by conditioning on the break estimates.


3.3.3.   The Effect of Beliefs About the Premium's Association with Volatility

As demonstrated in the previous subsection, the data before a structural break are relevant
for estimating the current equity premium if one believes that extremely large shifts in the
premium are unlikely. The data before a break can also be relevant if one believes that, across
SRs, the equity premium has at least some degree of positive association with stock-market
volatility. For example, if the equity volatility in the last SR is low by historical standards,
a prior belief in a link between the equity premium and volatility leads to an inference that
the equity premium in the last SR is also low. Of course, such inference relies on data before
the most recent break.

    Figure 4 plots the equity premium estimated with different degrees of the mean-variance
link. To isolate the effect of the link, the prior on Li is noninformative (a = oo). The solid
line plots the premium estimated with a moderate link as in section 3.3.1. (v = 10), the
dashed line plots the premium for a perfect link (v = oo; the prior spiked at = 1), and
the dotted line plots the premium estimated with no mean-variance link (i = 0). The figure
reveals that the effect of the link on the premium estimates is substantial. For example, in
the period of high volatility in the 1930s, the premium estimates with a perfect link are more
than double the estimates with no link. The current premium is estimated to be 4.3% with a


                                              18
perfect link, 6.4% with a moderate link (ii = 10), and 27.7% with no link. The lower current
premium in the presence of the link is due to the fact that the equity volatility in the 1990s
has been 12.8%, less than the 17% volatility in the overall sample. These results clearly
indicate that volatility can exert a strong effect on the estimate of the equity premium.

   Also note that the link reduces the posterior uncertainty associated with the current
premium estimate, as shown in Table 2. Whereas the posterior standard deviation of the
current premium is 10.18% when a = oc and no link is imposed, it drops to 2.27% with the
moderate link and to 1.08% with a perfect link. Strengthening the link increases the precision
of the current premium estimate for two reasons. First, it is well known that monthly data
are more informative about volatilities than about means, especially for subperiods of modest
length. A prior that links the mean to the volatility and is mildly informative about the
price of risk allows us to learn about the mean from the volatility. The second reason is the
relatively low volatility in the 1990s. To see the basic point clearly, assume that c is known
with certainty and that
                                            i=1,...,K+1,                                  (25)
which is the perfect volatility link (v = oo). Then

                                Std{jtx,q} = crStd{yx,q},                                 (26)

where "Std" denotes standard deviation. In this simplified setting, the posterior standard
deviation of the equity premium in a given SR is proportional to that regime's equity variance,
so a low—variance regime yields a lower standard deviation of the equity premium. To a rough
approximation, the same reasoning applies to an imperfect but positive link.


3.3.4. The Effect of the Transition Regimes

Figure 5 plots the equity premium estimated in the specifications with TRs (solid) and
without TRs (dashed). In both cases, there is no volatility link and 4r = 2%. The effect of
adding TRs is smaller than the previously observed effects of changing     and v, but it is
still significant. For example, with no TRs, the equity premium rises from 6.2% to 6.6% in
the 1990s, due to high recent returns. With TRs, however, the premium drops from 6.5%
to 5.9% over the last five years, because much of the recent price increase is attributed to
TRs during which the premium decreases. The inclusion of TRs in the statistical model is
therefore not only theoretically appealing but also empirically important.



                                              19
4. Conclusions
A long history of aggregate stock returns contains information about the current equity
premium even if the historical distribution of returns has experienced structural breaks.
This study estimates the equity premium using a framework that combines the information
in the entire return history with economically motivated prior beliefs. Our estimates also
incorporate uncertainty about the timing of breaks.

    Several economic considerations enter the specification of priors. First, changes in the
equity premium are unlikely to be extreme. With an economically reasonable (i.e., finite)
prior variance for shifts in the premium, equity returns before suspected breaks are still
somewhat informative about the current premium. Second, across subperiods separated
by structural breaks, it seems reasonable to believe that the equity premium is positively
associated to at least some degree with equity volatility. We introduce a flexible prior
that avoids specifying a parametric relation between the premium and volatility but allows
information about the price of risk from earlier subperiods to be used in estimating the
current premium. Third, shifts in the equity premium are likely to be accompanied by
contemporaneous price changes in the opposite direction. We incorporate this prior belief
by introducing "transition" regimes between the "stable" regimes, where the latter have the
usual interpretation associated with subperiods separated by structural breaks. Within a
transition regime, our prior favors a negative relation between the equity return and the
change in the premium between the previous and subsequent stable regimes.

    Estimates of the equity premium based on reasonable priors fluctuate between 3.9 and 6.0
percent over the period from January 1834 through June 1999. The estimated premium rises
through much of the nineteenth century and the first few decades of the twentieth century,
but it declines fairly steadily after the 1930's except for a brief period in the mid 1970's. The
estimated premium exhibits its sharpest decline of the entire period, to 4.8%, during the
decade of the 1990's. We find that economically sensible priors are important in estimating
the equity premium as well as in identifying the most likely dates at which breaks occurred.
They also enable the current equity premium to be estimated with almost as much precision
as what one would attribute to an estimate based on the long-sample average when potential
breaks are ignored.




                                               20
                                               Appendix
Prior Means for the Transition-Regime Parameters.

This part of the appendix uses the results in Campbell (1991) to find sensible prior means
for the TR parameters b and j+1• (These prior means are denoted as & and a in (6)
and (7).) Campbell's framework does not correspond exactly to ours. He models expected
returns as linear functions of predetermined state variables, whereas no such dependence is
modeled here. Also, his expected returns can change in any period, whereas ours can change
only during TRs. Despite these differences, the underlying economics is the same in both
frameworks, so we believe that his results are to some extent useful also in our framework.
We use those results to center our mildly informative prior beliefs about b and

    Campbell decomposes unexpected aggregate stock returns ( — E_x) into changes
in the expectations of future dividend growth (d,1) and changes in expected future stock
returns (llh,t):
                                           —
                                               E_1(x)          'IId,t —                                 (A.1)
He defines
                                               (E — E_1) > pkxt+k,                                      (A.2)
where p is a number a little smaller than one, here assumed equal to one for simplicity.
Consider a transition regime TR3 such that the equity premium at time 11 is Ej_1(xt+k) =
    and at time t, Et(xt+k) =   iti,
                                  for each period t + k that belongs to the next SR.'6 That
is, for k 1,
                          t— 'E E      —
                                       —
                                                 if t + k SR+1                         A
                                                   10            otherwise.

    The basic idea is to relate 'rlh,t to L by controlling for the expected durations of the
stable and transition regimes. Let Prk = Prob(t + k E SR31) = P1,2+1. As explained
in section 2.2.1., P2j+1,2j+1 denotes the transition probability of staying in the (j + 1)-st SR
(which is regime (2j + 1) overall.) The value of flh,t that reflects the expected duration of
the stable regime is
                                                           1
                         =    j>Prk=j
                                  k=1
                                                  1—
                                                       P2j+1,2j+1
                         =    jE(dsRlp2j+1,2j+1),              t E TR3,       ,j = 1,.   ,   K.         (A.4)
   '6Formally, our framework requires the TRs to be at least one period long Letting the premium jump in
a single step essentially eliminates the TR. Nevertheless, such a specification simplifies the exposition of our
informal argument leading to a useful approximate prior relation between          and

                                                      21
The last equality is taken from section 22.1.. In order to obtain a useful approximate prior
relation between h,t and      we replace the prior conditional expectation of the SR duration
with an unconditional expectation. The intuition of the argument leading to (A.4) holds also
for a multi-period TR, with an adjustment for the length of the TR Treating all ih,j'5 ill
the same TR equally, we divide (AA) by the expected duration of the TR:
                                      E(dsR)
                                      E1UTR)
                                              ,      tETR3,              =l,..,K.              (A.5)

Denote ci =   . Also denote (t) = j, for all t E TR3 and j = 1, . . , K. Then
                                                  (j)d, t TR,                                  (A.6)
where TR denotes the union of all TR3, j = 1, . . , K.

                                                            j
   A priori, all the by's are viewed alike, b3 = b, = 1,. . , K17 Based on the definition of
b in (4) and given , the value of b can be viewed as the slope coefficient in a regression of
TR equity returns et on

                                      b—- Cov(x, (t))             E TR                         (A 7)
                                              Var(z())
Combining (A.6) and (A.7),

                 b = Cov(x1,           = Cov(xj, qh,j/d) = Cov(xt ?lh,t)                 TR.   (A.8)
                        Var((t))            Var(ih,/d)              Var(ih,t)

    Campbell's empirical decomposition of the variance of the U.S. equity returns in 1927—
1988 yields Var(?ld) = 0.3694, Var(ih) = 0.2854, and —2Cov(d, ??h) = 0.3464, where °1
denotes the total variance of the unexpected stock returns. Using these results, taken from
the first line of Table 2 in Campbell (1991), it follows from (A.1) that

                               Cov(x, llh)   — Cov(?ld, 11h) —
                                             —                       —
                                                                   1 —   —1   607              (A 9)
                                 Var(h)            Var(llh)
As described in section 2.2.1., the prior expected durations of the SR and TR are 113 and
12 months, respectively, so ci = 113/12. Plugging these values into (A.8) gives a prior mean
for b of
                                   b = —1.607d= —15.13.                               (A.1O)

   Next, we determine a prior mean of the TR variance. The fitted returns from the re-
gression of Xj on L considered in (A.7) can be viewed as the mean returns in each TR.
  '70f course, in the posterior, the b3 's are likely to be different from each other.

                                                      22
Therefore, the TR variance can be thought of as the residual variance from that regression.
Since     is approximately proportional to i'h (see (A.6)), this variance is approximately
the same as the residual variance a from the regression of x on     across the TRs. Hence,

                           =   Var(xt) — (Covxt ?1ht)) Var(h,t) = 0.2644                        (A.11)
                                          Var(h,t)
We take UR = 16.94% per year, the unconditional volatility of Xt in the overall sample. This
choice yields o = 0.000634, which we use for a2, the prior mean of the TR variance.


Drawing from the Posterior Distribution.

In order to obtain draws of the parameter vector 0 from its joint posterior distribution, we
use a block—at-a-time version of the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm.'8 Repeated draws
of model parameters from their full conditional distributions form a Markov chain. Beyond
a burn-in stage, the elements in the chain are draws from the joint posterior distribution.

    The changepoints q are drawn using a technique developed by Chib (1998). The parame-
ter vector is augmented with a latent state variable indicating the regime from which each
observation has been drawn. Conditional on the current draw of 0, Chib's algorithm draws
the state variable, which uniquely determines q. One substantial advantage of this technique
is that each draw of q requires oniy two passes through the data, regardless of the number
of changepoints. This fact enables us to obtain the posterior distribution of as many as 30
changepoints (K = 15), as well as to integrate out the uncertainty about the changepoint
locations in estimating the equity premium. For more details, see Chib (1998)

   To implement the MH algorithm, we first perform the change of variables )           1/'y
and ç 1/k. Full conditional posteriors of the model parameters are then obtained by
incorporating the change of variables and rearranging the joint posterior, a product of the
prior in (18) and the likelihood function in (19):
                                        1
                      N                                   >0                                    (A.12)
                                     lvLt)
                      v + q_i          (x—pi)2
                                                 ,    i= 1,...,K+1                              (A.13)
                       2     —'K+1 —q—i          (Tt—/)2
                           + L4=1 Lt=q21_2+1
                                                                                                (A.14)
                               X
                                 2a+ K+1
  '8The algorithm is introduced by Metropolis et al. (1953) and generalized by Hastings (1970). See Chib
and Greenberg (1995) for a detailed description of the a1gorithm

                                                     23
                     (i — 2)cE2 +                             —
                                                                  (Iti+ILi+1 +      b))2          j = 1,.   .   . , K (A.15)
                                                    X?l+12j

                     N (mbv, vi),                   j = 1,        . , K,                                             (A.16)

where

                         —
                     mb3 —
                                    b         jl2j      (t=q2j_1+1 Xj           —   /L + /Lj+1
                                                                                    ________
                                               2
                                              0•j,j+1   \         12j
                                          1
                      Vb
                              =
                                   -+
The full conditional posterior of each element of the transition matrix P is

                                   Pk,k            Beta(ak + kk, Ck + 1),                                            (A. 17)

where flkk is the number of one-step transitions of the latent state variable from regime k to
regime k. The full conditional posterior distribution of u can be shown to be equal to
               K+1    12i—1                   1
                                                        —                   —
          oc (n                   exp

              + (,)2
                 i1 t=q2_2+1
                                        {—

                                                   +
                                                        3=lt=q2_1+l
                                                                           (a —             +
                                                                                                 bL))2] }
               K+1    12i—1                   1
          o (n i) exp{_                            [,'(v-1 + D1 + D2)
                      —
                           2'(VT1 + w + g) + d']} p > o,                                                             (A.18)

where d is a (K + 1)-vector whose i-th element is

                                                            ' 2'
                                                              2i—1



w is a (K + 1)-vector whose i-th element is

                                                              12j—1
                                                                                                                     (A.20)

   is a (K + 1)-vector whose i-th element is
                                                           q2i—1
                                                     1
                                                                                                                     (A21)
                                                    12i1 t=q2_2+1



                                                            24
                                    0                          0                          0    0
                           (Zi,i
                             o z2,1+z1,2                       0                          0    0
                                                      z2,2          zi>3                  0    0
                                                                                                     (A 22)
                                o           o                  0                  Z2,K_i+Zi,K 0
                                            0                  0                       0      Z2,K


                           (     0      —z3,1         0         ...        0          0
                               —z3,1        0     —z3,2 .                  0          0
                                 o          Z32       0         ...        0          0
                                                                                                     (A.23)
                                 o          o         0         ...        0      —Z3,K
                                 0          0         0         ...        Z3,K       0

                           (
                                Z5,1   + Z4,2
                                Z5,2     Z4,3
                                                                                                     (A.24)
                               Z5 K—i + Z4 K
                                     Z5,K

and, for    1, . .. , K,
                                                        (1 — i\2
                                                      2jVj
                                                      1
                                                  —
                                         Zi,j —                 2
                                                              o.j,j+i
                                                  —
                                                  —   l23(b         + )2                               .26
                                                                2
                                                              o.j,j+i
                                                              IL
                                                      2jt1j — Vj +
                                                       7              i\IL        i
                                         Z3j      —
                                                                      2
                                                                    0j,j+i
                                                  =           l2(b — )
                                         Z4,                                                         (A.28)
                                                                o.j>j+i

                                                  = l2(b +                                           (A.29)
                                                              0•j,j+i
                                                          1
                                                  =                        X.                        (A.30)
                                                          2j t=q2_1+i

   Each of the full conditional distributions, except for that of     in (A.18), corresponds
to a well known density, so draws from those densities are easily generated. In order to
draw i, a candidate value is drawn from a proposal density and accepted with a probability
that ensures convergence of the chain to the target distribution. If a candidate draw is not
accepted, the previous draw is retained. The proposal density for it is a piecewise linear

                                                               25
approximation to the target density. We use a two-pass grid method to draw from the
proposal density. In the first pass, we use an equally spaced grid (with fi = 40 gridpoints)
to fit a piecewise linear cdf '(pI) corresponding to p(p'). The second-pass grid is created
by taking P' (1- .), for f = 1, .. . , f2, where f2 determines the fineness of the second-pass
grid (we use f2 = 25 gridpoints). In both grids, we also add a few gridpoints in the tails of the
support, to prevent undersampling. The second grid increases the accuracy of the procedure
by putting more grid points in the regions of greater mass. Through the second-pass grid,
we then refit the piecewise linear cdf, denoted as P2(p.), and use the inverse cdf method
to draw p. That is, we generate a standard uniform variate u and take p as P'(uI.). The
second-pass grid is a very good approximation to the target density, since the rate at which
the proposal draws are accepted is over 95%. Note that our two-pass grid procedure can in
principle be used to make draws from virtually any distribution whose integrating constant
is unknown. The procedure is marginally feasible in terms of computation time even with a
highly dimensional parameter space (here, p has K + 1 = 16 elements).

  For each posterior draw of p, a draw of P(a) is constructed as (j+j+i)/2 for j = 1,.. , K.
The posterior moments of p and P(j), as well as the posterior probabilities that a particular
month belongs in a given regime, are estimated using 40,000 posterior draws, obtained by
retaining every 15th draw from a chain of 600,000 draws beyond the first 6,000 draws.
For each set of prior parameters, we run two independent Markov chains, with two different
seeds in the random number generator. Such an exercise is used to assess the precision of our
results. In all cases, the premium estimates produced by the two independent chains are very
close, almost always within less than lObp (annualized). Minor exceptions with somewhat
larger deviations occasionally occur in some cases that are less interesting a priori (e.g., no
mean-variance link and c = cc), but the overall precision of our results is satisfactory. The
reported premium estimate in each month is obtained by averaging the premiums obtained
from the two independent chains.




                                               26
                                          Table 1
                  Estimates of the Equity Premium with a Single Break
                               Specified in December 1925

    The table reports posterior moments of the equity premium (in percent per annum) in a model
with a single structural break specified at December 1925. The equity premium is defined as the
expected rate of return on the aggregate stock-market portfolio in excess of the short-term interest
rate, and pi and P2 denote the equity premiums before and after the break. The break is associated
with a shift in the equity premium given by i = P2 — p. The prior standard deviation of Li is cr
(annualized in the table).


                                Posterior Mean               Posterior Std Dev
               o (%)        1834—1925     1926—1999       1834—1925     1926—1999
                   0            5.22         5.22             1.27         1.27
                   1            5.03         5.59             1.31         1.42
                   2            4.65         6.33             1.39         1.67
                   3            4.33         6.93             1.44         1.83
                   5            4.00         7.69             1.49         2.01
                  00            3.64         8.36             1.53         2.19




                                                27
                                           Ttible 2
                   Posterior Uncertainty about the Current Premium

    The table reports posterior standard deviations of the current equity premium, as of June
1999, in percent per annum. The equity premium is defined as the expected rate of return on the
aggregate stock-market portfolio in excess of the short-term interest rate. The sample period is
split into 2K +1 regimes, K +1 of which are stable regimes (SRs), separated from each other by K

.
transition regimes (TRs). Throughout, K = 15. The equity premium in the i-th SR is denoted by
    The j-th TR is associated with a shift in the equity premium given by 1j = Pj+1 — j. In the
framework "with no TRs", the beginning and ending points of TRs coincide. For j = 1... , K, the
prior standard deviation of Lj is (annualized in the table). The standard deviation (volatility)
of the excess stock return in the i-th SR is denoted by o. In each SR (i = 1,.. . , K + 1), the
relation between the equity premium and variance is given by p =          where the prior for each
j is a gamma distribution with parameters u/2 and 2/v.


                        A. No prior association between , and
                                                          0, = 00
                       With TRs                 1.73        10.18
                       No TRs                   1.81        10.94
                       No TRs, fixed breaks     1.79         9.01
                         B. With TRs and a prior association be-
                             tween and
                                                               0 = 00
                       v = 10 (moderate)              1.37         2.27
                       v = oo (perfect)                —           1.08




                                              28
           I         I       I         I           I      I         I         I




 0.5




  0
           I    AMkMI        I         1k          I      L                   I
       184001     186001   188001   190001    192001   194001    196001    198001    200001
                                             month
           I         I       I         I           I      I         I         I




 0.5




       .   I                 I         I.          I                I         I
  0
       184001     186001   188001   190001    192001   194001    196001    198001    200001
                                             month
           I         I       I         I           I      I         I         I




 0.5




           I         I       I         I           I      I         I         I
  0
       184001     186001   188001   190001    192001   194001    196001    198001    200001
                                             month
  1




 0.5




  0        I      lL..J                            I                          I
       184001     186001   188001   190001    192001   194001    196001    198001    200001
                                             month


Figure 1. Posterior break probabilities. The figure plots, for each month, the posterior
probability that one of 15 stable regimes in the return distribution ends in that month.
(The 16th stable regime is assumed to continue through the last month of the sample.) The
first plot corresponds to the specification with transition regimes (TRs), no mean-variance
link, and 4r =   2%, the second plot to the same specification as the first plot but with
constant return volatility across stable regimes, the third plot to the same specification as
the second plot but with no TRs, and the fourth plot to the specification with TRs, with
the mean-variance link (v = 10), and a = oo.



                                              29
  6



 5.5



  5



 4.5



  4



 3.5



  3



 2.5



  2



 1.5



  1
       184001   186001   188001   190001    192001   194001   196001   198001   200001
                                           month


Figure 2. Equity premium with benchmark priors. The solid line plots, for each
month, the posterior mean of the equity premium obtained using the specification with
transition regimes,     = 3%, and ii = 10. The dotted line plots the posterior standard
deviation of jt in each month.




                                            30
                 ,-
        I           I              I      I           I             I               I           I




20                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                        I                      I
                        II


15                      II

                                                                                                           I
                        II                                              I

10                                                             —    —
                        i

                                                          I
 5.                                                                                                   -
                    I              I      I           I             I               I           I
 o
     184001      186001      188001    190001    192001        194001          196001        198001       200001
                                                month

        I           I              I      I           I         r                               I




                                                                                                                   -
20                                                            JI

                                                          )             .-.-—---—                          /
15                                                                                                        1-
                                                —
                                                                                            ————
10•                          I_'
                                                                                                                   -




 5                                                                                                                 -
            _(
                    I              I      I           I             I               I           I
 o
     184001      186001      188001    190001    192001        194001          196001        198001       200001
                                                month

yJ      I           I              I      I           I             I               I           I




20



10•                                                                 —                                              -
                                                          I- —


                    I              I      I           I             I               I           I
 o
     184001      186001      188001    190001    192001        194001          196001        198001       200001
                                                month


Figure      3. Equity premiums for different o's. The figure plots, for each month, the
posterior mean of the equity premium obtained in specifications with no mean-variance
link. The first plot arises from a specification with no transition regimes (TRs) and fixed
breaks, the second from a specification that accounts for break uncertainty but has no TRs,
and the third from a specification that includes TRs and accounts for break uncertainty.
The solid line corresponds to       = 2% and the dashed line to r = cc, where r is the
prior standard deviation of the shift in the equity premium at a structural break.




                                                 31
   184001     186001    188001     190001    192001     194001    196001     198001    200001
                                            month


Figure 4. Equity premiums for different degrees of a mean-variance association.
The figure plots, for each month, the posterior mean of the equity premium obtained in
specifications with transition regimes and q = oc. The solid line corresponds to a moderate
prior mean-variance association (ii = 10), the dashed line to a perfect link (ii = oo), and the
dotted line to no link (ii = 0).




                                              32
 6.8




 6.6




 6.4




 6.2




  6




 5.8




 5.6




 5.4




 5.2




  5
       184001   186001   188001   190001    192001    194001   196001    198001    200001
                                           month


Figure 5. Equity premiums with and without transition regimes. The figure plots,
for each month, the posterior mean of the equity premium jt obtained in specffications with
    = 2% and no mean-variance link. The solid line corresponds to the specification with
transition regimes (TRs), and the dashed line to the one without TRs.




                                            33
                                       References

Albert, James H., and Siddhartha Chib, 1993, Bayes inference via Gibbs sampling of au-
   toregressive time series subject to Markov mean and variance shifts, Journal of Business
   and Economic Statistics 11, 1—15.

Andrews, Donald W. K., 1993, Tests for parameter instability and structural change with
   unknown change point, Econometrica 61, 821—856.
Andrews, D. W. K. and W. Ploberger, 1994, Optimal tests when a nuisance parameter is
   present only under the alternative, Econometrica 62, 1383—1414.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 1998, Regime switches in interest rates, working paper,
  Stanford University.
Backus, David, and Allan W. Gregory, 1993, Theoretical relations between risk premiums
   and conditional variances, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 11, 177—185.
Bai, J., 1995, Least absolute deviation estimation of a shift, Econometric Theory 11, 403—436.

Bai, J., 1997, Estimating multiple breaks one at a time, Econometric Theory 13, 315—352.
Bai, Jushan, Robin L. Lumsdaine, and James H. Stock, 1997, Testing for and dating common
   breaks in multivariate time series, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Bai, J. and P. Perron, 1998, Estimating and testing linear models with multiple structural
   changes, Econometrica 66, 47—78.
Baillie, Richard T., and Ramon P. DeGennaro, 1990, Stock returns and volatility, Journal
   of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 203—214.

Barry, Daniel and J. A. Hartigan, 1993, A Bayesian analysis for change point problems,
   Journal of the American Statistical Association 88, 309—319.

Bhattacharya, P. K., 1994, Some aspects of change-point analysis, in Change Point Pro blerns,
   IMS Lecture Notes — Monograph Series, Vol. 23, ed. by E. Carlstein, H.-G. Mueller, and
   D. Siegmund. Hayward, CA: Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 28—56.

Bigelow, Erastus B., 1862, The tariff question... Boston, MA.
Brealey, Richard A., and Stewart C. Myers, 1996, Principles of Corporate Finance, McGraw-
   Hill, New York.

Broemeling, Lyle D., and Hiroki Tsurumi, 1987, Econometrics and Structural Change, Marcel
   Dekker, Inc., New York.
Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 18, 373—399.


                                             34
Carlin, B. P., Alan E. Gelfand, and Adrian F. M. Smith, 1992, Hierarchical Bayesian analysis
   of changepoint problems, Applied Statistician 41, 389—405.
Chan, K. C., Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 1992, Global financial markets and the
  risk premium, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 137—167.

Chen, J. and A. K. Gupta, 1997, Testing and locating variance changepoints with application
  to stock prices, Journal of the American Statistical Association 92, 739—747.
Chernoff, H. and S. Zacks, 1964, Estimating the current mean of a normal distribution which
   is subjected to changes in time, Annals of Mathematical Statistics 35, 999—1018.

Chib, Siddhartha, 1998, Estimation and comparison of multiple change-point models, Jour-
   nal of Econometrics 86, 22 1-241.

Chib, Siddhartha, and Edward Greenberg, 1995, Understanding the Metropolis-Hastings
   algorithm, American Statistician 49, 327—335.

Cowles, Alfred, III, and Associates, 1939, Common Stock Indexes, 2nd ed., Cowles Commis-
  sion Monograph no. 3, Bloomington, md.: Principia Press.
Diebold, F. X. and C. Chen, 1996, Testing structural stability with endogenous break point:
   A size comparison of analytic and bootstrap procedures, Journal of Econometrics 70,
   221—241.

Dow Jones and Co., 1972, The Dow Jones Averages, 1885—1970, ed. by Maurice L. Farrell,
  New York: Dow Jones.

French, Kenneth R., G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, Expected stock
   returns and variance, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3—29.
Glosten, Lawrence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David E. Runkle, 1993, On the relation
   between the expected value and the variance of the nominal excess return on stocks,
   Journal of Finance 48, 1779—1801.

Goetzmann, William N., and Roger G. Ibbotson, 1994, An emerging market: The NYSE
   from 1815 to 1871, working paper, Yale University.
Hamilton, J. D., 1989, A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series
  and the business cycle, Econometrica 57, 357—384.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1989, Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing
   models, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 289—317.
Hastings, W. K., 1970, Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their ap-
   plications, Biometrika 57, 97—109.

Homer, Sidney, 1963, A history of interest rates, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick,
  NJ.


                                            35
Hsu, D. A., 1982, Robust inferences for structural shift in regression models, Journal of
   Econometrics 19, 89—107.

Inclán, Carla, 1993, Detection of multiple changes of variance using posterior odds, Journal
    of Business and Economic Statistics 11, 289—300.

Kandel, S. and R.F. Stambaugh, 1990, Expectations and volatility of consumption and asset
  returns, Review of Financial Studies 3, 207—232.

Krishnaiah, P. R., and B. Q. Miao, 1988, Review about estimation of change points, in
   Handbook of Statistics, Vol. 7, ed. by P. R. Krishnaiah and C. R. Rao. New York:
   Elsevier.

Liu, J., S. Wu, and J. V. Zidek, 1997, On segmented multivariate regression, Statistica Sinica
   7, 497—525.

Macaulay, F. R., 1938, The Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields and Stock Prices in
  the United States since 1856, New York: NBER.
McCulloch, Robert E., and Ruey S. Tsay, 1994, Bayesian inference of trend- and difference-
  stationarity, Econometric Theory 10, 596—608.
Merton, Robert C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
  investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323—361.
Metropolis, N., A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbiuth, A. H. Teller, and E. Teller, 1953,
   Equations of state calculations by fast computing machines, Journal of Chemical Physics
   21, 1087—1092.

Pastor, Lubo and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1999, Costs of equity capital and model mispricing,
   Journal of Finance 54, 67—121.

Schwert, G. William, 1989, Business cycles, financial crises and stock volatility, Carnegie-
   Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 31 (Autumn): 83—125.
Schwert, G. William, 1990, Indexes of U.S. stock prices from 1802 to 1987, Journal of
   Business 63, 399—426.

Scruggs, John T., 1998, Resolving the puzzling intertemporal relation between the mar-
   ket risk premium and conditional market variance: A two-factor approach, Journal of
   Finance 53, 575—603.

Siegel, Jeremy J., 1992, The real rate of interest from 1800—1990: A study of the U.S. and
   the U.K., Journal of Monetary Economics 29, 227—252.
Smith, W. B. and A. H. Cole, 1935, Fluctuations in American Business, 1 790—1860, Cam-
  bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.




                                             36
Sowell, F., 1996, Optimal tests for parameter instability in the generalized method of mo-
   ments framework, Econometrica 64, 1085—1107.

Stephens, D. A., 1994, Bayesian retrospective multiple-changepoint identification, Applied
   Statistician 43, 159—178.

Tauchen, George and Robert Hussey, 1991, Quadrature-based methods for obtaining ap-
   proximate solutions to nonlinear asset pricing models, Econometrica 59, 371—396.
Turner, Christopher M., Richard Startz, and Charles R. Nelson, 1989, A Markov model of
   heteroskedasticity, risk, and learning in the stock market, Journal of Financial Economics
   25, 3—22.

Viceira, Luis M., 1997, Testing for structural change in the predictability of asset returns,
   working paper, Harvard University.
Werner, Walter and Steven T. Smith, 1991, Wall Street, Columbia University Press, New
   York.

Whitelaw, Robert F., 1994, Time variations and covariations in the expectation and volatility
  of stock market returns, Journal of Finance 49, 5 15—541.

Zacks, S., 1983, Survey of classical and Bayesian approaches to the change-point problem:
   Fixed sample and sequential procedures of testing and estimation, in Recent Advances
   in Statistics, ed. by M. H. Rivzi, J. S. Rustagi, and D. Siegmund. New York: Academic
   Press.

Zeilner, Arnold, 1971, An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics (John Wiley
   and Sons, New York, NY).




                                             37
