NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVALUATING AND INVESTING IN EQUITY MUTUAL FUNDS

Lubos Pastor
Robert F. Stambaugh

Working Paper 7779
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7779

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

July2000

Research support from the Center for Research in Security Prices and Dimensional Fund Advisors is
gratefully acknowledged (Pastor). We are grateful to Andrew Metrick, Toby Moskowitz, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Northwestern University, Ohio State University,
University of Chicago, University of Peimsylvania, and Vanderbilt University for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

2000 by Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.

Evaluating and Investing in Equity Mutual Funds
Lubos Pastor and Robert F. Stambaugh
NBER Working Paper No. 7779

July2000
JELNo. Gil, G12, Cli
ABSTRACT
Our framework for evaluating and investing in mutual fttnds combines observed returns on
funds and passive assets with prior beliefs that distinguish pricing-model inaccuracy from managerial

skill. A fund's "alpha" is defined using passive benchmarks. We show that returns on nonbenchmark passive assets help estimate that alpha more precisely for most funds. The resulting
estimates generally vary less than standard estimates across alternative benchmark specifications.
Optimal portfolios constructed from a large universe of equity fttnds can include actively managed
funds even when managerial skill is precluded. The fund universe offers no close substitutes for the

Fama-French and momentum benchmarks.

Lubos Pastor
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
lubos.pastor@gsb.uchicago.edu

Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER

stambaughwharton.upenn.edu

1. Introduction
Evaluating mutual fund performance combines data and judgment. The data typically consist of returns on the funds and one or more benchmarks, and the judgment typically involves
specifying the benchmarks and their role in defining performance. Investing in mutual funds
also combines data and judgment. Rather than accept the standard performance measures
at face value, investors can allow their decisions to reflect doubts about either the adequacy
of the benchmarks or the stock-picking ability of fund managers.

In this study, we develop and implement a framework in which views about the adequacy of the benchmarks—their ability to price other passive assets—can be incorporated
formally into both performance evaluation and the investment decision. The framework also
allows separate beliefs about potential managerial skill to enter the investment decision. To
accomplish these tasks, we introduce passive "non-benchmark" assets that are not used in
previous approaches. These assets provide information that can be used to estimate a fund's
performance more precisely. They also allow beliefs that distinguish benchmark inadequacy
from managerial skill, and they help account for common variation in returns across funds
that is not captured by the benchmarks.

A mutual fund's performance is often measured by alpha, the intercept in a regression of
the fund's return on one or more passive benchmark returns.' The choice of benchmarks is
often guided by a pricing model, as in Jensen's (1969) pioneering use of the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (CAPM) of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965) to investigate mutual fund
alphas relative to a single market-index benchmark. Other studies, beginning with Lehmann
and Modest (1987), examine fund alphas with respect to a set of multiple benchmarks viewed
as the relevant factors for pricing in a multifactor model, such as the Arbitrage Pricing Theory
of Ross (1976).
Alpha is typically computed by ordinary-least-squares (OLS) estimation of the regression

= A + /3ArB,t + €A,t,

(1)

where rA,1 is the fund's return in month t,
is a k x 1 vector containing the benchmark
returns, and 0A denotes the fund's alpha. This standard approach ignores information about
alpha provided by returns on other non-benchmark passive assets. Even though such assets
play no role in the definition of alpha in (1), they can play a useful role in its estimation.
'Throughout our discussion, "returns" are rates of return in excess of a riskiess interest rate, or they are
payoffs on zero-investment spread positions.
1

To take one example, asswne that the benchmark assets do indeed price other passive
assets. Consider the regression of a non-benchmark return
on the benchmark returns,

= a + I3rB,, + en,,,

(2)

where the correlation between
and E is positive. If the benchmarks price other passive
assets, then c, = 0. Now suppose that over the same sample period used to obtain the OLS
estimate of aA, the OLS estimate of a is less than its true value of zero. Given this outcome
and the positive correlation between A,L and e, the OLS estimate of aA is expected to be
less than its true value as well, and this information can be used in estimating aA.

Pricing models often motivate the choice of benchmarks, but non-benchmark assets can
provide additional information about a mutual fund's alpha even with no assumption about
the benchmarks' pricing ability. The explosive growth of the mutual fund industry in recent
years presents investors with many funds that have relatively short histories. Consider a
fund whose available return history is shorter than the histories of
and rB,t. Suppose
that the OLS estimate of a computed for the sample period of the fund's available history
is less than the OLS estimate of c computed for a longer sample period. Since the latter
estimate is more precise, the first estimate is more likely to be less than the true (unknown)
value of a. Given the positive correlation between EA, and e, the same can be said of the
OLS estimate of aA relative to its true value, and this information can be used in estimating
cEA. The additional information comes not through a pricing model, as in the first example,
but through the longer histories of the passive asset returns.

In the two examples described above, c is assumed to be either zero or completely
unknown. One may well prefer an intermediate version in which the benchmarks are believed
to be relevant for pricing other passive assets, but not without error. In such a case, which we
handle in a Bayesian framework, non-benchmark assets can play a role that combines aspects
of both examples. Additional information about cEA is provided by the extent to which the
short-history estimate of a differs from zero as well as from its long-history estimate.

Our study does not recommend a particular set of benchmarks for defining alpha. Recent
academic studies compute mutual fund alphas with respect to a single market benchmark
(e.g., Malkiel (1995)) as well as sets of multiple benchmarks (e.g., Carhart (1997) and Elton,

Gruber, and Blake (1996)). We compute alphas in both single-benchmark and multiplebenchmark settings. Alphas defined with respect to a single market benchmark may be of
interest whether or not one believes in the CAPM. We offer just two of many examples of
their use in practice: Morningstar, the leading provider of mutual fund information, reports
alphas computed with respect to one of several broad market indexes; Capital Resource
2

Advisors, one of the largest providers of performance information to institutional clients,
reports alphas computed with respect to the S&P 500 Index. Our approach allows one to
estimate alpha under various assumptions about whether the benchmarks that define alpha
price other passive investments
We investigate the performance of a large sample of equity mutual funds and find that
the information about a fund's alpha provided by non-benchmark returns can be substantial,
especially for certain types of funds. Suppose, for example, that one has no confidence in
the CAPM's pricing ability but nevertheless wishes to report a small-company growth fund's
traditional alpha defined with respect to a single market benchmark. The absolute difference
between the OLS estimate and an alternative estimate that incorporates information in nonbenchmark returns has a median value across such funds of 8.3% per annum. If instead one
has complete confidence in the CAPM's pricing ability, then the median absolute difference
in estimates is 7.2%. In both cases the alternative estimate is more precise, and its variance
is oniy about one-third that of the OLS estimate for the median small-company growth fund.
A number of studies observe that OLS estimates of mutual fund aiphas are sensitive to
the specification of the benchmarks that define those alphas.2 When the estimation of a
fund's alpha incorporates non-benchmark assets, the definition of alpha typically becomes
less important and, in some cases, even irrelevant. We estimate alphas defined with respect to
the CAPM and with respect to the three Fama and French (1993) benchmark factors, which
include size and value factors in addition to the market factor. When estimated using OLS,
the median difference in alphas between the two models is 2.3% per annum for all funds and
8.1% for small-company growth funds. When the estimation incorporates non-benchmark
assets but does not rely on the benchmarks to price them, those values fall to 1.2% and 2.0%.
If the benchmarks are instead assumed to price the non-benchmarks exactly, the estimates of
a fund's alpha are identical under the two models, even though the definitions of the alphas
differ. In general, if alphas are defined with respect to different benchmarks but estimated
using the same set of passive assets (benchmark and non-benchmark), then the estimates
are identical if in each case the benchmarks are assumed to price the non-benchmark assets
exactly. Loosely speaking, if you believe that some pricing model holds exactly and want a
fund's alpha with respect to it, you need not identify the model.
As in numerous previous studies, we find that estimated alphas for the majority of equity
mutual funds are negative.3 For each investment objective and each age group, we find a
2An early example is the study by Lehmann and Modest (1987).
3Grinblatt and Titman (1995) review the literature on mutual fund performance

3

posterior probability near 100% that the average of the funds' CAPM alphas is negative when
the non-benchmark assets are excluded. Alphas for most funds remain negative when defined
with respect to multiple benchmarks as well as when the information in the non-benchmark
assets is used the estimation.

Non-benchmark assets permit a framework for defining a measure of managerial skill
when a pricing model is viewed as possibly flawed but not useless. A common interpretation
of alpha is that it represents the skill of the fund's manager in selecting mispriced securities.
That interpretation is subject to a number of potential complications, including a concern
that the benchmarks used to define alpha might not price all passive investments.4 This
concern can be addressed by defining skill with respect to an expanded set of passive assets,
thus weakening the link to a pricing model. Preserving some role for a pricing model can
still be useful to an investor, in that a somewhat inaccurate pricing model can be of some
help in identifying optimal portfolios. We allow an investor to have prior beliefs about a
skill measure defined as the intercept in a regression of the fund's return on an expanded
set of passive assets that includes both non-benchmark assets as well as the benchmarks
relevant to a particular pricing model. At the same time, we allow the investor to have
prior beliefs about the potential mispricing of the non-benchmark assets with respect to the
benchmarks. In other words, an investor can have prior beliefs that distinguish managerial
skill from pricing-model inaccuracy.

Performance evaluation is a topic of long-standing interest in the academic literature, but
few if any studies have pursued its obvious practical motivation: constructing a portfolio of
mutual funds. We compute portfolios having the maximum Sharpe ratio constructed from
an investment universe of over 500 no-load equi1y funds. Optimal portfolios are obtained by
combining the information in historical returns with an investor's prior beliefs, accounting
for parameter uncertainty. We entertain priors representing a range of beliefs about both

managerial skill as well as the accuracy of each of three pricing models: the CAPM, the
three-factor Fama-French model, and the four-factor model of Carhart (1997). The last
model supplements the three Fama-French benchmarks with a "momentum" factor, the
current month's difference in returns between the previous year's best- and worst-performing
stocks. Returns on passive benchmark and non-benchmark assets are used in the modeling
and estimation, but only the mutual funds are assumed to be eligible for investment. The

compositions of the optimal portfolios are influenced substantially by prior beliefs about
both managerial skill and pricing models. We also find that a "hot-hand" portfolio of the
4Other well-known complications include the possibility that the manager uses information to change the
value of /3A through time as conditional expected returns on the benchmarks fluctuate.

4

previous year's best-performing mutual funds does not enter the optimal portfolio under any
set of prior beliefs considered, even if the investor has complete confidence in the four-factor
model, which contains the momentum factor. Real estate funds, interestingly, tend to exhibit
positive sensitivities to that factor as well as to the three Fama-French factors, so those funds
occupy much of the optimal portfolio for such an investor.
We find that when the passive benchmarks used to define aA are not available for investment, there need not exist close substitutes for them in the universe of mutual funds. For an
investor who believes completely in the accuracy of the Fama-French model and precludes
managerial skill, the perceived maximum Sharpe ratio is only 66 percent of what could be

achieved by direct investment in that model's benchmarks. For a believer in the Carhart
four-factor model, the corresponding value is 54 percent. Interestingly, actively managed
funds can be better substitutes for the benchmarks than existing passive funds, so active
funds can be selected even by investors who admit no possibility of managerial skill.

Our investment problem is related to the recent study by Baks, Metrick, and Wachter
(2000), who also consider investment in mutual ftmds under prior beliefs about manager
skill. Their investment universe includes mutual funds as well as the passive benchmarks
used to define cEA, and they do not include beliefs about possible pricing-model errors. In
their setting, an investor buys an actively managed fund only if it appears to have a positive
cEA. Those authors do not construct optimal portfolios, but they conclude that unless one is
extremely skeptical about the possibility of managerial skill, some actively managed funds
would be selected by an investor who wants a high overall Sharpe ratio. Our investment
universe differs from theirs in that we do not assume the benchmark returns can be earned
costlessly. Rather than attempt to construct after-cost versions of those returns, we simply
confine investors to the universe of mutual funds.
Section 2 discusses the econometric issues and reports results from computing alternative

estimates of alpha for 2,609 equity mutual funds. Section 3 presents the results of the
investment problem, and Section 4 briefly reviews our conclusions.

2. Estimating alpha
This section begins with some basic concepts underlying the use of non-benchmark assets.
We then describe the construction of our data, explain our methodology, and report results
based on a large sample of equity mutual funds. In this section, dealing with estimation, the
5

prior beliefs about cXA are "diffuse," or completely non-informative. In the spirit of much of
the previous literature, the fund's track record determines its estimated alpha without any

adjustment for what one might think to be reasonable magnitudes for that parameter. In
the next section, dealing with an investment problem, we consider the effects of informative
prior beliefs about managerial skill.

2.1. The role of non-benchmark assets
Let TN,,, denote the m x 1 vector of returns in month t on m non-benchmark passive assets,

so the multivariate version of the regression in (2) is written as

rN, = aN + BNTB,t + N,t,

(3)

where the variance-covariance matrix of
is denoted by E. Let denote the variance of
the disturbance A,t in (1). Also define the regression of the fund's return on all p (= m + k)
passive assets,

rA,t =

,
c
A
+ cANrN, + CABTB,t + UA,1,

where the variance of UA,L is denoted by o,. All regression disturbances are assumed to be
normally distributed, independently and identically across t. A key to understanding the
role of non-benchmark assets is given by the equality
EA5A+C'ANcXN,

(5)

which follows by taking expectations in (1) and (4) and applying the relation

= BNCAN +

(6)

which is easily verified using standard regression theory.
Intuition for how non-benchmark assets can help to estimate cEA in (1) is developed most
easily if the second-moment parameters 13A, CAN, and CAB are viewed as known. Assume the

fund's history contains S observations, and define estimators of the intercepts in (1), (3),
and (4) as
S

cEA = (1/S) (TA,j — /3ATB,i),

(7)

S

aN = (1/B) >(rN, — BNTB,1),

6

(8)

and

S

= (1/S) E(rA,t — CANrN, — CABrB,t).

(9)

Note using (6) that A is also equal to the result from substituting 5A and cEN into the
right-hand side of (5):
S

&4

+ CANcEN = (1/8) >(rA,t — (BCAN + CAB) rB,t)
=

(10)

Suppose first that the benchmarks have no assumed pricing ability. Then aN is a vector
of unknown parameters, but it can be estimated more precisely than in (8) if the available
history of TN,t and rB,t is longer than the S observations in the fund's history. Substituting
aN and 5A into the right-hand side of (5) gives A as an estimator of aA. Substituting the
more precise estimator of aN (along with 84 produces a more precise estimator of aA, since
&4 is uncorrelated with either estimator of aN. Suppose instead that the benchmarks are
assumed to price the non-benchmark assets exactly, so aN = 0 and thus aA = &4. Then
both A and A are unbiased estimators of aA, but the sampling variance of A, o/S, is less
than or equal to the sampling variance of A, o/S. In this case, the non-benchmark asset
returns explain additional variance of the fund's return and thereby provide a more precise
estimator of its alpha.
The basic idea is that a more precise estimator of aA is obtained by evaluating the right-

hand side of (5) at 5A and a more precise estimator of aN than aN. That more precise
estimator of aN can be obtained by using a sample period longer than that available for
the fund, as in the case where the benchmarks are not assumed to have any pricing ability,
or by simply setting aN = 0, as in the case where the benchmarks are assumed to price
the non-benchmark assets perfectly. When 6A,t is correlated with the elements of EN,t (i.e.
when CAN 0), then the difference between aN and a more precise estimator of aN supplies
information about the likely difference between aA and aA. When the more precise estimator
of aN relies on a longer history, the additional information about aA is provided in essentially
the same way that sample means of long-history assets provide information about expected
returns on short-history assets, as in Stambaugh (1997).
Much of the intuition developed when /3A, CAN, and c are known extends to the actual

setting in which those parameters must be estimated. Equation (5) also holds when all
quantities are replaced by OLS estimators based on the sample of 8 observations. That is,
cEA-5A+C'ANcEN,

7

(11)

where aA, aN, and A are the OLS estimates of the intercepts in (1), (3), and (4), respectively,
and ê&jv is the OLS estimate in (4). As before, the information in non-benchmark assets is
incorporated by replacing &N with a more precise estimator based either on a longer history
or some degree of belief in a pricing model. When all parameters are unknown, substituting

a more precise estimator of aN can in some cases produce an estimator of aA that is less
precise than the usual estimate of the fund's alpha, âÁ. For example, if one assumes that
cN = 0 and substitutes that value into (11) in place of N, the resulting alternative estimator
of cx is simply 5A• The mean of 5A is aA, but the variance of 5A can exceed that of &A. Since
CAN must be estimated and 5A and the elements of AN are correlated, replacing &N with a
lower-variance quantity need not lower the variance of cEA. Such an outcome is most likely

to occur as the number of non-benchmark assets increases without a sufficient increase in
the R-squared in (4). In essence, the degrees-of-freedom effect can outweigh the additional
explanatory power. We use between five and seven non-benchmark assets, depending on the
number of benchmarks, and we find that the information provided by those assets produces
a more precise estimate of cx for most funds in our sample. In the Bayesian framework
explained below, we also apply a moderate degree of shrinkage to the slope coefficients in
(4) to increase their precision and thereby enhance the information provided by the nonbenchmark assets. A potential direction for future research is the use of higher frequency
data to increase the precision of the slope coefficients.

Suppose two researchers agree on an overall set of p passive assets to include when
estimating cIA, but they disagree about the subset of those passive assets to designate as
benchmarks for defining aA. Their chosen benchmark subsets might not even have any
members in common. Moreover, suppose each researcher believes his benchmarks price the
remaining passive assets perfectly. Then those researchers' estimates of aA will be identical,
even though their definitions of aA are not. That is, the definition of aA is irrelevant to its
estimation if, for whatever benchmarks might be designated for defining aA, the remaining
non-benchmark assets would be assumed to be priced exactly by those benchmarks. Perhaps
ironically, if the benchmarks are not assumed to have perfect pricing ability, their designation
becomes relevant not only for defining CEA but also for estimating it.

To understand the above statements, consider first the maximum-likelihood estimator
(MLE) of cx under the restriction that aN = 0. That estimator is given by A, the OLS estimator of the intercept in (4), which does not depend on which of the p assets are designated
as the benchmarks. Note that the disturbances EN,t and UA,L are by construction uncorrelated
and, given the normality assumption, independent. The likelihood function can therefore be

expressed as a product of two factors, one for each regression. The restriction on aN does
8

not affect the MLE of öÂ, which is &4, since aN appears in the other factor. Substituting
6A along with the restricted MLE of aN (the zero vector) into the functional relation in (5)
gives 6A as the MLE of aA as well. It can also be verified that 6A arises as the restricted
estimator in a seemingly-unrelated-regression model, or SURM5 That is, let regressions (1)
and (3) jointly constitute a SURM, and consider the estimation of the model subject to the
restriction aN = 0. The restricted coefficient estimator requires the unknown joint covariance matrix of (EA,t c). If that matrix is replaced by the sample covariance matrix of the
residuals from the first-pass unrestricted OLS estimation, the resulting "feasible" restricted
SURM estimator of EA is again simply 5A With no restriction on cEN, then of course both
the MLE and SURM estimator of 1TXA is simply the usual estimator cEA. When shrinkage is
applied to the slope coefficients in (4), as in the Bayesian setting described below, the same
type of result obtains. That is, the assumption aN = 0 implies that the posterior mean of

aA is equal to the posterior mean of öA, which doesn't depend on the designation of the
benchmarks.

2.2.

Data

Monthly returns on the benchmark and non-benchmark passive assets are constructed for

the 35k-year period from July 1963 through December 1998 The sample period for any
given fund, typically much shorter, is a subset of that overall period. We specify up to three
benchmark series, consisting of the three factors constructed by Fama and French (1993),
updated through December 1998.6 The first of these, MKT, is the excess return on a broad
market index. The other two factors, SMB and HML, are payoffs on long-short spreads
constructed by sorting stocks according to market capitalization and book-to-market ratio.
We estimate "Fama-French" alphas, defined with respect to all three benchmarks, as well as
"CAPM" aiphas, defined with respect to just MKT.

When estimating CAPM aiphas, SMB and HML become two of the non-benchmark
series. Five additional non-benchmark series are used in the estimation of both CAPM and
Fama-French alphas. The first of these, denoted as CMS, is the payoff on a characteristicmatched spread in which the long position contains stocks with low HML betas (in a multiple
regression including MKT and SMB) and the short position contains stocks with high HML
betas. The long and short positions are matched in terms of market capitalization and book5Zellner (1962) introduces methods for estimating seemingly unrelated regressions. For a textbook treatment, including estimation under linear restrictions, see Theil (1971).
°We are grateful to Ken French for supplying these data.

9

to-market ratio, and the overall spread position is formed from a set of triple-sorted equity
portfolios constructed as in Pastor and Stambaugh (2000), who closely follow the procedures
of Daniel and Titman (1997) and Davis, Fama, and French (2000). At the end of June of
each year s, all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks in the intersection of the CRSP and
Compustat files are sorted and assigned to three size categories and, independently, to three
book-to-market categories. The nine groups formed by the intersection can be denoted by
two letters, designating increasing values of size (S, M, B) and book-to-market (L, M, H). We
then construct beta spreads within the four extreme groups of size and book-to-market: SL,
SH, BL, and BH. The stocks within each group are sorted by their HML betas and assigned
to one of three value-weighted portfolios.'7 A spread within each group is constructed each

month (from July of year s through June of year s + 1) by going long $1 of the low-beta
portfolio and short $1 of the high-beta portfolio, and the value of CMS in month t is the
equally weighted average of the four spread payoffs in month t.
The second non-benchmark series, denoted as MOM, is the "momentum" factor constructed by Carhart (1997). At the end of each month t — 1, all stocks in the CRSP file
with return histories back to at least month t — 12 are ranked by their cumulative returns
over months t — 12 through t — 2. The value of MOM in month t is the payoff on a spread
consisting of a $1 long position in an equally weighted portfolio of the top 30% of the stocks
in that ranking and a corresponding $1 short position in the bottom 30%. This factor is
included as a fourth benchmark in some of the analysis in the next section, dealing with
investment, but this section confines the estimation of alphas to those based on the CAPM
and the three-factor Fama-French model.

The remaining three non-benchmark assets, whose returns are denoted as IP1, 1P2,
and 1P3, are portfolios constructed from a universe of 20 value-weighted industry portfolios formed using the same classification scheme as Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999) The
three portfolios mimic the first three principal components of the disturbances in multiple
regressions of the 20 industry returns on the other passive returns: MKT, SMB, HML, CMS,
and MOM. The vector of weights for IP1 is proportional to the eigenvector for the largest
eigenvalue of the sample covariance matrix of the residuals in those regressions, and the other
two portfolios are similarly formed using eigenvectors for the second and third eigenvalues.
7Using up to 60 months of data through December of year s— 1, the "pre-formation" IIML betas are
computed in a regression of the stock's excess returns on "fixed-weight" versions of the FF factors, which
hold the weights on the constituent stocks constant at their June-end values of year s. Using the fixed-weight
factors, as suggested by Daniel and Titman (1997), increases the dispersion in the "post-formation" betas
of the resulting portfolios.

10

The specification of non-benchmark assets must be somewhat arbitrary, but our selection
of the five described above is based on several considerations. Recall that non-benchmark
assets supply information about aA, the fund's alpha, when they explain additional variance
of the fund's returns, i.e. when CAN 0. Also, except when the benchmarks are assumed
to price the non-benchmark assets perfectly, the latter assets also provide information about

0. Our inclusion of
cEA when they are mispriced by the benchmarks, i.e. when cEN
the three industry portfolios is motivated primarily by the first consideration, explaining
variance. Although we don't dismiss the possibility of their being mispriced, those portfolios
are constructed to capture the most important sources of industry-related variation that is
not accounted for by the other passive assets. On the other hand, our inclusion of CMS and
MOM is motivated chiefly by the second consideration, mispricing. Evidence in other studies
indicates that those spread positions may not be priced completely by the three benchmark

factors, MKT, SMB, and HML. For example, Daniel and Titman (1997) conclude that,
during the post-1963 period, characteristic-matched spreads in HML beta produce nonzero
alphas with respect to the Fama-French three-factor model.8 Fama and French (1996) report
a large three-factor alpha for the momentum strategy of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). Of
course, to be useful in estimating cEA, OMS and MOM also have to explain additional variance
of the fund's returns, and we find that to be the case for many funds.

Parsimony is a consideration limiting our number of non-benchmark assets to five. As
discussed earlier, the degrees-of-freedom effect in finite samples argues against indiscriminately specifying a large number of non-benchmark assets. One might instead include a
larger number of the characteristic-matched spreads, say one for each size/book-to-market
subgroup, or include all 20 industry portfolios instead of constructing the smaller set of three.
We tried such alternatives and found that they quite often produce estimates of cEA similar
to those obtained using the smaller set of five, but the precision of the estimates based on the
larger set is lower. The OLS estimators of 5A and CAN are undefined, or essentially infinitely
imprecise, when the total number of passive assets exceeds the length of the fund's history.

The shrinkage estimator (explained below) can still be computed in that case, but it often
yields a less precise inference than when fewer non-benchmark assets are used. It is likely
that future research could refine the selection of non-benchmark assets and further increase
the precision of estimated alphas. For example, a different set of non-benchmark assets
could be specified for each fund, so that the assets have a high correlation with the specffic
fund at hand. A larger number of non-benchmark assets could be used for a fund with a
longer history, since the degrees-of-freedom problem is then less severe. Our specification of
8Davis, Fama, and French (2000) find that a hypothesis of zero mispricing for such spreads cannot be
rejected within the longer 1929—97 period.
11

non-benchmark assets, motivated chiefly by simplicity, probably understate5 the potential
gains from using non-benchmark assets to help estimate fund performance.
The mutual-fund data come from the 1998 CRSP Survivor Bias Free Mutual Fund Database.9 Our sample contains 2,609 domestic equity mutual funds.'° We exclude multiple
share classes for the same fund as well as funds with only a year or less of available returns.
Funds are assigned to one of seven broad investment objectives, using information that the
CRSP database provides about classifications by Wiesenberger, ICDI, and Strategic Insight.
Table 1 lists the number of funds in each objective, further classifying funds within each
objective by the number of months in the fund's available return history. For each fund we
compute the monthly return in excess of that on a one-month Treasury bill.

2.3. The Bayesian framework
We compute the posterior mean of aA by computing posterior means for the parameters of
the regressions in (3) and (4). Recall from an earlier discussion that the likelihood function
for each fund can be expressed as a product of two factors, one for each regression. We assume

that the disturbances in (4) are uncorrelated across funds, which implies that the likelihood
functions across funds are independent. Non-benchmark assets thus play yet another role, in
that they account for covariance in fund returns that is not captured fully by the benchmarks.
We also specify prior beliefs in which the parameters of the regression in (3) are independent
across funds as well as independent of the parameters of (4). Given the latter property, the
posterior distribution of 0N is independent of 5A and CAN, so the posterior mean of cEA is
obtained simply by evaluating the right-hand side of (5) at the posterior means of aN, &4and
CAN. The independence of the prior and the likelihood across funds allows us to conduct the
analysis fund by fund. We also examine the posterior standard deviations of aA, which can
be computed using the posterior first and second moments of aN, 5A and CAN. Derivations
of the posterior moments are provided in the Appendix. The specification of prior beliefs is
discussed below.

First consider the parameters of the regression in (3). The prior distribution for E, the
covariance matrix of N,t, is specified as inverted Wishart,
(12)
W(H', ii).
___________________________________
9CRSP, Center for Research in Security Prices, Graduate School of Business, The University of Chicago
1999, crsp.com. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
'°We are grateful to Thomas Knox and the authors of Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2000) for providing
us with a number of corrections to the CRSP Mutual Fund Database.
12

We set the degrees of freedom ii = m + 3, so that the prior contains very little information
about . From the properties of the inverted Wishart distribution (e.g., Anderson (1984)),
the prior expectation of E equals H/(v — m — 1). We specify H = s2(v — m — 1)Im, 50
that E() = 821m. Following an "empirical Bayes" approach, the value of s2 is set equal
to the average of the diagonal elements of the sample estimate of obtained using OLS.
Conditional on , the prior for cEN is specified as a normal distribution,

aNI N(0, aN(2))

(13)

Pastor and Stambaugh (1999) introduce the same type of prior for a single element of ciN,
and

Pastor (2000) and Pstor and Stambaugh (2000) apply the multivariate version in

(13) to portfolio-choice problems. Having the conditional prior covariance matrix of aN be
proportional to is motivated by the recognition that there exist portfolios of the passive

assets with high Sharpe ratios if the elements of aN are large when the elements of
are small. Such combinations receive lower prior probabilities under (13) than when each

element of aN has standard deviation a but is distributed independently of . The prior
distribution for BN is diffuse and independent of cEN and .
Our earlier discussion focuses on the cases in which the benchmarks' ability to price the
non-benchmark assets is assumed to be either perfect or nonexistent. That is, either aN is

set to the zero vector or the prior beliefs about aN are diffuse. These two cases represent
the opposite extremes on a continuum characterized by oN' the marginal prior standard

deviation of each element in aN. Specifying o = 0 is equivalent to setting aN = 0,
corresponding to perfect confidence in the benchmarks' pricing ability. A diffuse prior for
prior beliefs are centered
aN corresponds to aaN = oo. With a nonzero finite value of
on the pricing restriction, but some degree of mispricing is entertained. We refer to CaN as
"mispricing uncertainty."

Next consider the parameters of the regression in (4). The prior for o, the variance of
A,t, is specified as inverted gamma, or
(14)

where x

denotes a chi-square variate with i"0 degrees of freedom. Define CA = (1AN CAB).

Conditional on o, the priors for öÁ and CA are specified as normal distributions, independent
of each other:

öAICN(öO, (E)c
13

(15)

and

CAN(CO, (E2))c).

(16)

The marginal prior variance of 5A is o, and the marginal prior covariance matrix of CA is
In this section, focused on estimation, we set cr = oo, which implies that the prior for cXA is
diffuse and that is irrelevant. In the next section, dealing with investment, we set cr to
finite values and specify & to reflect the fund's costs. The conditional prior variance of 5A is
positively related to a for a reason similar to that given for the corresponding assumption
in (13). If the variation in the fund's return is explained well by that of the benchmarks, so
that o is low, then it is less likely that the fund's manager can achieve a large value for 6A
Values for SO, L', CO, and I in (14) through (16) are specified using an empirical-Bayes

procedure. The basic idea is that a given fund is viewed as a draw from a cross-section of
funds with the same investment objective, so the prior uncertainty about a parameter for the
fund is governed by the cross-sectional dispersion of that parameter. The empirical-Bayes
procedure uses the data to infer those properties of the cross-section. The prior mean and
covariance matrix of CA, denoted by C0 and , are set equal to the corresponding sample
cross-sectional moments of CA, the OLS estimate of CA, for all funds with at least 60 months
of data and the same investment objective as the fund at hand. (Recall that the investment

equal to the sample covariance matrix of

objectives are displayed in Table 1.) Setting

CA, without adjusting for the sampling variation in those estimates, overstates the dispersion
across funds in the true values of CA. In that sense, our use of this empirical-Bayes procedure

is conservative, in that it applies an intentionally modest degree of shrinkage toward the
cross-sectional mean of CA when computing the posterior moments of CA for a given fund.
With a diffuse prior on CA, or no shrinkage, the estimate (posterior mean) of CA 1S simply the
OLS value A. The degree of shrinkage applied here, albeit conservative, gives a more precise
estimate of CA, especially for a short-history fund, and thereby allows the non-benchmark
assets to reveal more of their information about the fund's alpha.

The inverted gamma prior density for o implies (e.g., Zellner (1971, p. 372)),

E(o) = v02

(17)

and

4+ 2(E(cr))2
Var(a)

(18)

We substitute the cross-sectional mean and variance of & for E(ci) and Var() in (17)
and (18). The value of zi0 is set to the next largest integer of the resulting value on the
14

right-hand side of (18), and then that value of zi0 implies the value of s using (17). Here
again, using the cross-sectional variance of ô without adjusting for sampling error produces
a conservative amount of shrinkage toward the cross-sectional mean of & for funds with the
same objective.

Our framework assumes that funds' sensitivities to passive assets are constant over time.
One way of relaxing this assumption is to model these coefficients as linear functions of state
variables, as for example in Ferson and Schadt (1996). In such a modification, passive asset
returns scaled by the state variables can be viewed as returns on additional passive assets
(dynamic passive strategies), and the approach developed here could be extended to such a
setting. Another approach to dealing with temporal variation in parameters could employ
data on fund holdings. Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) and Wermers (2000),
for example, use such data in characteristic-based studies of fund performance.

2.4. An alternative approach using GMM
The information in non-benchmark assets can also be incorporated in an estimate of the
fund's alpha by using the generalized method of moments (0MM) of Hansen (1982). Let
'y denote the vector of parameters corresponding to the elements of öA, CAN, CAB, aN, and
BN. The estimate of 'y can be obtained by minimizing g('y)'Wg('y), where g('y) denotes the
vector of (1 + m + k) + m(1 + k) moment conditions
>lEF (rA — 5A — CANrN,1 — cABrB,)

11

vec

I

T
=1
(rjv

—

aN — BNTB,t)

r

rN,t

\.

()

\TBt

and F denotes the subset of the periods {1,.. . , T} representing the fund's return history of
length S. The first set of moment conditions in (19) corresponds to the regression in (4),
and the second set corresponds to the regression in (3). The weighting matrix W is block
diagonal, since the disturbance in (3) is uncorrelated with that in (4). GMM estimates of the
fund's alpha can be constructed under two cases, corresponding to 0aN = oo and 0N = 0 in
the Bayesian framework. With no restriction on aN, the above moment conditions serve to
exactly identify 'y. Using the GMM estimate ', the fund's estimated alpha can be computed
as cEA = 5A +
With the pricing restriction aN = 0, the second set of moment
conditions can be dropped and the fund's alpha is estimated simply as A = &4.

The above GMM approach incorporates the information in non-benchmark assets in
15

essentially the same manner as the Bayesian framework, but it permits a more general
stochastic setting. The disturbances in (3) and (4) are not assumed to obey a specific
distribution, and the weighting matrix W can be specified to allow non-i.i.d. behavior of
those disturbances. Moreover, it is straightforward to modify the above moment conditions
to allow the sensitivities (CA, BN) to be linear functions of state variables, as in Ferson and
Schadt (1996), whereas incorporating such an extension in the likelihood-based Bayesian
setting is more complicated. On the other hand, the Bayesian framework also offers some
advantages. First, it permits flexible non-extreme beliefs about pricing and skill, i.e., values
of 0N and other than zero or infinity. Second, it provides finite-sample inference about
the funds' aiphas. Third, it increases the precision of the estimates of CA, particularly for
short-history funds, by shrinking the elements of CA to their cross-sectional averages. Finally,
as demonstrated in the next section, the Bayesian framework permits the data to be analyzed

in the context of mutual fund investment and accounts for parameter uncertainty in that
decision problem.

2.5. Results
Table 2 reports medians, within various fund classifications, of CAPM alphas (Panel A)
and Fama-French aiphas (Panel B). The posterior mean of cIA, denoted as &A, is computed
for 'N equal to zero, two percent (annualized), and infinity. Recall that the usual OLS
estimator, denoted as &A, makes no use of non-benchmark assets. Also reported are median
absolute differences between cx and A. Not surprisingly, non-benchmark assets play a
greater role in the estimation of CAPM aiphas, since two of the non-benchmark assets in
that case, SMB and HML, are already included as benchmarks when estimating Fama-French
aiphas. Across all funds, the median value of IâA — cEAI is two percent per annum for CAPM
aiphas but about one percent or less, depending on
for Fama-French alphas. Note also
that &A — &Al is typically smaller for the funds with longer histories. With a longer history,
cEA becomes more precise, so the additional information in non-benchmark returns has a

smaller impact.

The manner by which non-benchmark assets provide information is illustrated most dramatically in the case of CAPM alphas for small-company growth funds. For such funds,
incorporating the information in non-benchmark assets typically makes a difference of between 7.2% and 8.3% per annum when estimating the CAPM alpha, depending on
Nearly half of those 413 funds have track records of three years or less (see Table 1), and

the bulk of their track records fall toward the end of the overall period. In recent years,
16

small-firm indexes have underperformed their CAPM predictions, which is relevant when
= 0, and they have also underperformed their long-run historical averages, which is
relevant when 0N = oo. (Both statements are relevant when
= 2%.) Incorporating
that information is accomplished in either case largely by including the size factor SMB as
a non-benchmark asset.
An important issue in performance evaluation is whether the mutual fund industry adds
value beyond standard passive benchmarks. We address this issue by computing posterior
probabilities that average fund alphas within various fund classifications are negative. These
probabilities are computed based on 100,000 draws of the average alpha from its posterior
distribution. The probabilities are reported in Table 3, together with posterior means of
average CAPM alphas (Panel A) and Fama-French alphas (Panel B). Some differences between the average alphas in Table 3 and the median alphas in Table 2 reflect skewness in the
cross-sectional distribution of fund alphas. For example, the average of the OLS estimates
of the CAPM alphas across all funds is —3.83%, compared to their median of —2.13%.
With few exceptions, Table 3 supports the inference that average fund alphas are negative.

For example, for each investment objective and each age group, the average of the OLS
estimates of the CAPM alphas is negative with 100% probability. The averages of the
OLS estimates of the Fama-French alphas are mostly negative, although they are reliably
positive for funds with histories longer than 10 years. When the non-benchmark assets are
included, the average performance across all funds remains significantly negative, although
the performance of long-history funds and aggressive growth funds improves with skeptical
prior beliefs about pricing (N = oo). The importance of beliefs about pricing can be
illustrated by the average Fama-French alpha for small-cap growth funds. When the nonbenchmark assets are not used, there is a 50% probability that the average alpha for those
funds is negative. When the non-benchmark assets are included, the probability that the
average alpha is negative rises to 100% when those assets are believed to be exactly priced
by the benchmarks, but it drops to 9% when no pricing relation is used.

The alpha estimates in Tables 2 and 3 are generally higher for the funds with longer
histories. These patterns could reflect survival effects, although similar age-related patterns
emerge in the subsample of funds that existed at the end of 1998 (about 75% of our funds),
and the median CAPM &A'S for the shorter-lived funds are actually lower in that subsample
than in the overall sample that includes non-surviving funds. Nevertheless, at least part of
the age patterns could reflect survival effects, in that funds with poor track records are less
likely to be long lived.
17

To investigate whether including the non-benchmark assets leads to a more precise inference about a fund's alpha, we examine the ratio of two posterior variances. The numerator
of the ratio is the posterior variance of aA under our model in which non-benchmark assets
are used and the prior variance for the elements of aN is as given in the column heading.

Recall that the posterior mean of aA in that case is denoted as cEA. The denominator of
the ratio is the posterior variance of cEA when the non-benchmark assets are not used and
diffuse priors are assigned to all parameters. The posterior mean of aA in that case is the
OLS estimate &A. For ease of discussion, we commit a slight abuse of notation and refer to
the posterior variances in the numerator and denominator as the "variances" of 'A and &A.
These variances reflect the precision of inferences about

in the sense generally associated

with standard errors in a frequentist setting. In fact, the denominator of the ratio equals
the squared standard error computed in the usual regression model.
For most funds, a more precise inference about alpha is obtained by including nonbenchmark assets. Table 4 reports the median ratio of the variance of A to the variance
of cEA. Also reported is the fraction of those ratios that are less than one. For the CAPM
alpha estimates, the median variance ratio across all funds is approximately 0.7, and the
ratio is less than one for roughly 90% of the funds. For Fama—French alphas, the ratio has
a median of about 0.85 and is less than one for roughly 80% of the ftinds. In general, the
median ratio is higher for the funds with longer histories. Note from Table 1 that funds with
track records of at least 20 years represent only about 5% or our sample (139 out of 2609).
For those funds, the OLS estimates of Fama-French alphas are typically about as precise
as the estimates that incorporate the non-benchmark assets: the median variance ratios are
1 MO or just slightly less, and the ratios cluster fairly tightly around that value. At the other
extreme lies the variance ratio associated with estimating CAPM alphas for small-company
growth funds. That variance ratio has a median between 0.33 and O39, depending on 0aN,
and the ratio is less than one for all such funds in our sample. Thus, for small-company
growth funds in particular, not only is the CAPM &A substantially higher than the CAPM
aA, it is also substantially more precise.
Recall that estimates of cxA are identical across different specifications of the benchmarks

when one assumes the non-benchmark assets are priced exactly under each specification.

In Table 2, note that the median values of A are indeed the same in Panels A and B
when N =0 (which sets aN = 0). Table 5 compares estimates of CAPM and Fama-French
alphas when 0N = 2% (Panel A) and N = oo (Panel B). As expected, the median absolute
differences between models are typically larger in the second case, but those differences are
still substantially less than the median absolute differences between OLS estimates (Panel
18

C). In other words, even when the non-benchmark assets are not believed to be priced
whatsoever by either model's benchmarks, their presence in the estimation still makes the
definition of aA substantially less important than when they are not used at all. Across all
funds, the median absolute difference between estimated CAPM and Fama-French alphas is
= 2% and L24% under a = oo, as compared to 2.28% for
0.42% (per annum) under
the OLS estimates. For small-company growth funds, the median difference is 0.69% under
= 2% and 203% under UaN = oc, as compared to 8.07% for the OLS estimates.

Table 6 compares alphas defined for a given set of benchmarks and estimated with or
without the pricing restriction imposed on the non-benchmark assets. That is, for cXA defined

with respect to a given pricing model, we compare estimates under o = 0 to estimates

under N =

Across all funds, the median difference is 0.94% for CAPM alphas and
0.68% for Fama-French alphas. Interestingly, the median differences display little if any
relation to the length of the fund's history. Most of the median differences in the two-way
sort (by objective and age) are 2% or less, with the exception of sector funds. For the funds
with the longest histories, the effect of imposing the pricing restriction on the non-benchmark
assets is often as large as the effect of not including the non-benchmark assets at all (shown
earlier in Table 2). The latter effect is more important for history lengths of ten years or less
when estimating CAPM aiphas and five years or less when estimating Fama-French aiphas.
Note from Table 1 that about 85% of the equity funds in our sample have history lengths
less than 10 years, and about 60% have histories of five years or less.
oo.

3. Investing with priors about skill and pricing
Prior beliefs about pricing models can be useful to someone investing in mutual funds. A
pricing model implies that a combination of the model's benchmark assets provides the
highest Sharpe ratio within a passive universe. That implication is useful to an investor
seeking a high Sharpe ratio, even if the investor has less than complete confidence in the
model's pricing accuracy and cannot invest directly in the benchmarks. Prior beliefs about
managerial skill are also important in the investment decision. One investor might believe
completely in a model's accuracy in pricing passive assets but believe active managers may
well possess stock-picking skill. Another investor might be skeptical about the ability of fund
managers to pick stocks as well as the ability of academics to build accurate pricing models.
This section applies the econometric framework described in the previous section to an
investment setting that allows an investor to combine information in the data with prior
19

beliefs about both pricing and skill. Non-benchmark assets allow us to distinguish between
pricing and skill, and they supply additional information about funds' expected returns in
essentially the same manner as in the estimation problem of the previous section. In addition,
non-b enchmark assets help account for common variation in funds, making the investment
problem feasible using a large universe of ftrnds. We begin the section with a discussion of
skill and prior beliefs, and then we present and discuss portfolios constructed under a range
of priors about pricing models and skill.

3.1. Prior beliefs
In both commercial and academic settings, much interest attaches to alphas defined with
respect to small sets of benchmarks identified by pricing models. Estimating such alphas is
the subject of the previous section. Alpha is often interpreted as skill displayed by the fund's
manager in selecting mispriced securities, but a nonzero alpha need not reflect skill if some
passive assets can also have nonzero aiphas. For example, a manager who starts a new fund
investing in non—benchmark passive assets whose alphas have historically been positive can
have a positive alpha in the absence of any skill. To address such concerns, one could expand
the set of benchmarks to include more passive assets, even to the point of including all assets
available to the manager. Indeed, as observed by Grinblatt and Titman (1989, p.412), "...
the unconditional mean-variance efficient portfolio of assets that are considered tradable by
the evaluated investor provides correct inferences about the investor's performance ... links
between performance measures and particular equilibrium models are not necessary." Chen
and Knez (1996) adopt a similar approach in a conditional setting, in that they evaluate funds
with respect to a set of passive benchmarks selected without regard to a pricing model: "...we

argue that for application purposes, one does not need to rely on asset pricing models to
define an admissible performance measure" (p. 515).
In practice, the number of passive assets must be limited in some fashion. Our empirical
design includes p passive assets, consisting of k benchmarks and m non-benchmark assets,
and the benchmarks are associated with popular asset pricing models. Suppose one admits
the possibility that the benchmarks do not price the non-benchmark assets exactly, that is
0. Then öÁ, the intercept in (4), is a better measure of skill, in that it is defined with
cEN
respect to the more inclusive set of passive assets. Of course, that measure might still be
nonzero for passive assets omitted from the set of p. The point is simply that inadequacy of
as a skill measure implies inadequacy of aA, whereas öÁ can be adequate when aA is not.

20

The skill measure öÂ is defined with respect to the overall set of p assets, but the investor

nevertheless finds it useful to partition that set into k benchmark and m non-benchmark
assets. Even though the investor is unwilling to assume that the k benchmarks price the nonbenchmark assets exactly, he might nevertheless believe that the benchmarks possess some

pricing ability. That pricing ability, albeit imperfect, helps the investor identify portfolios
with high Sharpe ratios, as will be illustrated below. The investor's prior beliefs about
pricing are represented as before, with a prior for ciN characterized by 0aN
We assume that an investor selecting a portfolio of mutual funds generally has informative

prior beliefs about a fund manager's ability to achieve a nonzero 6A Prior beliefs about 6A,
given by (15), are characterized by the prior mean and standard deviation, o and o. Recall
that in the estimation problem addressed in the previous section, the prior beliefs about öÁ
are diffuse ( = co) and thus ö0 is irrelevant. In the investment problem addressed here,
can be finite, and even zero, so the prior mean ö0 must be specified as well.
If a fund manager possesses no skill, then öÂ should simply reflect costs, since the returns
on the p passive assets used to define 5A have no costs deducted. To represent a prior belief

that precludes skill, we set r. = 0 and specify

=

1

—(expense

+ 0.01 x turnover),

(20)

where expense is the fund's average annual expense ratio and turnover is the fund's average
annual reported turnover. Multiplying the latter quantity by 0.01 is equivalent to assuming
a round-trip cost per transaction of one percent, approximately the 95 basis points estimated
by Carhart (1997) for the average fund in his sample. Carhart obtains that estimate as the
average slope coefficient in monthly cross-sectional regressions of fund return on "modified"
turnover (MTURN), which is reported turnover plus one-half the rate of change in total
net assets (TNA) adjusted for investment returns and mergers. Reported turnover is the
minimum of the fund's purchases and sales divided by its average TNA. MTURN, which
essentially includes transactions arising from contributions and withdrawals, is the appropriate measure for estimating transactions costs in Carhart's regression. For example, a fund
that sells nothing in a year but experiences contributions doubling its size will have a value
of zero for turnover but a value of 0.50 for MTURN. The resulting purchases incur costs
impacting the fund's return that year, and the year-by-year values of MTURN can better
explain that component of return variation and thereby provide an estimate of transactions
costs. In forecasting future transactions, however, it seems more reasonable to abstract from
growth or shrinkage of the fund and instead view a fund with either no sales or no purchases
as likely to be a low-turnover fund. Thus, we define turnover as the average of the reported
21

turnover values.
When one admits some possibility of skill, the link between turnover and prior expected
performance becomes less clear. If the manager does possess skill, then high turnover is

likely to be accompanied by positive performance. On the other hand, if the manager
possesses no skill, then high turnover can only hurt expected performance. If the investor is
uncertain about whether the manager has skill, that is if a > 0, then the relation between
expected turnover and expected performance is ambiguous. A similar ambiguity arises with

expense ratios. We follow an empirical Bayes approach in specifying how prior expected
performance depends on expense and turnover when > 0.11 Specffically, we estimate a
cross-sectional regression of estimated öÁ on expense and turnover, where the estimate
of öÁ is the posterior mean obtained with o = oo. Across a number of alternative methods
for including funds (e.g., minimum history length) and estimating the coefficients (OLS or
weighted least squares), we find that the coefficient on expense is consistently about —1
and is at least twice its standard error. In contrast, the coefficient on turnover fluctuates
within an interval roughly between —0.005 and 0.005 and is generally less than its standard
error.12 Guided by this result, we specify

=

—expense

(21)

as the prior mean of 5A when a, > 0.

3.2. The investment problem
Under various prior beliefs about skill and pricing, we construct portfolios with the highest
Sharpe ratio, defined as expected excess return divided by the standard deviation of return.
The investment universe consists of 505 funds selected from the 2,609 equity mutual funds
analyzed in the previous section. The 505 funds are those that (i) charge no load fee, (ii)
exist at the end of 1998, (iii) have at least 36 months of return history under the most recent
manager, and (iv) have data on expense ratios and turnover rates. We exclude funds that
charge load fees simply because it is not clear how to treat the payment of such fees within
the single-period setting implicit in maximizing the Sharpe ratio. The p passive assets used
to define 5A are included in the econometric specffication, but since returns on those assets
"An alternative approach, proposed by Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2000), is to specify a prior for
performance that is truncated below at a point that reflects expenses as well as an estimate of transactions
costs.
'2Wermers (2000) finds that turnover does not exhibit a significant relation to net performance after
adjusting for risk and asset characteristics.

22

do not include any implementation costs, only the mutual funds are assumed to be eligible
for investment. In addition, short positions in funds are precluded.
The stochastic setting is as defined in Section 2. Let R denote the sample data, consisting
of returns on passive assets and funds through month T, and let rT+1 denote the vector of
returns on the funds in month T + 1. In solving the investment problem, Sharpe ratios are
computed using moments of the predictive distribution of the funds' returns,

p(rT+1IR) =

fP(rT+lR, 0) p(0R) dO,

(22)

where p(OIR) is the posterior distribution of the parameter vector, 913 The first two moments

of this predictive distribution are derived in the Appendix. The fund's history is used only
back to the month beginning the most recent manager's tenure, whereas the return histories
of the p passive assets begin in July 1963.
A meaningful investment universe can include oniy those funds that exist at the end of the
sample period, December 1998, but this selection criterion raises the issue of survival bias.

In particular, under prior beliefs that admit the possibility of skill (o > 0), one might be
concerned that the posterior mean of a manager's skill measure &4 is overstated by a failure
to condition on the fund's having survived. Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2000) make the
interesting observation that, if a fund's survival depends only on realized return histories,
then the posterior distribution of the parameters for the surviving funds is unaffected by
conditioning their survival. In other words, a sufficient assumption for this result is that once
one conditions on all the return histories, the probability of a fund's surviving is unaffected
by further conditioning on the model's unobserved parameters. The Bayesian posterior for

the parameters conditions on the return histories in any event, and with this assumption
those return histories subsume the information in knowing the fund survived. Like Baks,
Metrick, and Wachter, we find the notion that survival depends only on realized returns to
be plausible, and thus we proceed under that assumption.

3.3. Portfolio selections
Table 7 reports weights in the optimal portfolio for investors with various beliefs about managerial skill and mispricing of passive assets under the CAPM. (The weights in each column
of Panel A add to 100 percentS) For convenience, we refer throughout to a portfolio having
'3Early applications of Bayesian methods to portfolio choice using diffuse prior beliefs, include Zeilner
and Chetty (1965), Klein and Bawa (1976), and Brown (1979). Recent examples, using informative priors,
include Pastor (2000) and P.stor and Stambaugh (2000).

23

the highest Sharpe ratio within a given universe as "optimal." Mispricing uncertainty, N'
is assigned values of zero, one percent, and two percent (per annum), while skill uncertainty,
o, is assigned values of zero, one percent, three percent, and infinity. Tables 8 and 9 report
corresponding results for two other pricing models, the Fama-French three-factor model (Ta-

ble 8) and the Carhart four-factor model (Table 9). Table 10 reports optimal weights for
= oo, in which case the investor makes no use of the pricing models.
We stated earlier that a pricing model, even if not believed completely, helps identify the

portfolios with high Sharpe ratios. This point can be illustrated in Table 7, for example,
by examining the optimal portfolio's correlation with the market index, MKT. Reported
in Panel B of Tables 7 through 10 is the optimal portfolio's predictive correlation with the
portfolio having the highest Sharpe ratio among those that combine the factors of each
pricing model. The latter portfolio is optimal for an investor who believes completely in
the given pricing model and can invest only in the p passive assets. The investor here, in
contrast, can invest only in mutual funds and not in the p passive assets. An investor who
believes completely in the CAPM and in no possibility of fund-manager skill (°aN = = 0)
selects a combination of market index funds that is virtually perfectly correlated with MKT.
A value of aN = 1% means that, before examining the data, the investor assigns about a
five percent probability to the prospect that the expected return on a given non-benchmark
passive asset violates its CAPM prediction by more than 200 basis points per annum in
either direction. With that degree of mispricing uncertainty but the same belief about skill,
the optimal portfolio is still essentially composed of market index funds and has a correlation

with MKT that rounds to 1.00. With twice as much mispricing uncertainty (N = 2%),
the correlation with MKT is 0.89, which is still considerably higher than the value of 0.74
obtained in Table 10 when no pricing model is used.
The CAPM continues to influence portfolio choice when the investor admits the possibility

of managerial skill. A value of r. = 1% means that, before examining a given fund's track
record, the investor assigns about a 2.5% probability to the prospect that the fund's manager
generates a positive skill measure gross of expenses of at least 200 basis points per year. (Of

course, given the symmetry of our prior, the investor assigns the same probability to a
negative skill measure of that magnitude, but the left tail is presumably less interesting with
short sales precluded.) With that amount of skill uncertainty, the CAPM can still help the
investor construct the portfolio with the highest Sharpe ratio, even with some uncertainty
about the CAPM's ability to price passive assets. When = 1%, the optimal portfolio has
a correlation of 0.92 with MKT when 0N = 2% (Table 7), as compared to a correlation of
only 0.76 when the CAPM is not used (Table 10). With three times as much skill uncertainty
24

(oo = 3%), the optimal portfolio's correlation with MKT is 0.93 when N = 2% and 0.87
when the model is not used. That is, even with a substantial degree of willingness to accept
the possibility of managerial skill and only modest confidence in the CAPM, the investor's
portfolio selection is still influenced by the pricing model.
Portfolio choice is influenced by beliefs in the other pricing models in essentially similar

ways as noted above for the CAPM. For both the Fama-French and four-factor models,
however, perfect confidence in the model does not result in an optimal portfolio of funds that
mimics as closely the optimal combination of the benchmarks from the model. Table 8 reports
optimal portfolios for investors with varying degrees of confidence in the three-factor FamaFrench model. After seeing the data, an investor who has complete prior confidence in that
model and admits no possibility of manager skill (N = = 0) believes that the optimal
portfolio constructed from our universe of 505 no-load mutual funds has a correlation of only
0.75 with the optimal combination of the Fama-French benchmarks (Panel B). Moreover,
as reported in Panel C, that investor judges the highest Sharpe ratio obtainable within the
fund universe to be only 0.66 times that of the highest Sharpe ratio obtainable by combining

the benchmarks.14 Under the four-factor model, as reported in Table 9, the correlation
between the optimal fund portfolio and the optimal combination of the four benchmarks is
0.61, and the Sharpe ratio of the first portfolio is only slightly more than half that of the
second. Evidently, close substitutes for the Fama-French and Carhart benchmarks cannot
be constructed with long positions in funds from our no-load universe.

The main reason for the lack of benchmark substitutes is our precluding short sales of
mutual funds. When the short-sale constraint is removed, the Sharpe ratio of the optimal
fund portfolio increases to 0.99 times the Sharpe ratio of the efficient benchmark combination

under the Fama-French model and to 0.94 times the maximum under the Carhart model.
Since only a relatively small subset of funds can be shorted in practice, precluding short
sales in our fund universe seems reasonable. We also redid the analysis with an expanded
investment universe of 919 funds that includes funds with load fees. The improvement from
including the load funds is surprisingly small, despite the fact that we ignore their load fees.
Under the four-factor model, the Sharpe ratio rises only to 0.55 times the maximum, as
compared to multiple of 0.54 in the original no-load setting. Under the Fama-French model,
the Sharpe ratio rises so little that it rounds, as before, to only 0.66 times the maximum.
'41f öo were set to zero for each fund, the correlation between the two portfolios would equal the Sharpe
ratio of the fund portfolio divided by the Sharpe ratio of the benchmark portfolio In that case the second
portfolio would have the highest possible Sharpe ratio for the overall universe of funds and passive assets with

investment weights unconstrained (i.e., short sales permitted), and an exact relation between correlations
and Sharpe ratios applies (eg. Proposition 1 of Kandel and Stambaugh (1987))

25

We conclude that the universe of all equity mutual funds, including the load funds, provides
no close substitutes for the Fama-French and momentum benchmarks.

3.4. Portfolio comparisons
Differences in prior beliefs about pricing models and the potential for managerial skill can
lead to economically significant differences between optimal portfolios of mutual funds. Table
11 and Panels D and E of Table 10 present comparisons of portfolios constructed under
various specifications. The certainty-equivalent differences are computed for an investor
who maximizes the mean-variance objective,

=
where E and

—

(23)

denote the mean and variance of the excess return on the investor's overall

portfolio (including unrestricted riskiess borrowing and lending). Risk-aversion, A, is set
to 2.75, which is the level at which an investor would allocate 100% to MKT if the investment universe contained just that single risky position in addition to the riskless asset. In
comparing portfolios obtained under different specifications, one portfolio is designated as
optimal and the other as suboptimal, where the suboptimal portfolio is optimal under the
alternative specification. We compare the certainty equivalent for the optimal portfolio, C0,
to the certainty equivalent for a suboptimal portfolio, C8. Both certainty equivalents are
computed using the predictive moments obtained under the prior beliefs associated with the
optimal portfolio.

Panel A of Table 11 compares portfolios formed with the same CaN and o but under
different pricing models. The difference between any two models ranges between 1 and 61

basis points per month, depending on the prior uncertainty about mispricing and skilL'5
In general, sample averages receive more weight in estimating expected returns when one's
prior beliefs about pricing and skill become less informative. As mispricing uncertainty
increases, the portfolios formed with beliefs centered on different pricing models become more
alike: the certainty-equivalent difference drops and the correlation increases. An increase in
skill uncertainty also tends to make the cross-model difference less important, although not
monotonically. The largest certainty-equivalent differences, which can exceed 50 basis points
'5The reported certainty-equivalent difference is actually the average of two differences, one for each of the

two pricing models designated as producing the optimal portfolio. The correlation reported in Panel A is
similarly the average of two values, one for the predictive distribution associated with each model. Averaging
in this fashion treats the pricing models symmetrically, although generally the two values being averaged are
close to each other.

26

per month, tend to occur between the CAPM and the four-factor model when cN and c are
small. The smallest differences occur between the Fama-French and four-factor models when
and ao are both one percent or less, however, the certainty-equivalent
a6 is large. When
difference between those two models is at least 19 basis points per month.
In Panel B of Table 11, the optimal portfolio under a given set of beliefs about skill and
mispricing is compared to the portfolio selected by an investor who rules out any ability of
academics to build models and any skill of portfolio managers to pick stocks. The portfolio
of this "completely skeptical" investor, for whom craN = oc and a = 0, is designated as

the suboptimal portfolio in computing the pairwise comparisons described previously. (Its
weights are given in the first column of Table 10.) Suppose one forces that portfolio to be
held by an investor who has a modest degree of confidence in the CAPM, say crN = 2%,
and who admits some possibility of managerial skill, say o = 1%. Then that investor suffers
a certainty-equivalent loss of 29 basis points per month, or about 3.5% per year. With
beliefs centered around the Fama-French model but again with craN = 2% and Co
1%,
the certainty-equivalent loss falls to 15 basis points per month. When skill uncertainty is
one percent or less, complete belief in the four-factor model produces a portfolio quite close
to that obtained with no use of the model at all, with a certainty-equivalent difference of 6
basis points or less and a correlation of at least 0.97. As an investor's willingness to accept
the prospect of managerial skill increases, so does the certainty-equivalent loss if forced to
hold the portfolio of the completely skeptical investor. With cr = 3%, for example, the loss
is between 31 and 89 basis points per month with modest confidence (ci = 2%) in one
of the three pricing models. With no use of a pricing model, the loss is 23 basis points, as
reported in Panel D of Table 10.

Even with no belief in a pricing model and no preconceived limit on the magnitude of

likely managerial skill, that is when both o and a. are infinitely large, the investor is
generally ill-advised in using a fund's historical average return as the input for its expected
return. If the fund's history is shorter than those of the passive assets, then the histories of
the passive assets provide additional information about the fund's expected return. Under
the above prior beliefs, the certainty-equivalent loss of holding the portfolio constructed
using sample-averages instead of holding the portfolio constructed using that additional
information about expected returns is 187 basis points per month, or more than 22 percent
annually (Panel D of Table 10). The predictive covariance matrix obtained when CaN =
and o = oo is used to construct both portfolios. As prior beliefs about pricing or skill
become informative, the loss incurred by holding the portfolio based on sample averages
becomes even greater, as is apparent in Panel C of Table 11.
27

3.5. Who should buy actively managed funds?
One might presume that actively managed funds should be purchased only by those investors
who admit some possibility that active fund managers possess stock-picking skill. For investors presented with our universe of 505 no-load funds, that need not be the answer. An
investor who believes completely in the CAPM and admits no possibility of managerial skill

does indeed invest only in market-index funds (Table 7). As the investor's beliefs depart
from complete confidence in the CAPM, however, actively managed funds enter the optimal
portfolio even if the investor still adheres to a belief that managerial skill is impossible. If
one can invest directly and costlessly in the p passive assets used to define the skill measure
&4, then indeed long positions in funds arise only when positive öA'S are thought possible.
Otherwise, one simply combines the passive assets to obtain the highest Sharpe ratio. Baks,
Metrick, and Wachter (2000) essentially pose their active management question in that context. If instead the p passive assets are not available for investment, as in our setup, perfect
substitutes for them need not exist in the mutual fund universe, let alone in its passively
managed subset. As a result, some actively managed funds can become attractive even to
investors who admit no chance of managerial skill.
A striking example of the above possibility occurs in the first column of Table 8. The
investor in that case believes completely in the Fama-French model and in no chance of
managerial skill. Nevertheless, the bulk of that investor's optimal portfolio is allocated to
actively managed value funds and real-estate specialty funds: Legg Mason Total Return,
Mutual Discovery, First American Investment Real Estate Securities and DFA AEW Real
Estate Securities. Table 12 reports posterior means and "t statistics" (posterior mean divided
by posterior standard deviation) of the intercept and slopes in (4) for all funds that receive at
least a ten percent allocation in any of the porfolios in Tables 7 through 10. The selection of
the above funds has nothing to do with their having superior historical performance. In fact,
three of the four funds listed above have negative 6A'S. With 'N = = 0, the expected
returns on these funds, gross of costs, are assumed to conform exactly to the Fama-French
model. The presence of these funds in the optimal portfolio is instead driven by their risk
characteristics. Note, for example, that all four funds have relatively large positive (and
"significant") slopes on HML.

28

3.6. Hot hands?
To the universe of 505 no-load funds, we also add a portfolio of funds with recent high returns,
motivated by much previous research indicating short-run persistence in fund performance.16

At the end of each year, starting with December 1962, we sort all existing equity funds
by their total returns over the previous twelve months (including only funds with returns
reported for those months) and form the equally weighted "hot-hand" portfolio of the top
ten percent. As Carhart (1997) observes, this portfolio has a positive sensitivity to the
momentum factor MOM, which is confirmed by the results in Table 12. The hot-hand
portfolio appears in the last row of both panels, and the posterior mean of its coefficient on
MOM is 0.19 (with a t statistic of 13.5). This portfolio does not enter any of the optimal
portfolios reported in Tables 7 through 10. The same result occurs if the hot-hand portfolio
contains only no-load funds, as constructed by Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993).

As Carhart (1997) points out, the hot-hand portfolio is a kind of momentum play. Even
a strong belief in momentum, which in our setting amounts to a strong belief in Carhart's
four-factor model, does not result in an allocation to the hot-hand strategy. As we discover,
one reason for this outcome is the existence of other funds that apparently offer even stronger
momentum plays, at least in the sense that they have higher coefficients on MOM. The first
column of Table 9 displays the portfolio selected by an investor who rules out skill and has
complete confidence in the four-factor model. Note that the bulk of this portfolio is invested
in real estate funds. The regression results in Table 12 reveal that the posterior means of the
MOM coefficients for many of these funds are higher than that for the hot-hand portfolio.
Perhaps as importantly, the coefficients on SMB, HML, and MKT for these funds are also
positive and relatively large.'7 The highest-Sharpe-ratio portfolio of the benchmarks in the
four-factor model contains those three factors and MOM in positive amounts. In our sample,
real estate funds offer exposures to all four factors, and that feature makes them attractive
to investors who believe in that model. When prior beliefs admit the possibility of skill,
funds enter the optimal portfolio due to their average realized returns as well as their risk
characteristics. This doesn't help the hot-hand portfolio, since the posterior mean of its öÁ
is only 1 basis point.'8
'6See, for example, Grinblatt and Titman (1992), Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993), and Brown
and Goetzmann (1995)
'7This is consistent with the evidence in Sanders (1997), who reports significantly positive 5MB, HML,
and MKT betas for real estate investment trust indices between 1978 and 1996
'8The hot-hand porfolio has a positive alpha with respect to the Fama-French benchmarks and receives a
substantial positive allocation when the investment universe contains only those three benchmarks and the
hot-hand portfolio. See Knox (1999) for a treatment of this case in a Bayesian portfolio-choice setting.

29

4. Conclusions
This study develops and applies a framework in which beliefs about pricing models and
managerial skill play roles in both performance evaluation and investment decisions. Nonbenchmark passive assets provide additional information about mutual funds' performance
measures and expected returns, and they allow us to specify prior beliefs that distinguish
mispricing from skill. In addition, non-benchmark assets help account for common variation
in fund returns, making the investment problem feasible with a large universe of funds.
A mutual fund's performance measure, alpha, is defined relative to a set of passive benchmarks. The typically reported OLS estimate of alpha ignores information provided by returns
on non-benchmark assets. The non-benchmark assets help estimate alpha if they are priced
to some extent by the benchmarks or if their return histories are longer than the fund's.

Using a sample of 2,069 U.S. equity mutual funds, we demonstrate that the returns on
non-benchmark assets contain substantial information about fund performance. For most
funds, the estimates of alpha that incorporate this information are more precise than the
standard estimates. In the case of small-company growth funds, for example, the nonbenchmark assets allow alphas defined with respect to the market benchmark to be estimated
with only one third of the variance associated with the usual OLS estimates of those alphas.
Compared to the usual estimates, the estimates of alpha that incorporate the information
in the non-benchmark assets tend to exhibit less variation across different specifications of
the benchmarks. At the extreme, if one believes that some subset of the passive assets used in
the estimation prices the other passive assets exactly, then the estimate of alpha is the same
regardless of which subset is designated as the benchmarks that define alpha. In other words,
if one believes dogmatically in a pricing model, it does not matter which model that is when
estimating alpha. For most funds, we find that including information in non-benchmark
assets is more important than specifying the degree to which the non-benchmark assets are
priced by the benchmarks. We also find that, across different beliefs about pricing, most
funds have underperformed the CAPM and Fama-French benchmarks.
An important practical motivation for mutual-fund performance evaluation is to help an
investor decide in which funds to invest. This study constructs portfolios with maximum
Sharpe ratios from a universe of 505 no-load equity mutual funds. We find that the optimal
portfolios are substantially affected by prior beliefs about pricing and skill as well as by
including the information in non—benchmark assets. A pricing model is useful to an investor

30

seeking a high Sharpe ratio, even if the investor has less than complete confidence in the
model's pricing accuracy and cannot invest directly in the benchmarks. With investment
in the benchmarks precluded, even investors who believe completely in a pricing model and
rule out the possibility of manager skill can include active funds in their portfolios. The fund
universe offers no close substitutes for the Fama-French and momentum benchmarks, and
active funds can be better substitutes for the benchmarks than passive funds. We also find
that the "hot-hand" portfolio of the previous year's best-performing funds does not appear
in the portfolio of funds with the highest Sharpe ratio, even when momentum is believed to
be priced. An investor who holds that belief and is skeptical about managerial skill instead
invests heavily in real estate funds, which have higher exposures to the momentum factor
and the Fama-French factors.
Maximizing the Sharpe ratio is only one of many investment objectives. With a multiperiod investment objective, for example, beliefs about pricing and skill could exhibit
different effects. A multiperiod setting could also allow a meaningful consideration of the
funds that charge load fees. Such extensions offer challenges for future research.

31

Appendix
This Appendix derives the posterior moments of 0A used in Section 2 as well as the predictive
moments of the fund returns used in Section 3. The prior for the parameters of the regression

in (4) is independent of the prior for the parameters of the regression in (3). In addition,
both of those priors are assumed to be independent of the (diffuse) prior for EB and VBB,
the mean and covariance matrix of the normal distribution for rB,t. The independence of
the priors and the independence of UA,i and EN,t imply that the posterior distribution for
the parameters of the regression in (3) and the predictive distribution for rN,T+1 and rB,T+1
depend oniy on the sample of passive asset returns, not the fund returns. We first provide the
moments of those distributions, relying on the derivations in Pastor and Stambaugh (2000),
henceforth referred to as PS. Those moments are then combined with the posterior moments
of 5A and CA to obtain the the posterior moments of cEA and the predictive moments of the
fund returns.

A.1. Posterior distribution for the parameters of (3)
Define Y = (rN,1, ,riv)', X = (rB,1,.. ,rB,T), and Z = (tT X), where tT denotes a
T-vector of ones. Also define the (k + 1) >< m matrix C = (aN BN)', and let g = vec (G).
For the T observations t = 1, , T, the regression model in (3) can be written as

.

Y = ZG + U, vec (U)

N(0, 0 IT),

(AJ)

=
where U = (CN,t, .. . , EN,T)'. Define the statistics O = (Z'Z)—'Z'Y, = vec (O),
— tTE)/T. Let Op
(Y — Zã)'(Y — ZG)/T, EB = X'tT/T, and VBB = (X —
denote the

parameters of the joint distribution of the passive asset returns (C, , EB, and
VBB), and define the T x p sample matrix of passive returns, R = (X Y). The likelihood
function for the passive returns can be factored as

p(RpOp) p(YOp,X) p(XOp),

(A.2)

where

p(YOp, X) o

exp {_tr(Y — ZG)'(Y — ZG)'}

p(XOp) o VBBI exp{_tr(X — tTE)'(X — tTE)V}.

(A.3)
(A.4)

The joint prior distribution of all passive-return parameters is
p(Op) =p(oNIE) p(E) p(]3N) p(EB) P(VBB),
32

(A.5)

where

p(aNIE)

lEexP{_c(-j?LEY1aN}

(A.6)

p(E)

oc

IEL1 exp {_trHE1}

(A.7)

p(BN)

oc

1

(A.8)

p(EB) o 1

(A.9)

P(VBB) oc IVBBI.

(A.1O)

is inverted Wishart with a small
number of degrees of freedom, so that it is essentially noninformative. The prior on aN
given E is normal and centered at the pricing restriction. Let D denote a (k + 1) > (k + 1)
matrix whose (1, 1) element is -— and all other elements are zero. Also let F = D + Z'Z
and Q = Z'(IT — ZF—'Z')Z. Applying the analysis in PS, the likelihood and the prior are
combined to obtain the following moments of the posterior distribution:
The priors of BN, EB, and VBB are diffuse. The prior of

Var(gRp)

= E(gRp) = (Im ® F1Z'Z)I

(A.11)

= E(ERP)=T1kl(H+TE+O'Q)

(A.12)

0 F'

(A.13)

EB = E(EBRp)=EB

(A.14)

VBB = E(VBBIRP)=T2/BB

(A.15)

Var(EBIRp) = T—k—2"

(A.16)

Posterior means are denoted using tildes for the remainder of the Appendix.

A.2. Predictive moments of the passive returns
These predictive moments are derived in PS. Define rp+i = (r,T+1 TB,T1). Its predictive
mean is

E = E(rp,T+lIRp) (&N +EBNEB),
where &N and N are obtained from Eq. (A.11) using = vec ((N BN)).
Partition the predictive covariance matrix as

D \_ NN
p*_-r
Vp — varrP,T+1 LP) —
BN

33

*
NB
BB

v

•

(A.17)

Denote the i-th row of BN as b, the i-th column of G as gj, and the (i, i) element of E as
The first submatrix, VN, can be represented in terms of its (i,i) element:

(VN)(,) = bYB*Bbj + tr [VBCov(bi, bRp)} + & + [1 E]Cov(g, gRp)[1 E}'. (A.19)
Note that Cov(b, bRp) and Cov(g, gRp) are submatrices of Var(gRp) in (A.13). The
remaining submatrices in (A.18) can be shown to be equal to

B*B =

=

VB =

T7BB

+ Var(EBIRp)

BNVBB + BNVar(EBIRP).

A.3. Posterior distribution for the parameters of (4)
Let rA (S x 1) contain S observations of rA,1, the return on a given fund A. We assume S ç T
and that the (consecutive) months in which rA,t is observed form a subset of those in which

rN,t and rB,i are observed. The assumption that the disturbances in (4) are independent
across funds, coupled with the assumption that the priors of that regression's parameters
are independent across funds, implies that the posterior distribution for a given fund's parameters of the regression in (4) does not depend on the observed returns of the other funds
(conditional on the passive return sample Rp). Let °A denote the set of parameters 5A, CA,
and o-,. Our various modeling assumptions give
P(OA, OpRp, rA)

o P(OA, Op)p(Rp, rAIOA, Op)

= p(OA)p(GP)p(rAIRp, GA, OP)P(RPOA, Op)
= p(04p(rAIRp, OA)p(Op)p(RpIOp)
p(OAIRp,rA)p(OplRp).

o

(A.20)

The second factor in (A.20) is the posterior derived previously. The first factor, the posterior
for GA, combines the

priors given in (14) through (16) with the likelihood,

p(rARp, GA) o -

—

exP{__(rA

ZAqA)'(rA —

ZAcbA)}

(A.21)

where RP,A denotes the S rows of Rp corresponding to the months in which
is observed,
ZA = (t5 RP,A), and çbA = (öÁ c)'. The prior densities corresponding to (14) through (16)

are given by

p(a)

1
oc _____

I

2

OSo

exp —-—-

34

(A.22)

and

p(cAk) o
where çbo = (o

exp {(cbA - o)'Ao(A -

e and
A — " v04

\

(75 0

(A.23)

—1

0

A 24

The product of (A.21), (A.22), and (A.23) gives, after simplifying,'9

p(A, (7uRp, rA) oc -, exp {_A_ A)'(AO + Z,ZA)(cbA - A)}

a+vo+i{}'

(A.25)

where

= (Ao+Z.,ZA)'(Aoo+ZrA)
vos + r4r4 + A00 — (A0 + ZZA)cbA.

hA
It

(A.26)
(A.27)

follows from (A.25) that
AIRP,rA,(7U

N(cbA, c(Ao+ZZA)')

aIRp,rA

(A.28)
(A.29)

,

XT+v0

and hence

&=E(aIRp,rA) =

T+i—2

Var(AIRp,rA) = &(AO+ZZA)',

(A.30)
(A.31)

where the last equation follows from variance decomposition.

A.4. Posterior moments of a fund's alpha
Let N and VaN denote the posterior mean and covariance matrix of aN, given by the appropriate submatrices of the moments in (A.11) and (A.13), and let VA denote the posterior
covariance matrix of cbA given in (A.31). From the previous discussion recall that the postenors of cbA and aN are independent. Thus, from equation (5), the posterior mean of the
fund's alpha is given by
cEA

= 5A + CANtXN,

'9See Zeilner (1971, pp. 75-76) for a similar derivation.

35

(A.32)

where 6A and AN are subvectors of the posterior mean of A given in (A.26).
To obtain the posterior variance of aA, rewrite (5) as

= çb'd,

(A.33)

where d = (1 c 0)', and the posterior mean and covariance matrix of d are given by

000
000

1

d=

N

,

Vd =

0

0

VaN 0

(A34)

Let V denote the data, Rp and rA, and note that by the variance-decomposition rule,
Var(aAIV) = E[Var(cb'Adl V, d)IV} + Var[E(dIV,d)IV].

(A.35)

Using the independence of cbA and d, the first term in (A.35) can expressed as

E[Var(dIV,d)V] = E[d'VAdIV]
= E[tr (VAdd')lV]
= tr[VAE(dd'IV)]
= tr (1%AVd) + dVAd,

(A36)

and the second term can be expressed as

Var[E(cdlD,d)lD} = Var{cAdlD}

=

QYJIVdc15A.

(A.37)

A.5. Predictive moments of fund returns
The derivation of the predictive moments of fund returns closely parallels the derivation in
PS of the predictive moments of the non-benchmark returns, rN,T+1. Let R denote all of the
sample returns data on funds and passive assets through period T. Since CA and E (the
mean of rpj) are independent in the prior, the predictive mean of rA,T+1 is

E(rA,T+1IR) E(6A + cAEpR) A + CAEP.

(A.38)

The predictive variance of rA,T+1 can be written as
Var(rA,T+1IR) = E(Var(rA,T+1IR, c5A)R) + Var(E(rA,T+1IR, c5A)R).
36

(A.39)

To evaluate both terms on the right-hand side, first note that the regression in (4) implies
TA,T+1 = &4+cArp,T+1+UTH-1

=

(A.40)

(A41)

To compute the first term on the right-hand side of (A.39), observe using (A.40) that
VarfrA,T+1IR, A) = culVp*cA + &j,

(A.42)

and taking expectations gives
E(Var(rA,T+lR, cbA)R) = ö'AVPöA + tr [VCov(cA, cjR)] + .

(A43)

To compute the second term on the right-hand side of (A.39), observe using (A.41) that
E(rA,T+1R, cbA) = {1 E]çbA,

(A.44)

so

Var(E(rA,T+lR, A)lR)

[1

E,]COV(çA, cbdR)[1 EY.

(A.45)

Note that the posterior covariance matrix Cov(q5A, R) and its submatrix Cov(cA, c'R)
are given in (A.31).
Computing the predictive covariance of rA,T+1 with the return on another fund J, rJ,T+1,
is simplified by the independence across funds of (i) the disturbances in (A.40) and (ii) the
posteriors for the coefficient vectors cbA and qfj. Applying the same approach as used above
for the predictive variance gives
Cov(rA,T+1,rJ,T+1R)

(A.46)

Computing the predictive covariance of rA,T+1 with the vector of returns on the passive
assets, rP,Tf 1, is simplified by the independence of the posterior for ç5 from that of E and
Vp. Let 0 denote the union of Op and GA. Using the law of iterated expectations and the
variance decomposition rule gives
Cov(rA,T+1, rp,T+1IR) = E(Cov(rA,T+1, rp,T+1R, O)R) + Cov(E(rA,T+1IR,O), E(rp,T+1IR,O)IR)

=

E(VPCAR) + Cov(öA + cEp, EpR)

= VPCA+COV(EP,EPR)CA
= VIA.

37

(AA7)

Table 1
Number of Equity Mutual Funds Classified by
History Length and Investment Objective
The sample contains domestic equity mutual funds in the CRSP database with continuous return histories
longer than one year. Multiple share classes for the same fund are excluded. Funds are assigned to one of
seven broad investment objectives using information that the CRSP database provides about classifications
by Wiesenberger, ICDI, and Strategic Insight.

Investment objective

13—23

Length of fund's return history (months)
24—35 36—59 60—119 120—239 240

Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income

128
40
213
36

60
30
130
35

95
41
226
38

109

Growth and income

154
9

80
10

61

641

Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
All funds

All

0
0
60
4

413
153
972
174

32
251

21
10
92

47

14

119

153

36

16

13

34
41

576

17

37

45

68

4

0

215

382

581

676

190

139

2609

38

106

Table 2
Estimates of Alpha for Equity Mutual Funds
Each value in the table is the median across the set of designated funds, expressed in percent per annum.
Fund performance, denoted by cA, is defined as the intercept in the regression of the fund's excess return,
rAt, on either the market benchmark index, MKTt, (Panel A) or that benchmark index plus the size and
value benchmark indexes, SMB and HML (Panel B). The OLS estimate of aA, denoted by &A, is based on
the fund's available history and the corresponding history of the benchmarks. The posterior mean of aA,
denoted by A, is based on the fund's available history as well as the returns from January 1963 through
December 1998 on the benchmarks and additional non-benchmark indexes. The quantity
expressed
in percent per annum, denotes the prior standard deviation of the intercept 0N in a regression of a nonbenchmark return on the benchmark indexes. The prior for oA is diffuse.

History length or
investment objective

A for OQ
cEA

00

2%

0

for O\T of
00
2%

IcEA — cEA

0

A. TA, = A + flAMKTI +
-4.81
-2.85
-2.87
-1.49
-0.84

-2.07 -1.87 -1.34
-1.64 -1.53 -1.17

240 months and greater -0.53

-0.17 -0.26 -0.14

Small-company growth -8.45
Other aggressive growth -5.41
Growth
-2.17
Income
-0.39
Growth and income
-0.51
Maximum capital gains -2.29
Sector funds
-1.06
All funds
-2.13

-1.59

3.27
2.53
2.44
1.35
1.29
0.70

3.29
2.47
2.24
1.29
1.04
0.53

3.33
2.72
2.10
1.42
0.96
0.17

7.66
4.65
1.48
1.07
0.89
1.75
3.48

8.30
4.58
1.52
0.83
1.02
1.34
2.95

1.87

1.90

B. rA, = A + bA,1MKTj + bA,2SMBj + bA,3HMLt + 71A,t
-1.68
-2.07 -1.96 -1.43
1.66 1.55
-1.63
-1.64 -1.52 -1.38
1.40 1.25
-1.46
-1.14
-1.29
-1.61
1.05 0.95
-0.92
-0.97 -0.94 -0.66
0.76 0.57
0.07
-0.09 -0.06 0.08
0.64 0.42
240 months and greater 0.12
-0.17 -0.13 0.17
0.76 0.50

1.59
1.01
0.78
0.39
0.24
0.05

13—23 months
24—35 months
36—59 months
60—119 months
120—239 months

-1.61

-1.35

-0.97 -0.91
-0.09

-0.08

-1.13
-0.56
0.03

-0.97 -0.05

-3.96

-2.70

0.09

7.20
4.80
1.64
1.27
0.93
2.16
4.95

-1.25

-1.07 -0.74

2.05

-0.97 -0.74 -1.06
-0.97 -1.01 -1.17

-1.84 -1.40 -0.45
-0.97 -0.87 -0.59
-1.47 -1.53 -1.95

13—23 months
24—35 months
36—59 months
60—119 months
120—239 months

Small-company growth

-0.41

Other aggressive growth -0.37
Growth
-0.88
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds

-2.03
-1.19
-0.28
-1.84

All funds

-1.07

-1.59

-1.16 -0.08
-0.97 -0.45 0.08

1.45
1.76

-0.97 -0.86 -0.72
-1.84 -1.90 -1.74
-0.97 -1.00 -1.11
-3.96

-3.51

-2.48

0.90
0.74
0.79
1.40
3.18

-1.25

-1.14 -0.86

1.09

-1.47 -1.32 -0.34

39

1.15
1.34
0.78
0.61
0.68
1.03
2.44

0.92
0.96
0.59
0.47
0.44
0.45
1.35

0.91

0.65

Table 3
Average Equity-Fund Aiphas
The table reports the posterior mean of A, the average a across the set of designated funds, expressed in
percent per annum. Also reported is the posterior probability (expressed in percent) that A is negative
Fund performance, denoted by UA, is defined as the intercept in the regression of the fund's excess return,
rA,t on either the market benchmark index, MKTt, (Panel A) or that benchmark index plus the size and
value benchmark indexes, SMB and HML (Panel B). The OLS estimate of aA, denoted by &, is based on
the fund's available history and the corresponding history of the benchmarks. The posterior mean of a,
denoted by A, is based on the fund's available history as well as the returns from January 1963 through
December 1998 on the benchmarks and additional non-benchmark indexes. The quantity 0N expressed
in percent per annum denotes the prior standard deviation of the intercept UN in a regression of a nonbenchmark return on the benchmark indexes. The prior for OA is diffuse.

Posterior mean of cEA

History length or
investment objective
13—23 months

Prob( cEA < 0)

A for XN of
CEA

A. rA,L =
-6.31

24—35 months
36—59 months
60—119 months
120—239 months

-4.77
-4.12

0
oo
+ I3AMKTI + A,i
-1.67 -1.19

A

cEA for 0aN

aA

0

00

100

100

98

100
100
100

100
100
100

98

72
99

42
50
89
100
80
100
100

-1.67

-1.29

-1.78
-0.99

-1.39

-2.13

-1.07

-008

0.11

240 months and greater

-0.50

-0.26

Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
All funds

-9.29
-6.79
-3.06
-0.84
-1.02
-4.74
-4.14

-0.27
-1.28
-0.99
-1.00
-1.56
-1.25
-2.85
-2.45
-1.33

100
100

0.01
-1.39
-1.27
-0.36
-1.01
-3.01
-0.54

100
100
100
100
100
100
100

100

-0.97

100

100

-383

-0.66

98
100
100
100
100
100

B. rA,1 = cIA + bA,lMKT + bA,2SMB + bA,3HMLI + 17A,i
13—23 months
-1.54
-1.67 -1.06
100
100
-1.22
24—35 months
-1.67 -1.02
100
100
36—59 months
-1.32
-1.78 -1.10
100
100
60—119 months
-0.66
-0.99 -0.44
100
100
120—239 months
0.38
-0.08
0.46
0
72
240 months and greater
0.15
-0.27
0.21
10
99

Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
All funds

-000
027
-078
-204
-L76
-L67
-1.43
-0.99

100

94

70

78

98
100
100
100

99
1

17

-1.28
-0.99

0.50
0.29

50
30

100

9

98

30

-1.00

-0.61

100

100

99

-1.56
-1.25
-2.85
-2.45
-1.33

-1.64
-1.43
-1.64
-1.25
-0.72

100
100
100

100
100
100
100

100
100
100

40

99
100

100

99
100

Table 4
Relative Precision of Estimates of Alpha for Equity Mutual Funds
The table reports statistics for the ratio of variances, Var(äA)/Var(âA). Fund performance, denoted by a,
is defined as the intercept in the regression of the fund's excess return, rA,t, on either the market benchmark
index, MKTt, (Panel A) or that benchmark index plus the size and value benchmark indexes, SMBt and
HML (Panel B). The OLS estimate of A, denoted by A, is based on the fund's available history and the
corresponding history of the benchmarks. The posterior mean of cA, denoted by A, is based on the fund's
available history as well as the returns from January 1963 through December 1998 on the benchmarks and
additional non-benchmark indexes. The quantity
expressed in percent per annum, denotes the prior
standard deviation of the intercept aN in a regression of a non-benchmark return on the benchmark indexes.
The prior for aA is diffuse.

=0

= 2%

History length or
investment objective

median % < 1

13—23 months
24—35 months
36—59 months

A. TA,, =
0.62
0.63
0.65

median % < 1

A + flAMKTI +
83
88
90

0.62
0.62
0.65

83
88
92

93
93
88

0.69

91

96

0.77

0.84

98

92

0.98

74

100

90
87
84
83
92
96

0.34
0.55
0.76
0.75
0.77
0.73
0.63

0.39
0.59
0.80

0.77
0.80
0.85
0.66

100
90
87
89
85
88
95

89

0.68

91

0.72

89

+ bA,2SMBj + bA,SHMLt + 71A,t
0.69
81
0.69

81

240 months and greater

0.84

Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds

0.33
0.54
0.76
0.75
0.77
0.70
0.62

100

All funds

0.68

= A + bA,1MKTj

82
89

0.87

0.70
0.76

0.63
0.63
0.68
0.73

97
97

60—119 months
120—239 months

B. rA,

median % < 1

= 00

13—23 months

0.70

81

24—35 months
36—59 months
60—119 months
120—239 months

0.79
0.85
0.89
0.95

240 months and greater

1.00

76
80
80
75
53

0.98

Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds

0.80
0.81

0.88
0.88
0.91
0.96
0.74

84
86
78
79
67
66
95

0.79
0.79
0.86
0.87
0.89
0.94
0.74

All funds

0.86

78

0.84

0.78
0.84
0.88
0.93

41

90
89
89
85
95
96

79
83

0.78
0.83
0.89
0.94
0.99

77

88
82
83
72
75
95

0.80
0.78
0.88
0.86
0.90
0.96
0.76

86
88
82
82
73
83
95

82

0.85

82

84
88
71
86

82
83
91

83

Table 5
Comparison of Estimated CAPM and Fama-French Alphas under
Alternative Roles for Non-Benchmark Assets
Each entry in Panels A and B is the median across funds of the absolute difference between posterior means
of a fund's CAPM alpha and its Fama-French alpha, in percent per annum, under alternative prior beliefs
about the degree to which each model prices the non-benchmark assets. Each entry in Panel C is the median
absolute difference of the OLS alpha estimates. Fund performance, denoted by aA, is defined as the intercept
in the regression of the fund's excess return, rA,t, on either the market benchmark index, MKT, (CAPM)
or that benchmark index plus the size and value benchmark indexes, SMB and HML, (Fama-French). The
OLS estimate of aA, denoted by &A, is based on the fund's available history and the corresponding history of
the benchmarks. The posterior mean of aA, denoted by A, is based on the fund's available history as well
as the returns from January 1963 through December 1998 on the benchmark and additional non-benchmark

indexes. The quantity o denotes the prior standard deviation of the intercept cN in a regression of
a non-benchmark return on the benchmark returns, and the table compares A under a given non-zero
°a but different specifications of the set of benchmark indexes. (The posterior means of the CAPM and
Fama-French aiphas are identical under a = 0.) The prior for aA is diffuse.

Length of fund's return history (months)
Investment objective

13—23

24—35

36—59

60—119 120—239

240

All

A. Mispricing uncertainty for the non-benchmark assets (caN) equal to 2% per annum
na
1.01
0.58
0.74
0.67
0.70
0.69
Small-company growth
na
0.69
0.43
0.74
0.60
0.69
0.67
Other aggressive growth
0.41
Growth
0.43
0.38
0.41
0.40
0.35
0.40
Income
0.49
0.41
0.47
0.48
0.38
0.47
0.57
Growth and income
0.19
0.18
0.20
0.26
0.33
0.23
0.20
0.45
0.64
0.35
0.43
0.66
0.46
0.37
Maximum capital gains
1.11
na
Sector funds
0.96
0.85
1.36
0.93
0.98
All funds
0.42
0.41
0.47
0.43
0.40
0.32
0.42

B. No reliance on the model to price the non-benchmark assets (ax = oc)
2.11
na
1.69
2.72
1.89
2.02
Small-company growth
na
2.10
1.29
2.38
1.75
2.20
Other aggressive growth
1.11
Growth
1.25
1.18
1.13
1.13
1.02
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
All funds

0.53
2.00
2.43

1.07
0.63
1.16
2.41

1.18

1.18

1.31

1.29
0.74
1.64
3.40
1.38

1.27
0.54
2.15
2.37

1.26

1.52
0.89
1.30
2.91
1.20

C. No use of non-benchmark assets (OLS estimates)
11.21
11.33
7.98
4.72
3.96
Small-company growth
8.97
6.79
6.43
4.47
3.52
Other aggressive growth
Growth
3.60
1.97
1.91
1.28
1.33
1.44
Income
1.80
1.43
1.30
1.62
Growth and income
1.79
1.73
1.54
1.01
0.85
5.45
5.67
3.04
3.61
2.30
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
5.08
5.08
1.51
2.90
3.60
All funds
3.88
2.93
2.47
1.67
1.53
42

na

2.03
1.89
1.14
1.27
0.59
1.34
2.47

0.99

1.24

na

8.07
6.35
1.81
1.44
1.25
2.60
3.29
2.28

1.17
0.61
1.12

na
1.13
0.93
0.68
1.46

na
1.07

Table 6
Comparison of Estimated Aiphas With and Without the Pricing-Model
Restriction Applied to the Non-benchmark Assets
Each entry in the table is the median across funds of the absolute difference between posterior means
of a fund's alpha, in percent per annum, under alternative prior beliefs about whether the pricing-model
restriction applies to the non-benchmark assets. Fund performance, denoted by UA, is defined as the intercept
in the regression of the fund's excess return, rAt, on either the market benchmark index, MKTt, (Panel A) or
that benchmark index plus the size and value benchmark indexes, SMB and HML (Panel B). The posterior
mean of UA, denoted by âA, is based on the fund's available history as well as the returns from January
1963 through December 1998 on the benchmarks and additional non-benchmark indexes. The quantity o
denotes the prior standard deviation of the intercept UN in a regression of a non-benchmark return on the
benchmark indexes, and the table compares iA under YN = 0 versus crN = oo. The prior for UA is diffuse.

Length of fund's return history (months)
Investment objective

13—23

24—35

A. rA,t =
Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
All funds

B. rA, =
Small-company growth
Other aggressive growth
Growth
Income
Growth and income
Maximum capital gains
Sector funds
All funds

36—59

60—119

A + /3AMKTt + A,t

1.57
0.82

1.69
0.72
0.78
1.32
0.48
0.85
3.31

1.40
0.67
0.75
1.00
0.56
0.93
2.94

1.46
0.88
0.85
1.30
0.69
1.36
6.22

0.84
1.23
0.52

0.90

0.89

1.01

1.00

1.35
3.61

120—239

240

All

1.08
0.92
0.91
1.56
0.64
1.45
4.78
0.99

na

na

1.55
0.77
0.83
1.28
0.54
1.07
4.31

0.80

0.94

na

1.62
1.63
0.59
0.40
0.37
1.29
1.93

0.74

0.68

A + bA,1MKTL + bA,2SMBL + bA,3HML +

1.76
1.19

na

0.57
0.41
0.36

0.65
0.84
0.46
0.89
2.01
0.73

0.67
0.67
0.36
1.30

2.05
1.20
0.63
0.40
0.37
1.33
1.30

1.39
1.90
0.55
0.51
0.41

2.85

1.41
2.16

0.66

0.66

0.68

0.66

43

0.83
1.19
0.48
0.95

1.62
1.78

1.58
1.88
0.56
0.33
0.34
1.49
1.25

1.91

na

na

Table 7

Portfolios with the Highest Sharpe Ratio Under Priors for CAPM
Mispricing and Skill of Fund Managers
The investment universe consists of 505 no-load equity mutual funds with at least three years of return history through
December 1998. The benchmark factors are MKT, the excess return on the 'value-weighted stock market, SMB, the
difference between returns on small and large stocks, HML, the difference between returns on high and low bookto-market stocks, and MOM, the difference between returns on stocks with high and low returns over the previous

year (excluding the most recent month) The correlations and Sharpe ratios in Panels B and C are computed with
respect to the same predictive distribution used to obtain the optimal fund portfolio in the same column. The weights
in the combination of a given set of benchmarks with the highest Sharpe ratio are computed using the marginal
predictive distribution of those benchmarks under diffuse priors (which is equivalent to using sample moments of the
those benchmarks).
Mispricing uncertainty

Skill uncertainty

(°aN) in

(o) in percent

percent

per year:

per year:

0

0

0

0

1

3

0

1

1

00

0

1

3

-

-

22

16
44

23

-

A. Portfolio Weights (>< 100)

Ameristock Mutual Fund
23
BT histitutional:Equity 500 Index Fund
California Investment SkP 500 Index Fund
53
Cohen & Steers Realty Shares
Century Shares Trust
DFA AEW Real Estate Securities Portfolio
Elfun Trusts
First American Investment:Real Est Sec/Y
First Funds:Growth and Income Portfolio/I
Gabelli Asset Fund
Galaxy Funds II:Utility Index Fund
IDS Utilities Income Fund/Y
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Value Fund/Navigator
MassMutual Insti Funds:S mall Cap Value Eqty/S Oakmark Fund
Robertson Stephens Inv Tr:Information Age/A
T. Rowe Price Dividend Growth Fund
T. Rowe Price Equity Income Fund
UAM Fds Tr:Heitman Real Estate Portfolio/Inst 24
Vanguard Index Tr:Extended Market Port/mv
Vanguard PrimeCap Fund
Weitz Series Fund:Hickory Portfolio
Weitz Series Fund: Value Portfolio

-

22

41
-

-

6

-

-

-

-

23

71

30

23

-

-

-

-

1

-

4
-

15

51

14

-

-

8

-

32

-

-

5

-

5

-

1

17

4

-

1
00

2

2

0

1

67
-

-

-

11

-

-

9

-

-

3

54

59

-

-

8
3

5

11
18

4

-

2
3

2
00

20

-

-

-

5
-

32

18

11

5

-

2
4
57

3

5
-

-

4

59

-

-

-

8
-

5

-

12

-

-

2

-

-

20

-

1

57

8
28

92

93
55

43

34

26

6

B. Correlation (x 100) with the portfolio having the highest Sharpe ratio
among all portfolios that combine the benchmark factors shown

MKT
100 99 95 93 100 98 94 94 89
48 49 51 34 49 56 53 37 64
MKT, SMB, IIML
32 31 31 21 35 35 33 23 53
MKT, SMB, IIML, MOM
C. Sharpe ratio of the portfolio in Panel A divided by the highest Sharpe
ratio for a portfolio that combines the benchmark factors shown (x 100)
MKT
96 104 152 234 96 104 153 230 107
MKT, SMB, HML
MKT, SMB, HML, MOM

68
49

94

114 156 224
197 214 314 482 141 154 226 339 102 109 148 213
292 318 466 716 144 157 230 346 81 86 118 169

44

Table S
Portfolios with the Highest Sharpe Ratio Under Priors for Fama-FEench-Mode1
Mispricing and Skill of Fund Managers
The investment universe consists of 505 no-load equity mutual funds with at least three years of return history through
December 1998. The benchmark factors are MKT, the excess return on the 'value-weighted stock market, SMB, the
difference between returns on small and large stocks, HML, the difference between returns on high and low bookto-market stocks, and MOM, the difference between returns on stocks with high and low returns over the previous

year (excluding the most recent month). The correlations and Sharpe ratios in Panels B and C are computed with
respect to the same predictive distribution used to obtain the optimal fund portfolio in the same column. The weights
in the combination of a given set of benchmarks with the highest Sharpe ratio are computed using the marginal
predictive distribution of those benchmarks under diffuse priors (which is equivalent to using sample moments of the
those benchmarks).

Mispricing uncertainty (claN) in percent per year:
Skill uncertainty (c) in percent per year:

0

0
0

1

0

0

3 00

A. Portfolio Weights (x100)
- - 10 Ameristock Mutual Fund
- 3 - CGM Realty Fund
- - - Cohen & Steers Realty Shares
- - - Columbia Real Estate Equity Fund
DFA AEW Real Estate Securities Portfolio
13
1
DFA Invest Grp:US Large Cap Value Port
2
First American Investment:Real Est Sec/Y
19 13 - Galaxy Funds II:Utility Index Fund
8
5
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Total Return Fund/Navigator 40 10
44
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Value Fund/Navigator
Mutual Discovery Fund/Z
- - 2 Oakmark Fund
- 29 7 T. Rowe Price Equity Income Fund
UAM Fds Tr:Heitman Real Estate Portfolio/Inst 1
Weitz Series Fund:Hickory Portfolio
- - 45 29
Weitz Series Fund:Value Portfolio

1

0

1
1

3 oo 0

2
1

-

9

-

4

-

4

17

4

-

-

20
13

15
11

34

6
-

-

-

1

-

1

-

2

-

-

-

25

-

18

8

-

-

21

15
18

43

-

-

8
-

-

47

41

28

21

3

3
31

-

-

-

25

5

18 39 37 26 15 35 34 24 6

6

-

6
3

21

2
00

-

-

22

2

3

3

-

12

-

-

-

6

50

35

86
74
55

90
64
37

94
54
32

17
3

4

B. Correlation (x 100) with the portfolio having the highest Sharpe ratio
among all portfolios that combine the benchmark factors shown

MKT
88 89 89 94 87 89 89 94 83
75 74 66 55 75 75 65 55 73
MKT, SMB, HML
52 47 38 32 54 50 38 32 57
MKT, SMB, HML, MOM
C. Sharpe ratio of the portfolio in Panel A divided by the highest Sharpe
ratio for a portfolio that combines the benchmark factors shown (<100)
MKT
137 147 180 234 139 147 179 232 146
66 70 86 112 66 70 85 111 70
MKT, SMB, IIML
99 106 130 169 89 94 114 149 75
MKT, SMB, HML, MOM

45

151 176 229
72
78

84
91

109
118

Table 9
Portfolios with the Highest Sharpe Ratio Under Priors for Four-Factor-Model
Mispricing and Skill of Fund Managers
The investment universe consists of 505 no-load equity mutual funds with at least three years of return history through
December 1998. The benchmark factors are MKT, the excess return on the 'value-weighted stock market, SMB, the
difference between returns on small and large stocks, HML, the difference between returns on high and low bookto-market stocks, and MOM, the difference between returns on stocks with high and low returns over the previous

year (excluding the most recent month). The correlations and Sharpe ratios in Panels B and C are computed with
respect to the same predictive distribution used to obtain the optimal fund portfolio in the same column. The weights
in the combination of a given set of benchmarks with the highest Sharpe ratio are computed using the marginal
predictive distribution of those benchmarks under diffuse priors (which is equivalent to using sample moments of the
those benchmarks).

Mispricing uncertainty (claN) in percent per year:
Skill uncertainty (c) in percent per year:

0

0
0

1

0

0

3 00

A. Portfolio Weights (x100)
- 1 - Alpine US Real Estate Equity Fund/Y
1
CGM Realty Fund
10 6 14 14 9 Cohen & Steers Realty Shares
Columbia Real Estate Equity Fund
11 12 6 DFA AEW Real Estate Securities Portfolio
28 19 - First American Investment:Real Est Sec/Y
20 16 4 - - 8 Gabelli Asset Fund
14 11 - Galaxy Funds II:Utility Index Fund
- - - 48
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Value Fund/Navigator
- - - 2
Lindner/Ryback Small Cap Fund/Investor
2
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Ist:US Real Est/A 4
7
Mutual Discovery Fund/Z
- - 14 T. Rowe Price Dividend Growth Fund
UAM Fds Tr:Heitman Real Estate Portfolio/Inst 13 16 9
Weitz Series Fund:Hickory Portfolio
10
- 38 34
Weitz Series Fund: Value Portfolio

1

0

14
10

27
19

-

1
1

1

9

-

-

21

18

-

-

16

11

15

-

-

9
1

12

40

37

75
68
62

89
65
50

94
51
30

17

13

-

-

2
3
15

16 9
-

-

26
18

14 9
12 6
19
16 5
6

-

-

1
8
14
11
18
15

-

12

2
00

6

-

2

2

2
1

1

1

3

3 oo 0
14

9

46
2

6
-

-

11

39

35

5

10
7

-

5
1

3
2

44
1

5
-

B. Correlation (xlOO) with the portfolio having the highest sample Sharpe
ratio among all portfolios that combine the benchmark factors shown

MKT
75 75 89 94 75 75 89 94 75
67 68 66 51 67 68 65 51 67
MKT, SMB, HML
61 62 50 30 61 62 50 30 61
MKT, SMB, HML, MOM
C. Sharpe ratio of the portfolio in Panel A divided by the highest Sharpe
ratio for a portfolio that combines the benchmark factors shown (<100)
MKT
175 178 177 222 176 179 178 222 179
84 85 85 106 84 85 85 106 85
MKT, SMB, IIML
54 55 55 69 54 55 55 69 55
MKT, SMB, HML, MOM

46

181 179 221
86 86 106
56 55 68

Table 10
Portfolios with the Highest Sharpe Ratio Under Priors for Skill
of Fund Managers and No Use of a Pricing Model (CaN = oo)
The investment universe consists of 505 no-load equity mutual funds with at least three years of return history
through December 1998. The benchmark factors are MKT, the excess return on the value-weighted stock market,
SMB, the difference between returns on small and large stocks, HML, the difference between returns on high and
iow book-to-market stocks, and MOM, the difference between returns on stocks with high and low returns over the
previous year (excluding the most recent month). The correlations, Sharpe ratios, and certainty-equivalent differences
in Panels B through E are computed with respect to the same predictive distribution used to obtain the optimal fund
portfolio in the same column. The weights in the combination of a given set of benchmarks with the highest Sharpe
ratio are computed using the marginal predictive distribution of those benchmarks under diffuse priors (which is
equivalent to using sample moments of the those benchmarks). The certainty-equivalent difference is computed with
relative risk aversion equal to 2.75.
0
Skill uncertainty (o) in percent per year:
A. Portfolio Weights (x100)
CGM Realty Fund

Cohen & Steers Realty Shares
Cappiello-Rushmore Trust:Utiity Income Fund
Columbia Real Estate Equity Fund
DFA AEW Real Estate Securities Portfolio
First American Investment:Real Est Sec/Y
Galaxy Funds II:Utility Index Fund
1D5 Utilities Income Fund/Y
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Value Fund/Navigator
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Ist:US Real Est/A
Oakmark Fund
T. Rowe Price Dividend Growth Fund
UAM Fds Tr:Heitman Real Estate Portfolio/Inst
Weitz Partners Value Fund
Weitz Series Fund:Hickory Portfolio
Weitz Series Fund:Value Portfolio

1

2

3

oo

2

1

13

2
14

13

11

-

1

7

9

9

20
14

14

2

7
-

12

11
21

6
8

-

5

5

-

-

32

2

5

3

9

12

37 32

-

-

11

-

24

-

2

8

-

-

2

6

18

42

43

6

B. Correlation (x 100) with the portfolio having the highest Sharpe ratio
among all portfolios that combine the benchmark factors shown
MKT
74 76 82 87 94
66
59

MKT, SMB, HML
MKT, 5MB, IIML, MOM

66
60

66
57

64
50

51
31

C. Sharpe ratio of the portfolio in Panel A divided by the highest Sharpe
ratio for a portfolio that combines the benchmark factors shown (x 100)
MKT
MKT, SMB, HML
MKT, SMB, HML, MOM

190
91
59

191 184 185 221
92
59

88

89

57 57

D. Comparison to the portfolio that is optimal under o = 0
1
6
23
Certainty-equivalent difference (basis pts. per mo.) 0

100 100 97

Correlation (xlOO)
E. Comparison to the portfolio that is optimal
when expected returns equal sample means

89

106
69
133
71

Certainty-equivalent difference (basis pts. per mo.) 477 440 367 310 187
68

Correlation (xlOO)

47

69

75

80

91

Table 11
Comparisons of Portfolios of No-Load Funds Formed Under Various
Prior Beliefs About Manager Skill and Pricing Models
All portfolios being compared are formed from an investment universe of 505 no-load equity mutual funds with at
least three years of return history through December 1998. The pricing models considered are the Capital Asset
Pricing Model of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), the three-factor Fama-French (1993) model, and the four-factor
model of Carhart (1997), which adds a momentum factor to the Fama-French model. All of the reported correlations
and certainty-equivalent differences are computed using the predictive distribution formed under the prior mispricing
uncertainty (UaN) and skill uncertainty (o) in the column heading. The certainty-equivalent difference is computed
with relative risk aversion equal to 2.75.

Mispricing uncertainty (craN) in percent per year: 0
0
Skill uncertainty (c) in percent per year:

0
1

0
3

0

1

00

0

1
1

1

1

2222

3 oo 0 1 3 00

a

A. Comparison of the portfolios formed with the same o and
under
different pricing models
Certainty-equivalent difference (basis points per month)
CAPM versus Fama-French
CAPM versus four-factor
59 61 34 18 50 51 28 13 24
Fama-French versus four-factor

26 25 19 28 23 19 14 21 9 8 8 10
27 19 5
24 29 19 3 19 23 17 2 10 13 13 1

Correlation (x 100)
CAPM versus Fama-French
CAPM versus four-factor
Fama-French versus four-factor

87 89 93 94 87 91 95 96 97 96 97 98
73 71 91 96 76 75 92 97 94 89 93 99
89 84 94 99 92 88 94 99 97 94 94 100

B. Comparison of the optimal portfolio to the portfolio that is optimal under
aaN = 00 and = 0
Certainty-equivalent difference (basis points per month)

o

CAPM

Fama-French
Four-factor

71 74 138 299 53 57 121 275 26
28 35 94 227 22 27 85 217 11
4
6
35 153 3
5 34 151 2

29

89

15

67

3

31

232
196
147

73 71 70 60 77 74 71 62 95
87 82 73 69 91 86 73 69 96
98 97 87 69 98 97 87 69 99

90
93
98

73
73
88

65
70
69

Correlation (x 100)

CAPM
Fama-French
Four-factor

C. Comparison of the optimal portfolio to the portfolio that is optimal when
expected returns equal sample means
Certainty-equivalent difference (basis points per month)

CAPM

Fama-French
Four-factor

393 356 259 172 395 358 262 171 404 367 270 171
414 380 281 171 417 383 282 172 426 390 285 174
465 428 302 185 466 429 303 185 468 431 305 185

Correlation (x 100)

CAPM

95 95 94 94 94 94 93 95 83

81 82 84 93 80 82 84 93 77

87
79

89

95

Fama-French

84

93

Four-factor

67 67 82 94 67 68 82 94 68

68

81

93

48

Table 12
Coefficients in Regressions of Fund Returns on the Passive Asset Returns
The table reports posterior means and "t statistics" (posterior mean divided by posterior standard) of the intercept (öÂ) and slope
coefficients in a regression of the fund's return on the returns of the eight passive assets. The passive assets are CMS, a spread between
stocks with high and low HML betas but with both legs matched in terms of market capitalization (size) and book-to-market ratios,
IP1—1P3, three portfolios formed by applying principal-component analysis to a set of 20 industry portfolios, MOM, the difference between
returns on stocks with high and low returns over the previous year (excluding the most recent month), SMB, the difference between
returns on small and large stocks, HML, the difference between returns on high and low book-to-market stocks, and MKT, the excess
return on the value-weighted stock market.

5 CMS IP1 1P2 1P3 MOM
A. Posterior Mean (xlOO)
Ameristock Mutual Fund
0.39
0
-O
-1
BT Institutional:Equity 500 Index Fund
0.09
0
4 -14
CGM Realty Fund
-0.14
-1
California Investment S&P 500 Index Fund
0.07
0
Century Shares Trust
-0.45
-10
2
Cohen & Steers Realty Shares
-0.22
-13
-9
Columbia Real Estate Equity Fund
-0.26
16 -10
DFA AEW Real Estate Securities Portfolio
-0.59
7
-9
First American Investment:Real Est Sec/Y
-0.29
21
-12
Galaxy Funds II:Utility Index Fund
-0.57
38
-9
11
1
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Total Return Fund/Navigator -0.16
-11
4
0.84
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Value Fund/Navigator
0.34
-18
6
Mutual Discovery Fund/Z
Robertson Stephens mv Tr:Information Age/A
1.13
55
-6
-1
T. Rowe Price Dividend Growth Fund
0.21
7
1
T. Rowe Price Equity Income Fund
0.16
17
UAM Fds Tr:Heitman Real Estate Portfolio/Inst -0.32
-17 -10
Vanguard Index Tr:Extended Market Port/mv
-0.08
-2
-1
0.44
-13
5
Vanguard PrimeCap Fund
-11
Weitz Series Fund:Hickory Portfolio
0.56
7
2
Weits Series Fund:Value Portfolio
0.41
-0
Hot-Hand Portfolio
0.01
-7
0

-7

6

1

1

-6
-2

-21

3

19

1

1

-2

-28
-41
-22
-24
-25
-48

6
17
8
9
5

9
28
22
23
16
13

3
23
7
48

8

-9
-2
2
-21
3
3
15

-6
-5
-10

5MB HML MKT
-34
-25
58
-24

8
69
46
57
47
13
10

-24
39
32
-3

8

96

63

109

-2

96

43
53
61
64
71
63

132
102

67
-14
57

6

70
54

-3

9

0

-4

61
19

19

48

-133
20
36
52
-3
-32
18
18
-11

B. "t-statistic" (posterior mean divided by posterior standard deviation)
Ameristock Mutual Fund
2.0
0.0 -0.1 -1.2
1.8
-1.6 -5.5
BT Institutional:Equity 500 Index Fund
1.9
-0.3 0.5 0.6 1.2
-1.5 -12.0
CGM Realty Fund
-0.7
0.2 -2.9 -1.2
0.3
2.3
4.0
California Investment S&P 500 Index Fund
1.4
-0.5 0.5 0.6 0.9
-1.7 -11.6
Century Shares Trust
-1.6 -0.7 0.7 -3.1 1.0
1.7
0.9
Cohen & Steers Realty Shares
-0.9 -0.6 -2.2 -2.7 2.1
3.7
5.2
Columbia Real Estate Equity Fund
-0.8
0.7 -2.3 -1.3
1.0
2.8
3.4
DFA AEW Real Estate Securities Portfolio
-2.1
0.4 -2.7 -2.0
1.3
3.7
5.3
-1.2
4.2
First American Investment:Real Est Sec/Y
1.0 -3.3 -1.7
0.6
2.5
-2.2
Galaxy Funds II:Utility Index Fund
2.6 -3.2 -4.8 -1.7
2.7
1.5
-1.2
1.2
1.0
0.6
0.4
1.8
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Total Return Fund/Navigator -0.2
2.8 -0.8
1.5
2.5 -0.3
-0.7 -2.4
Legg Mason Eq Tr:Value Fund/Navigator
1.4
-1.8 3.1
1.0
0.5
-1.9
5.2
Mutual Discovery Fund/Z
1.4 -0.9
Robertson Stephens Inv Tr:Information Age/A
1.6
1.6 -1.5
0.6
1.5
1.4 -1.6 -0.4
1.4 -0.7
T. Rowe Price Dividend Growth Fund
2.0
1.5
2.1
T. Rowe Price Equity Income Fund
3.7
1.9
1.3
1.7
-2.9
0.1
UAM Fds Tr:Heitman Real Estate Portfolio/Inst -1.1 -0.8 -2.5 -2.6 1.8
4.0
5.3
Vanguard Index Tr:Extended Market Port/mv
-0.8 -0.5 -1.5 0.9 -2.6
3.3 21.4
2.8 -1.5
3.6
6.8 -3.4
-0.8
1.6
Vanguard PrimeCap Fund
1.4
Weits Series Fund:Hickory Portfolio
-0.5 1.9 -1.4 -1.0
0.0
3.9
Weitz Series Fund:Value Portfolio
2.4 -0.0
1.3 -1.3 -2.6
-1.0
3.0
Hot-Hand Portfolio
0.2 -2.2
0.4 4.6 -3.4
13.5 22.4

0.8
-0.9
2.9
-0.6
3.6
2.8
3.0
4.1
4.0
5.0
5.8
-1.1
5.7
-3.9
3.9
9.0
2.8
-0.9
-4.7
0.9
2.3
-4.1

49

-1
3

-40
2
30

-19
-7
9

-3
-10
-8
-9
-4

8
4

-6

0

31

90

-2

94
99
106

140
91
82
64
75
78

70
107
103

68
108

72
89
11.2
38.9
4.8
38.1
10.7
5.5
4.5
6.5
5.9
11.3

9.0
6.6

7.0
2.1
17.0
18.5
5.8

33.4
10.3

5.9
9.6
30.6

References
Anderson, T.W., 1984, An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis (John Wiley and
Sons, New York, NY).

Baks, Klaas P., Andrew Metrick, and Jessica Wachter, 2000, Should investors avoid all
actively managed mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation, Journal
of Finance, forthcoming.

Brown, Stephen J., 1979. Optimal portfolio choice under uncertainty: a Bayesian approach.
In V. S. Bawa, S. J. Brown, and R. W. Klein, eds.: Estimation Risk and Optimal Portfolio
Choice (North Holland, Amsterdam).

Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1995, Performance persistence, Journal of
Finance 50, 679—698.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
52, 57—82.

Chen, Zhiwu, and Peter J. Knez, 1996, Portfolio performance measurement: Theory and
applications, Review of Financial Studies 9, 511—555.

Daniel, Kent, and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional
variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1—33.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035—
1058.

Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Characteristics, covariances,
and average returns: 1929 to 1997, Journal of Finance 55, 389—406.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber and Christopher R. Blake, 1996, The persistence Of
risk-adjusted mutual fund performance, Journal of Business 69, 133—157.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset pricing
anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55—84.

Ferson, Wayne E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in
changing economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425-461.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Portfolio performance evaluation: Old issues
and new insights, Review of Financial Studies 2, 393—421.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1992, The persistence of mutual fund performance,
Journal of Finance 47, 1977—1984.

50

Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1995, Performance evaluation. In R. Jarrow, V.
Maksimovic, and W. Ziemba, eds.: Handbook in Operations Research and Management
Science, Vol. 9: Finance (Elsevier Science).
Hansen, Lars P., 1982, Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators, Econometrica 50, 1029—1054.

Hendricks, Darryll, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993, Hot hands in mutual
funds: Short-run persistence of relative performance, 1974—88, Journal of Finance 48,
93—130.

Jegadeesh, Narasimham, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65—91.
Jensen, Michael C., 1969, Risk, the pricing of capital assets, and the evaluation of investment
portfolios, Journal of Business 42, 167—247.

Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, On correlations and inferences about
mean-variance efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 18,

61—90.

Klein, Roger W., and Vijay S. Bawa, 1976, The effect of estimation risk on optimal portfolio
choice, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 215—231.

Knox, Thomas A., 1999, Statistical decision theory in portfolio choice, BA. honors thesis,
Harvard University.
Lehmann, Bruce N., and David M. Modest, 1987, Mutual fund performance evaluation: A
comparison of benchmarks and benchmark comparisons, Journal of Finance 42, 233—265.

Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
stock portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13—37.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum? Journal
of Finance 54, 1249—1290.

Pastor, Lubo, 2000, Portfolio selection and asset pricing models, Journal of Finance 55,
179—223.

Pastor, Lubo, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1999, Costs of equity capital and model mispricing,
Journal of Finance, 54, 67—121.

Pastor, Lubo, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2000, Comparing asset pricing models: an investment perspective, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Economic
Theory 13, 341—360.

Sanders, Anthony B., 1997, The historical behavior of REIT returns: A capital markets
perspective, The Handbook of Real Estate Investment Trusts, edited by R. Garrigan and
J. Parsons (Irwin Publishing Co.), 1997.

51

Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425—442.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1997, Analyzing investments whose histories differ in length, Journal
of Financial Economics, 45, 285—331.
Theil, Henri, 1971, Principles of Econometrics, Wiley, New York.

Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, working paper, University of Colorado at Boulder.
Zellner, Arnold, 1962, An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated regressions and
tests for aggregation bias, Journal of the American Statistical Association 57, 348—368.

Zeilner, Arnold, 1971, An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics (John Wiley
and Sons, New York, NY).

Zeilner, Arnold, and V. Karuppan Chetty, 1965, Prediction and decision problems in regression models from the Bayesian point of view, Journal of the American Statistical
Association 60, 608—616.

52

