NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

YOUTH SMOKING IN THE U.S.: EVIDENCE AND IMPLICATIONS

Jonathan Gruber
Jonathan Zinman

Working Paper 7780
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7780

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

July2000

We are grateful to James Beny, Cristian Gonzalez, Jeffrey Hoffner, and Choonsiang Tan for outstanding
research assistance, and to seminar participants at the NBER, the University of Peimsylvania, and the
University of Chicago for helpful comments. Gruber acknowledges financial support from the National
Institute on Aging and the National Science Foundation; Zinman acknowledges support from MIT's Joim
Castle Fellowship, the Hany S. Truman Scholarship Foundation and the Social Science Research Council's
Program in Applied Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
2000 by Jonathan Gruber and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is
given to the source.

Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Evidence and Implications
Jonathan Gruber and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 7780

July2000
JELNo. 118, H21

ABSTRACT
The one-third rise in the teen smoking rate in the 1 990s has led to considerable interest in

understanding the determinants of the youth smoking decision. We explore four aspects of this
decision. First, we consider the demographic correlates of smoking participation, and find that
smoking participation is not simply concentrated among the most disadvantaged youth; indeed,
increasingly over time youth smoking is taking place among white, suburban youth with college

educated parents and good grades. Second, we show that neither changes in demographic
characteristics nor changes in attitudes towards smoking can explain the striking increase in smoking

rates in the 1 990s. Third, we document that price is a powerful determinant of smoking for high
school seniors; using state fixed effects models on data for the 1991-1997 period we estimate an
elasticity of smoking participation of -0.67, which suggest that the drop in cigarette prices in the
early 1 990s can explain 26% of the subsequent upwards smoking trend for seniors. But price is not
important for younger teens, although we do find some evidence that restrictions on access to
cigarette purchases can lower the quantity that younger teens smoke. Finally, we document that there

is an important intertemporal correlation in the decision to smoke. In particular, we find that there
is a significant correlation across cohorts in teen smoking and later smoking of adults, and that the

taxes that teens face on cigarettes have a significant negative effect on their smoking later in life.

These findings suggest that between 25 and 50% of the rise in youth smoking in the 1990s will
persist into adulthood for this cohort; rough calculations suggest that the long run cost to the U.S.
will be at least 1.6 million years of life lost from this youth smoking increase.
Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142

One of the most striking trends in the behavior of youth in the U.S. during the 1990s has

been the increased incidence of smoking. After steadily declining over the previous 15 years,

youth smoking began to rise precipitously in 1992. By 1997, smoking by teenagers in the U.S.
had risen by one-third from its 1991 trough. This trend is particularly striking in light of the
continuing steady decline in adult smoking in the U.S. Indeed, today we are in the alarming
position of having a youth smoking rate that is roughly fifty percent greater than the smoking rate
of adults.

This striking time trend has motivated substantial public policy interest in youth smoking,

highlighted by the recent unsuccessful attempt of the Clinton Administration to pass a
comprehensive tobacco regulation bill that had the ostensible main purpose of reducing youth

smoking. This public policy interest arises out of concern that youth are not appropriately
recognizing the long run implications of their smoking decisions. Indeed, young smokers clearly
underestimate the likelihood that they will still be smoking in their early 20s and beyond. For
example, among high school seniors who smoke, 56% say that they won't be smoking 5 years

later, but only 31% of them have in fact quit five years hence. Moreover, among those who
smoke more than 1 pack/day, the smoking rate five years later among those who stated that they
would not be smoking (74%) is actually higher than the smoking rate among those who stated
that they would be smoking (72%) (Department of Health and Human Services, 1994).

If youth smoking leads to adult smoking, particularly in a manner that is underappreciated
by the youth smokers themselves, it can have drastic implications for the health of the U.S.

population. Smoking-related illness is the leading preventable cause of death in the U.S., and

2
smokers on average live 6.5 (males) to 5.7 (females) fewer years, relative to never smokers

(Cutler et al., 1999). Thus, it is critical to understand the role that public policy can play in
deterring youth smoking.
Yet, despite this interest and concern, we do not very well understand either the

determinants nor the implications of youth smoking behavior. This paper attempts to remedy
these deficiencies in our understanding by providing new evidence on four aspects of youth
smoking.

The first is the correlation between background characteristics such as race, sex,
education, family structure, and work behavior and the decision to smoke (or how much to

smoke conditional on smoking). We explore how well smoking behavior can be explained by
both clearly exogenous background characteristics, as well as by potentially endogenous

attitudinal variables. And we assess how these relationships have changed over time as youth

smoking has risen. Our key findings here are that background characteristics explain only a
small share of the decision to smoke, and that smoking participation is not simply concentrated
among the most disadvantaged youth; indeed, increasingly over time youth smoking is taking
place among white, suburban youth with college educated parents and good grades.
The second is an assessment of the extent to which changes in background characteristics,

or changes in attitudes towards smoking, can explain the precipitous recent rise in youth smoking

in the 1990s. In short, we find that neither plays an important role in explaining this rise;
background characteristics can explain at most 10% of the rise.
The third is an understanding of the role that public policy can play in deterring youth

smoking. We provide a comprehensive analysis of the impact of prices and other public policies

3
on youth smoking in the 1990s, using three different data sets with information on youth
smoking to assess the robustness of our findings.
The findings of this analysis are clear: the most important policy determinant of youth

smoking, particularly among older teens, is prices. There is a statistically significant and
quantitatively large response of smoking by older teens to prices in all three data sets, although

the estimated price elasticity varies significantly. On the other hand, price does not appear to be
an important determinant of smoking by younger teens. There is little consistent evidence of
robust effect of other public policies targeted to reducing youth smoking, although there is some
suggestion that restrictions on youth purchase of cigarettes reduce the quantity of cigarettes

smoked. And we find that black youth and those with less educated parents are much more
responsive to cigarette price than are white teens and those with more educated parents,
suggesting a strong correlation between price sensitivity and socioeconomic status.
The final part of this paper then builds upon these findings to assess the long run
implications of youth smoking, and in particular to forecast what the recent rise in youth smoking

bodes for future smoking in the U.S. We do so in two ways. First, we pursue a cohort analysis,
examining what the historical record tells us about the implications of higher youth smoking for

adult smoking of those same cohorts as they age. Second, we use data from the Vital Statistics
Natality data to examine the extent to which policy interventions when individuals are young

determine their smoking decisions later in life. Both approaches yield similar results: there are
significant intertemporal linkages between youth and adult smoking, with each percentage point
of additional smoking by youths translating into only 0.25 to 0.5 percentage points more smoking

by those youths as adults. This finding suggests that there will be a significant rise in future adult

4

smoking because of the 1990s experience. Rough calculations suggest that even if this rise in
youth smoking is transitory (due to significant recent price increases), the adult smoking rate for
this cohort will rise by 8 to 16%, and at least 1.6 million total life years to this cohort will be lost.

The paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides background on trends in youth smoking
and on previous work in this area. Part II presents our cross-sectional analysis of demographic
determinants of smoking decisions, and what this analysis implies for explaining time trends.

Part ifi explores the role of price and other public policies. Part IV then turns to the
intertemporal implications of youth smoking. Part V concludes.

Part I: Background
Youth Smoking: Where It's Been, Where It's Going, and Why We Should Care

The time series trends in youth smoking are depicted in Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 shows
the trend since the 1970s for the three available surveys of seniors: the Monitoring the Future
(MTF) data, which has surveyed seniors since 1976 but 8th and 10th graders only since 1991; the

National Health Interview Survey (NHIS); and the National Survey of Household Drug Abuse
(NELISDA). The latter two surveys are household surveys, for which we use data on older teens.1

There is considerable uncertainty over the relative value of in-school vs. household surveys for
collecting smoking information; the latter have the advantage of collecting information on
dropouts, but the disadvantage that youths may be less willing to give honest answers when their

parents may overhear. Despite these differences in sources, however, all three surveys show the

1b particular, for the NHIS, we use 18-19 year olds, and for the NESDA we use 17-19
year olds through 1991, and 18-20 year olds for 1996-97.

5
same basic trend: large declines over the late 1970s, flattening and slow declines in the 1980s,
and a steep rise in the 1990s.
Figure 2 focused on the trend for the 1990s for all high school youths, using data from the
MTF and the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS), which collected data for 1991, 1993, 1995,

and 1997 on a large sample of 9-12th graders. For both data sets, there are dramatic increases in

the 1990s. In the MTF data, there is an increase of 7.2 percentage points, or 35 percent; in the
YRBS, the increase starts from a higher base, but the increase is larger at 8.7 percentage points,
so that the percentage increase is also about one-third.
This dramatic upswing in youth smoking is a concern because smoking as a youth has

been strongly correlated with smoking as an adult. Table 1 shows tabulations from the 1992 and
1995 National Health Interview Surveys on the age of initiation of smoking by current or former

adult smokers. This table reveals that 42% of current or former adult smokers started before their
16th birthday, and

75% started before their 19th birthday. Conversely, of those smoking a pack a

day as high school seniors in the Monitoring the Future survey, 87% are smoking five years later.
Even among those smoking 1-5 cigarettes per day, 70% are smoking 5 years later.
If youth smoking is a strong determinant of adult smoking, then the long run secular

decline in adult smoking may be reversed. Of course, these facts do not prove that the current
upswing in youth smoking will lead to higher long run adult smoking rates, for two reasons.
First, it is difficult to distinguish causality from these intertemporal correlations; smoking later in
life may not be a consequence of youth smoking for adults in the past, but rather smoking at both

points in life may simply arise from intertemporal correlation in tastes for this activity. This
suggests a natural test for causality of this relationship between youth and adult smoking, which

6
is to assess whether exogenous shifts in the smoking of youth affect smoking of those same

individuals later in life. This is the exercise that we will take up in Part IV.
Second, however, there may also have been a structural shift in the nature of youth

smoking. Those youths who are newly taking up smoking today may be different from those in
the past, and in particular more resolved to quit, and therefore this intertemporal correlation may

be broken. We do find some evidence for this view below, in that there is a relative rise in the
smoking rates of more advantaged youths in the 1990s. But these changes are modest relative to
the enormous rise in smoking within virtually every identifiable subgroup in our data.

Previous Literature on Youth Smoking

There is a substantial literature on the background characteristics of youths that are most

closely correlated with smoking decisions. This literature is reviewed in the Surgeon General's
Report of 1994, which provides a comprehensive overview of the state of knowledge to that
point. Many of the conclusions in that chapter are echoed and updated in the discussion below,
as they draw on the same data that we will use.
One interesting additional piece of data that does not come from the data that we use

below is the brand preferences of youth relative to adults. In 1993 (the latest availableyear of
data for adults and teens), smoking among adults was relatively dispersed across many brands,

with the top three brands (Marlboro, 24%; Winston, 6.7%; Newport, 4.8%) accounting for only
35% of the total cigarettes smoked. But smoking among youth was much more concentrated,
with the top three brands (Marlboro, 60%; Camel, 13.3%; Newport, 12.7%) accounting for 85%
of cigarettes smoked.

7
There is also a sizeable literature on the responsiveness of youth smoking to prices and
other public policies. The early work on the price elasticity of youth smoking was cross-sectional

in nature. This work generally found quite strong impacts of prices on youth smoking. While
there is some variation, a representative estimate that is frequently cited is Chaloupka and
Grossman's (1996) estimate of a participation elasticity of -0.675 and a total smoking elasticity
of -1.3 13. Similar estimates are found in Lewit, Coate and Grossman (1981) and Lewit and
Coate (1982), although the result is disputed by Wasserman et al. (1991).
This literature has been strongly criticized, however, by DeCicca et al. (1998) and Evans
and Huang (1998), who point out that in cross-sectional data it is impossible to disentangle price

and policy impacts from other underlying long-mn determinants of smoking attitudes. For
example, as they note, taxes are traditionally the lowest in the tobacco producing states, where

smoking is also the highest, and it is difficult to disentangle causality in that relationship. These
two papers take different approaches to solving this problem. DeCicca et al. pursue a strategy of
focusing on smoking initiation, which compares changes in smoking rates to changes in price

within a cohort, and they find no significant price impact. Evans and Huang, on the other hand,
use repeated cross-sections of youth and include state fixed effects to control for fixed state tastes
towards smoking, and they find a significant participation price elasticity of -0.5 over the 19851992 period (using repeated cross-sections of the restricted MTF data discussed below).

Both of these approaches have weaknesses. The DeCicca et al. methodology excludes the
responsiveness of quitting to price increases; ultimately, it i.s the level of youth smoking that is

the concern, not just initiation. Evans and Huang do consider the overall level of smoking, but
they do not include the other controls for state smoking regulations that are deemed quite

8

important by DeCicca et al. Moreover, neither paper focuses on the period of most interest, the
1990s.

There is a smaller literature which has studied the impact of other anti-smoking policies

on youth smoking. DeCicca et al. (1998) include in their model measures of state access
restrictions on youth tobacco purchase and of restrictions on smoking in public places, and find

no effect on smoking. Chaloupka and Grossman (1996) include a variety of measures of access
restrictions and clean air regulations; they find no (actually wrong-signed) impacts of the former,

but fairly strong negative impacts of the latter in their cross-sectional study. Another crosssectional study by Chaloupka and Pacula (1998) focusing on youth access restriction enforcement
does find some evidence that more tightly enforced youth access restrictions lowers youth

smoking. But these cross-sectional studies once again suffer from the fact that the legislation and
enforcement of youth access restrictions may be correlated with fixed underlying attitudes

towards smoking. Two interesting case studies of communities that implemented tough youth
access restrictions found mixed results, with Jason et al. (1991) finding substantial (50%)
declines in youth smoking in Woodridge, Illinois, while Rigotti et al. (1997) finding very limited

impacts on sales to youth and youth smoking in several Massachusetts communities.

To summarize, the literature on both prices and policies has produced somewhat mixed
conclusions, particularly the limited literature that has attempted to control for unobserved state

characteristics. Moreover, another limitation of most of the work on price responsiveness is that
it has focused on either only one cohort or one age group of teens. h fact, as we document at
length below, there is considerable heterogeneity among the teen population in their
responsiveness to policy variables.

9

Part II: Determinants of Youth Smoking
Data and Empirical Strategy
For this part of the analysis, we will be using the public use data set from the Monitoring
the Future (MTF) survey, a large nationally representative cross-section of high school seniors.
This survey contains information on a rich set of background characteristics and attitudinal
variables which makes it an excellent source for trying to comprehensively model the

determinants of youth smoking. These public use data do have two drawbacks, however. First,
they are only for high school seniors, so that we cannot explore how these background

characteristics affect smoking decisions by younger teens. Second, they do not contain very
detailed locational information, so that we cannot in these data explore the role of state level

policies. We address both of these issues in our policy analysis below. We use data from the
MTF surveys over the 1976-1997 period.

We will estimate simple cross-sectional models of smoking, using two different
dependent variables: a dummy for smoking participation (defined as smoking any cigarettes over

the previous month), and the number of cigarettes smoked conditional on smoking at all. For the
former, we will estimate linear probability models, for ease of coefficient interpretation; our

results are very similar if we use probit or logit models instead. For the latter, the results are
somewhat difficult to interpret, since factors that affect the participation decision can have
compositional impacts on the conditional number of cigarettes smoked.

Cross-Sectional Results for 1997

We begin by estimating cross-sectional models for 1997, the last year in our sample. We

10

include a broad set of variables in our base specification that are plausibly exogenous to the

smoking decision. Our basic results for 1997 are presented in Table 2A, for participation, and
2B, for conditional intensity. There are a number of findings of interest:
•

The single most important determinant of smoking is race: blacks and those of "unknown
race" (likely other non-whites) smoke much less

•

Those living with fewer than two patents are more likely to smoke

•

Males are less likely to smoke (but smoke more when they do smoke); in the raw data,
males are more likely to smoke, but this appears to be reversed by the inclusion of
variables such as work status and family structure.

•

Those in are suburbs (the omitted locational group) are likely to smoke more

•

Those with more highly educated parents are more likely to smoke, with no clear pattern
for the intensity of smoking.

•

There are lower smoking rates in the West

•

Academic performance and trajectory appear very significant. Current OPA (relative to
year/region normalization) has huge significant effects (with better students smoking
less), and students in college preparatory programs and those planning on attending
college smoke significantly less across the board.

•

Those who are married are less likely to smoke, but those who are engaged or
divorce dlseparated are more likely to smoke

•

Those who work are less likely to smoke, but smoking rises quite strongly with hours
worked and with income

•

Those who are absent from school more frequently are more likely to smoke

•

Overall, the model has modest explanatory power, with an R-squared of 0.11, which is
fairly high for a linear probability model.
The key findings of these regressions are that smoking is not as purely concentrated in

disadvantaged youths as it is concentrated on low socioeconomic status adults: smoking is much
lower among minorities than among whites; it is more likely in the suburbs than in either the city

11

or rural areas; and it is positively correlated with parental education. On the other hand, youth
smoking is much more likely among those with worse academic performance, who miss more

school, and who don't plan to go to college. There also appear to be strong income effects on
smoking: more hours worked and more income lead to more smoking among seniors. An
interesting question is whether the positive association with indicators of advantage such as
suburban dwelling or college educated parents are also picking up unmeasured aspects of
income.

Can We Explain the Time Series?

In trying to explain the dramatic increase in smoking in the 1990s, the first step is to
assess whether there were changes in background characteristics which might play an important

role. We do this assessment by taking our cross-sectional models and using the estimated
relationships to predict smoking in each year, given the values of the Xs in each year. If changes
in background characteristics are explaining the time series pattern, then this predicted series
should mimic actual smoking behavior.

We present the results from doing so in Figure 3. We use here a cross-sectional model
estimated in 1985-86 to predict smoking in each year, so that we can do out of sample
predictions on both the steep decline in the 1970s and the steep increase in the 1990s; we come to

the issue of coefficient stability next. In fact, we find that this model can predict very little of
either the decline in the 1970s or the rise in, the 1990s. The predicted series does rise very
slightly in the 1990s, by 0.7 percentage points, but this is less than 10% of the 7.8 percentage

point rise in smoking by high school seniors over this period. Thus, the steep increase in

12

smoking participation of the 1990s is not explained by changes in background characteristics.

Figure 4 shows the same exercise for smoking intensity. Here, the model predicts
somewhat better the changes over time, but this is perhaps unsurprising since the changes are

much more modest.

Changes in the Estimated Relationships
One issue of importance is whether it is very inappropriate to apply constant coefficients
to the estimated relationships between smoking and background characteristics, because the

relationship is changing over time. This is a particularly interesting question due to our inability
to find the expected negative relationship between socioeconomic status and smoking in the

recent cross-section. Is this because smoking has become over the 1990s more of a "yuppie
phenomenon"?
We investigate this by examining the changes in the coefficients in our cross-sectional

model over time. Table 3 shows changes in these coefficients for smoking participation, first

from 1976 to 1986, then from 1986 to 1997. The second column shows the coefficients for
1976, the third column for 1986, and the fourth colunm for 1997; the fifth column shows the
change from 1976 to 1986 (1986 coefficient minus 1976 coefficient), and a t-statistic on that
difference; the next colunm does the same for 1986 to 1997; and the final column does the same
for the entire 1976 to 1997 period.
The results show substantial stability in the characteristics of smokers over this twenty-

one year period; only 11 of the 35 coefficients change significantly over this time period. But
there is a striking and consistent story from the coefficients that do change: smoking is rising

13

much more among "advantaged" youth, particularly in the 1990s. There is a significant rise in
smoking among whites relative to non-whites, among those students who don't work relative to
those students who do work, among those students who live in suburban settings relative to town
or urban settings, among those whose mothers are college educated relative to lower education

groups, and among religious students. Perhaps the most striking pattern is the association of high
relative GPA and smoking: while smoking fell significantly for high OPA students relative to
low GPA students between 1976 and 1986, it then rose even more over the next decade for the
high UPA strata.
Thus, smoking is indeed rising significantly among advantaged youth relative to their

disadvantaged counterparts. But it is worth noting that these relative changes are completely
swamped by the secular increases among all groups. To confirm this point, in Figure 5 we graph
smoking rates over time for four comparison groups: men and women; whites and blacks;

suburban and urban dwellers; and high (top 25%) and low (bottom 25%) OPA students. For
every group smoking rates rise precipitously in the 1990s; the only group for which this rise

appears modest is low GPA students. Thus, we conclude that while there was a shift towards
more smoking by advantaged students over the past 10-20 years, it is swamped in the past decade
by other factors that are affecting all students.

Adding Attitudinal Variables
The MTh data have a variety of other attitudinal variables that may potentially be
correlated with smoking decisions, but are also potentially endogenous to the same external

factors that are causing smoking to increase. While we have excluded these variables from our

14

basic model, given the failure of changes in background characteristics to explain the time trend
in smoking participation, it is of interest to know whether changes in attitudes can explain this

trend. We have therefore augmented our basic models by including the host of attitudinal
variables which may be relevant for smoking decisions:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

do you disapprove of those who smoke 1 or more packs per day?
how often do you see anti-smoking ads?
does smoking make a guy/girl your age look cool, insecure, independent, conforming,
mature, or trying to look mature & sophisticated?
do you prefer to date a non-smoker?
has the harm from smoking been exaggerated?
does smoking reflect bad judgement?
do you mind being around others who smoke
is smoking a dirty habit?
how much of a physical risk does smoking pose?
how severe are the consequences for students in your school of smoking?
The full set of these variables are only available since 1989, so for this exercise we focus

on the period from 1989-1997. Over this period, somewhat surprisingly, there do not appear to
be any clear trends in attitudinal variables. There is a slight rise in the share of teens exposed to
counter-advertising in 1996-97, although this variable has no impact on smoking decisions in our
cross-sectional models.

Perhaps reflecting this lack of trends, adding these variables to our model does not
improve its predictive performance. Indeed, as Figure 6 shows, the model with attitudinal
variables actually predicts declining smoking in 1996 and 1997, when smoking continues to rise.

So changing attitudes, at least as reported to the MTF, do not appear to explain the rise in
smoking in the 1990s either.

The Role of Other Substances

15

One interesting question is what role other risky behaviors, and in particular use of other

substances, is playing in this time series pattern. We explore this issue in Figure 7 which shows,
along with smoking participation, use of alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs; in each case,

participation is defined as any use over the past 30 days, analogously to smoking. In fact, in all
three cases, the time trend looks very much like that for smoking, with declines until 1991 and

increases thereafter. The correspondence is particularly striking for marijuana, although use
drops off some in 1997.

Interpreting these correlated trends is difficult, as there are at three possibilities. The least
likely is that there exogenous shifts in the use of these other substances that led to increased
smoking; although there is no statistically convincing evidence, most work on pathways of
substance use suggest that smoking is a pathway to use of other substances, and not the reverse.
A second possibility is therefore the reverse: that the rise in smoking in the 1990s led to more use

of these other substances. We present evidence below that falling cigarette prices in the 1990s
can explain 30% or more of the trend in smoking by seniors over this time period. And there are
a number of studies which suggest that smoking is complementary with use of these other

substances (Chaloupka et al., 1998; Dee, 1999). Thus, at least part of these trends in other
substances may have been driven by falling cigarette prices.
But it seems unlikely that this can explain all of these strong trends, particularly for

marijuana. A third alternative is therefore that there were other shifts in tastes that led to rnore

use of all of these substances. One piece of suggestive evidence for this view is the lack of
correspondence between the time trends in use of cigarettes and these other substances in the

1980s: use of other substances fell much more than did smoking. These trends cast some doubt

16

on either of the two alternatives above, in favor of a story based on a taste shift towards all
substance use in the 1990s.

Part III: Prices and Other Public Policies
Given the failure of background characteristics to explain the trend in youth smoking in
the 1990s, a particularly important question is whether price movements can explain this

upsurge. In fact, as Figure 8 documents, there was a substantial decline in prices in the early
1990s, corresponding precisely to the timing of the increase in youth smoking. Of course, youth
smoking continued to increase even after prices began to rise again, but the most precipitous
increases in youth smoking were over the 1992-1994 period when prices were falling. Moreover,
recently released data for 1998 reveals that there was both a sharp increase in prices (by 10%)
and the first decline in youth smoking of the decade, as smoking among seniors fell by 1.4

percentage points (3.8%). So a natural question arises: can price movements explain the time
series trend?
This ties into a more general question of the role that public policy can play in

determining youth smoking behavior. A primary determinant of price movements for cigarettes
is excise tax policy. Moreover, there are a variety of other policy tools that state and federal
policy makers can pursue in an attempt to reduce youth smoking. Are these successful, and what
do they suggest for future policy directions? We address these questions below.

Data
The public use data from the MTF are not suitable for this exercise because they do not

17

contain information on state of residence, not are they available for teens other than high school

seniors. We therefore searched for data sets that had available data on smoking for repeated
cross-sections of teens of all ages over the 1990s, as well as state identifiers so that cigarette

prices and taxes could be matched to the youths. Three data sources meet this criteria, and all
three are used.2 The first, and best, source for our purposes is a restricted use sample of the MTF
data which includes information on smoking behavior, race, age, sex, and state of residence, for
8th 10th and

12' graders, from 1991 through 1997. We focus on 1991 as the starting point for

the analysis for three reasons: first, this is the last year before teen smoking began to rise; second,
this is the year in which the 8th and 10th grade MTF data become available; and third, this is the

year that the YRBS data described next became available.

The second data source is the YRBS data graphed earlier. These data provide
information on smoking and a limited set of background characteristics for 1991, 1993, 1995 and
1997 for a sample of 9—12th graders. The MTF and YRIBS data are comparable, in that they

provide nationally-representative, in-school surveys of youth. As noted earlier with reference to
Figure 2, they suggest different levels of smoking among teens, but similar trends. The sample
sizes of these surveys are also comparable. But the MTF data has the strong advantage of being a
more complete survey over this sample period; the survey includes data on 35 states in every year

from 1991 to 1997, and a total of 277 state/year pairs over this time period. On the other hand,
2A fourth data set that could have been used here is the National Survey of Household
Drug Abuse data, but this was excluded for two reasons. First, the quality of these data before
the mid 1990s is quite suspect, due to the use of in-home surveys without computer assistance
that could suffer from bias due to parental observation; indeed, these data do not appear to show
an increase in smoking among teens through the mid-1990s, while the more respected MTF arid
YRBS surveys both do. Second, there is no public use or even private use version of the
NSHDA data available with state identifiers; only selected researchers can access these data.

18

the YRBS is a survey that is phasing into coverage of the entire nation, with only 10 states in the
survey in every yeas, and only 102 state/year pairs over this time period.3 As a result, while from
1991 to 1997 there are 59 tax changes to be studied in the MTF data, there are only 14 in the

YRBS data. Thus, the results that we obtain in the MTP are more robust to the specification
check pursued below, and we will rely on them as our primary estimates.

The third data source is the Vital Statistics Natality Detail Files. These data are a census
of birth certificates for the U.S., with approximately 4 million observations per year. The data
contain information, since 1989, on the smoking behavior of the mother during pregnancy, and
they are available for virtually every state in every yeas from 1991 onwards, providing even more

variation than the MTF (73 tax changes over this time period).4 But these have the disadvantage
of being focused solely on one particularly select group of teens, those having children before
their 19th birthday. Due to the enormous size of the Natality data (over 300,000 teen mothers per

year for our seven years of analysis), we do not analyze micro-data on smoking rates by mothers.

Rather, we group these data into state*year*age cells, and analyze cell mean rates of smoking
and conditional smoking intensity, where the regressions are weighted by cell size.

The means for all three data sets are presented in Table 4. We consider two measures of
smoking: participation, defined as any smoking over the past month, and conditional intensity.5

3All of our YRBS means and estimates are weighted using weights designed to reproduce
national representativeness.
4Smoking data are not available for California, Indiana, and South Dakota in any year and
for New York for 1991-93; smoking data for New York City, but not the remainder of the state,
is available beginning in 1994.

5Jn the MTF and YRBS data, conditional intensity is asked in intervals, and we use the
midpoint of each interval for intensity. In the natality data, the intensity question is continuous.

19

The latter measure has the difficulty as a dependent variable that if there are policy impacts on
participation, there could be sample selection bias to the effects on conditional intensity; for
example, if higher prices reduce smoking participation, and those who quit are low intensity
smokers, then higher prices could be associated with higher intensity among those who remain
smokers through this compositional effect.

As noted above, smoking rates are somewhat higher in the YRBS than in the MTF data
sets; for seniors over this time period, participation rates in the MTh are 31% while they are 36%

in the YRBS. Smoking rates are much lower for teen mothers; for 17-18 year old teen mothers,
the smoking rate is only 18%. However, smoking intensity is higher in the MTF survey,
averaging 7.2 cigarettes per day for seniors as compared to 6.1 cigarettes per day in the YRBS.
Intensity is even higher for teen mothers, averaging over 10 cigarettes per day for 17-18 year old

mothers. Thus, smoking among teen mothers appears less frequent, but more intense when these
women are participating. Note that this is not just a male/female difference; smoking
participation among males and females are very similar in the YRBS and MTF surveys, and
intensity is actually somewhat higher for males.
Smoking is less frequent, and smoking intensity is lower, for younger teens in all three

surveys. In the MTP and YRBS surveys, the full sample results are weighted more closely to the
results for younger teens, since the samples of younger teens are much larger; in the Natality
data, they are weighted towards older teens, since there are so many more births to older teens in
the data.

The key independent variables to be used in the analysis are state-level measures of
prices, taxes, and other policies. Prices as of November of each year for each state are provided

20
in the Tobacco Institute (1998), and a monthly series of information on taxes can be constructed

from information in that volume as well. The MTF and YRBS surveys are both conducted in the
spring, so we use an average of the prices from November of year t-1 and November of year t as

our price measure, and the tax rate as of February as our tax measure. For the natality data, we
know the actual month of the birth, so we use the tax rate from that month of birth.
The two dimensions of anti-smoking policy that we explore are clean air regulations and

youth access restrictions. Clean air regulations, which are described in substantial detail in
Jacobson and Wasserman (1997), are laws which restrict smoking from certain public areas. We
constructed a comprehensive data base of such laws using information from the state legislative
records, Coalition on Smoking OR Health (various years) , and the Centers for Disease Control

web site httD://www2.cdc.wv/nccdDhnfosh/statcJ. While there are a panoply of such laws, we
categorize them into five categories: private workplace restrictions; public (e.g. state and local
government) workplace restrictions; restaurants; schools; and other (e.g. elevators, public
transportation, theaters).

Youth access restrictions are laws designed to limit youth purchases of tobacco products,

since, while youth smoking is legal, selling cigarettes to youth is not. As reviewed in Jacobson
and Wasserman (1997), states have therefore endeavored along various dimensions to
implement barriers to youth access to cigarette purchase. Categorizing these state efforts is
difficult, as there are a large number of different regulatory tools, and states enforce them with

differential rigor. We therefore rely on the expert opinion of a panel convened by the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) to evaluate state laws limiting youth access to cigarettes (Alciati, et al.,
1998) This panel considered a wide variety of state laws in this area and formed an index to

21

capture their overall "bite" in limiting youth access. They consider nine categories of state
regulation, and provide a score within each, which is aggregated into a total index. Their index is
available for 1993-1996; we have followed their rules, in consultation with them, to use state
laws to extend the data back to 1991 and forward to 1997. We did augment thei.r index by
adding some finer disaggregation of categories, and by correcting some inconsistencies with

actual legislation. We also added three additional categories that they did not consider:
advertising restrictions; licensing of retailers; and penalties on minors themselves for tobacco

purchase. The index also reflects state efforts to comply with the recent Synar Ammendments
proposed by the Food and Dmg Administration.

We describe in more detail how this index was created in the Appendix. Appendix Table
Al also shows means for the MTF of the clean air and youth access index variable. The average
value of our access index is roughly 12 (where the maximum possible value is 26); about half of
students were subject to restrictions On smoking in private workplaces, whereas restrictions in
restaurants, government worksites, schools, and other sites were more common.
The other frequently discussed public policy intervention to reduce youth smoking is

counteradvertising. While this is a major focus of very recent discussions, over the time period
studied in this paper (ending in 1997) there was very little counteradvertising in most states.6

Empirical Strategy
For all three data sets, we pursue a similar estimation strategy, considering the impact of

6Based on conversations with experts at the Office on Smoking and Health at the Centers
for Disease Control. The available data suggests that only a few states have major programs by
1997, and that the spending on those programs was fairly constant over our time period.

22
prices and public policies on smoking in the following regression framework:

(17) SMOKJL = a + PPRICE]1 + ÔACCESSJt + yCLNAIR1 + qX + AS + VT1 +
where i indexes individuals; j indexes states; and t indexes years
SMOK is a measure of smoking (participation or conditional intensity)
PRICE is the price per pack of cigarettes (inclusive of taxation)
ACCESS is the index of access restrictions
CLNAIR is a set of dummy variables for clean air regulations
X is a set of individual control variables (which varies by data set)
S is a set of state dummies
T is a set of year dummies
By including a complete set of state fixed effects, this regression surmounts any problems
with fixed differences across states in both their level of prices and the propensity to smoke, e.g.

due to tobacco production intensity. However, two potential concerns remain with the
interpretation of the price coefficient in this specification. First, if tobacco companies are doing
any state-specific pricing, then prices may be endogenous to smoking levels. While 80% of the
variation in prices within states over time are driven by tax changes (Umber and Koszegi, 1999),

there remains 20% that is possibly demand driven. We therefore instrument prices with the tax

rate in the state, to provide identification solely from tax-induced price movements. All
estimates presented below are from such instrumental variables models.
Second, the identifying assumption of this estimator is that within-state changes in

taxation (and other public policies) are not themselves determined by youth smoking behavior. It
is plausible that tax policy is set as a function of smoking in a state, with revenue maximizing
legislators and an inelastically demanded good. Since youths smoke only about 2% of the total
number of cigarette packs smoked annually, it is doubtful that youth smoking per se is driving
tax policy. But it is possible that youth smoking is correlated with some of the same factors that

23

drive adult smoking, and possibly therefore with tn setting. It is difficult with this short panel to

address this concern definitively, but we discuss an attempt to do so below.
Another important estimation issue is that we are using a large number of observations in
each of these data sets, but we really only have variation in our key variables across state and

year cells. As a result, all regressions are estimated with the standard errors corrected for within
state-year cell correlations in the error terms.

Results - MTF Data
We begin the analysis by focusing on the MTF data, which as discussed above is the

highest quality source of nationally representative data. We also start with seniors, to parallel
most previous work in this area.

The results of estimating equation (1) for high school seniors are presented in the first
two colunms of Table 5. The most important finding is that there is a negative and statistically
significant impact of prices on smoking participation. The implied elasticity at the sample mean
is -0.67. The impact on conditional intensity is negative, but insignificant, implying a small

elasticity of conditional intensity of -0.06. As noted earlier, it is difficult to interpret these
estimates as the pool of smokers is changing. In particular, it seems likely that those who quit
smoking as the price rises have the lowest ex-ante intensity, which would lead to a positive
compositional bias to the estimates.

We obtain much less convincing evidence for the role of other policies, however. There
is a negative impact of access restrictions on the quantity of cigarettes smoked, but the coefficient

is not significant. The only clean air restrictions for which there are significant negative effects

24
are for restrictions on government workplaces (in terms of conditional quantity smoked) and for

restrictions on other sites (for both participation and quantity smoked). It seems highly unlikely
that there is a true causal impact of restrictions in government worksites on youth; it is perhaps
more plausible that restrictions on other sites such as public transportation might matter.
Does this significant price impact suggest that we can explain the time series movements

by the price decline of the early 1990s? From 1991 through 1997, the price of cigarettes fell by
14 cents. At our estimated coefficient on participation, this explains 26% of the 8 percentage
point rise in smoking for seniors over this time period. Thus, price is playing an important role,
but not the dominant one.
The next four columns of Table 5 investigate the impact of prices and policies on younger
smokers (8th and 10th graders). Interestingly, there is little impact of price on the smoking of

younger teens. The coefficients on both participation and intensity are insignificant for 8-10th
graders, and as a result for the full sample of 8-12th graders. Over the full sample, the price
elasticity for participation is only -0.31, with a conditional intensity Sasticity of -0.03. This casts
further doubt on the role of price as the primary determinant of the time series trend, since the

trends in smoking are quite similar for 8-10th graders and for seniors. On the other hand, even
though younger smokers are less price sensitive, their estimated price sensitivity is still nontrivial; it is similar, for example, to the elasticity of smoking participation estimated for adults by
Evans et al. (1999).
The impacts of other policies on the smoking of 8-10th graders is more interesting than

for seniors. We now estimate a highly significant impact of youth access restrictions on the
conditional quantity of cigarettes consumed by younger teens, which is not subject to selection

25

bias due to the insignificant impacts on participation. This coefficient suggests that moving
from the lowest to the highest value of this index would lower smoking intensity by 1.38

cigarettes per day, or 25%. This is interesting because it is indeed possible that access
restrictions, by raising the hassle costs of obtaining cigarettes, do not deter youths from smoking

at all, but rather limit the extent to which they do smoke. We also again obtain negative impacts
of government worksite restrictions on smoking intensity, and negative impacts of other clean air
restrictions on both intensity and participation.
There is a paucity of control variables available in these restricted MTF data. We do find

that smoking rises with grade. The age variables are defined only conditional on grade (due to
data restrictions in these MTF data), but they have the expected pattern: older children within

each grade smoke more. Non-white youths are much less likely to smoke, and there is a positive
effect of being male among seniors, but a negative effect among 8th and 10th graders, so that for

the full sample the effect is insignificant. As showed above, the positive impact of being male
for the seniors becomes negative when other covariates available in the public use data are
included.

YRBS and Natality Data

As emphasized above, a key advantage of our analytic strategy is that we have brought
several data sets to bear on this question, in order to analyze the most consistent patterns of

impacts of public policy on smoking. In this spirit, Tables 6 and 7 replicate the results for the
MTF data in the YRBS and Natality data, once again for older teens (seniors in the YRBS; 17-18
year olds in the Natality data), younger teens (9-11th graders in YRBS; 13-16 year olds in

26
Natality data), and overall.

The most strikingly consistent finding across all three data sets is the negative impact of

prices on smoking by older teens. h the YRBS, the elasticities are enormous: there is an
elasticity of -1.5 on participation,

an elasticity of -1.5 on conditional intensity. In the

Natality data, the elasticities are more modest, with an elasticity of participation of -0.38 and an

elasticity of conditional intensity of -0.15. It is perhaps not surprising that the elasticity is
smaller for teen mothers than for other groups, given that the very fact that these women are
smoking reveals their insensitivity of the smoking decision to information about the hazards for

newborns. This smaller elasticity is not due to the gender composition of the sample. In both the
MTF and YRBS data, we estimate very similar elasticities for males and females; the elasticities
are somewhat higher for males in the MTF and somewhat higher for females in the YRBS.

Moreover, there is a consistent finding of a much smaller impact of prices on young
smokers. In the YRBS data, the elasticity of participation is wrong-signed, and the elasticity of
conditional intensity is insignificant, for 9-11th graders. In the Natality data, both coefficients
are right-signed, but insignificant.

Why might we be finding that older teens are more price sensitive? There are several

possible explanations. One is that smoking means different things at different ages. Younger
teens may view participation as pure experimentation, which is less well described by
economists' models of addictive behavior, such as Becker and Murphy (1988), and which is as a
result less sensitive to economic factors such as price. But by the time these youths have become
seniors they have completed their experimentation phase, and smoking follows expected

relationships with price and other economic factors. This type of story is consistent with the fact

27

that younger teens who smoke consume a smaller quantity of cigarettes, and with the evidence
below that the demographic correlates of socioeconomic disadvantage (race and parental
education) lead to higher price sensitivity for seniors, but not for younger teens.
Alternatively, younger teens may be pursuing smoking as a mode of acceptance into a

peer group, and by the time they are seniors they have been accepted into the group. If smoking
as a younger teen regardless of price is required to gain acceptance to a peer group, but once
within the group peer effects have their usual multiplier impact on price elasticities, then this

would yield low price elasticities on younger teens and higher ones on older teens. Finally, it
may simply be that teens using their own money are more price elastic than are those who rely on
money from parents (obtained either complicitly or illicitly).
In contrast to the robust and significant impact of prices on youth smoking, however, we

obtain much more mixed evidence on a role for other public policies. There is no public policy
variable other than price which is significant for either age group in all three data sets, or even in

both the data sets representing the full teen population (MTF and YRBS). The most robust
finding appears to be for the impact of youth access restrictions on the quantity of cigarettes
smoked, which is negative for both younger teens and seniors, and significant for the latter, in the
Natality data; the magnitudes of the effects for teen mothers are much smaller than for all teens

in the MTF. We also find negative impacts of clean air regulations for restaurants (which are
significant for participation by seniors in the Natality and YRBS data), and of clean air
regulations for other sites such as public transportation (which are highly significant in the MTP,
and are negative and marginally significant for younger teen participation in the Natality data).

The coefficients on the covariates in the YRBS generally conform to expectations. There

28

is little impact of sex, and an enormous negative impact of race, on smoking rates. Smoking
rates fall with grade, conditional on age, but rise strongly with age, so that on average smoking is

rising with grade as well. Echoing our findings above using MTF microdata, there is little
impact of parental education on smoking, at least for seniors; there is some evidence that having
more educated parents leads to less smoking for 8th and 10th graders.7 There are very few

covariates in the Natality data, but they do confirm that smoking rises with age and is much
higher for whites.8 One interesting difference between the Natality and YRBS data sets is that
smoking among Hispanics is much lower in the Natality data, but is only marginally lower in the

YRBS. Unfortunately, due to the restricted nature of the MTF data, we can't bring that evidence
to bear on racial distinctions; the data only report whether the youth is white or non-white in
those data.

hi summary, there are four conclusions from these basic results. First, there is a sizeable
and significant negative impact of price on smoking by seniors, particularly for the decision to

participate. This finding is robust to all three data sets. We estimate elasticities that range from
-0.38 (Natality) to -1.5 (YRBS), but the most reliable estimate is probably the elasticity of -0.66

from the MTF data. Second, however, we find that there is no impact of price on younger teens,
so that in aggregate the price impacts on teen smoking are weak, with overall price elasticities for

teens ranging from -0.13 (YRBS) to -0.35 (Natality). Third, there is some suggestion that laws
which restrict youth access to tobacco products reduce the intensity of youth smoking, but not

7Parental education is not available in the 1991 YRBS, and is missing for a number of
respondents in other years, so the omitted category here is parents who are either high school
dropouts or for whom education is missing.
8Note that the covariates here are cell means, e.g. percent white in the age/year/state cell.

29

smoking participation. Finally, there is little consistent evidence that clean air restrictions matter
for youth smoking decisions.

We have also considered specification tests to address two potential concerns about this

exercise. The first is that, for two of our three data sets, we only have data on students, and not
high school dropouts. This may lead to a biased estimate of the aggregate teen elasticity, if
dropouts are differentially price sensitive; but since the quoted statistics on teen smoking come
from the in-school surveys used here, these are the relevant data for trying to explain time trends.
More perniciously, however, if high school dropout rates are somehow correlated with tobacco

taxation, then there could be a sample selection bias to our estimates. We have included in the
regressions reported here data on dropout rates by state and year. In no case did including these
control variables change much our coefficient on price, nor did the variables themselves enter

significantly in our regressions. So this suggests no bias from selection on who remains in
school as taxes change.

Another more serious concern, mentioned earlier, is that excise taxes may be endogenous,
if not directly to youth smoking, then to aggregate cigarette consumption, which may in turn be
correlated with youth smoking decisions (either positively, through adult peer effects, or

negatively, through teen contrariness). This general endogeneity concern is impossible to address
perfectly, in particular given the very short panel of data with which we are working. One
approach to addressing the specific concern that our finding is driven by an omitted correlation of
youth and adult smoking is to include directly in the regression a control for aggregate cigarette

consumption in that state in the previous year. Once again, the results are very robust (with the
exception of a decline in the participation elasticity estimate to -1.2 in the YRBS data), and the

30

coefficients on lagged packs/capita themselves are generally insignificant. Thus, it appears that
correlations between aggregate consumption and both tax setting and youth smoking cannot

explain our findings.

Heterogeneity
The analysis thus far has considered youth smoking as a simple aggregate, and has not

explored the heterogeneity in policy impacts across different groups of youth. But there are
considerable differences across youth in their underlying propensity to smoke. Most noticeable
is racial differences, and the YRBS suggests some differences by parental education as well, at

least for younger teens. In this section we explore the heterogeneity in the price responsiveness
of youth smokers. In particular, we assess whether socioeconomically disadvantaged youth are
more responsive to prices, suggesting a cross-elasticity between price and income.

The results for a racial decomposition of smoking responsiveness are presented in Table
8. For the MTF sample, we can only compare white and non-white youths, since this is the only

racial distinction available in these restricted data. In the YRBS and Natality data, we can
compare white and black youths more specifically. When we have estimated models for whites
and all non-whites in these other data sets, they are similar but more muted than the results for
whites and blacks.

The results for the MTF and YRBS data for seniors are striking: there is much higher
price responsiveness among blacks than among whites. In the MTF, the price elasticity of
participation for white seniors is only -0.35, and is insignificant, and there is a positive

coefficient on conditional intensity. But for black seniors the elasticity of participation is an

31

enormous and statistically significant -2.32, and there is a signilkant elasticity of conditional
intensity of -2.03 as well. In the YRBS, the results are even more extreme, with an elasticity of 0.63 for white smoking participation and an unreasonable elasticity of -9.3 for blacks; this

implausibly large estimate likely reflects the effect of examining a small number of tax changes
in only a subsample of the data. Iii the Natality data, on the other hand, the results are reversed:
the price elasticity for whites is slightly larger than for the full sample, and there is no price
responsiveness of participation among blacks (although there is a large negative impact on
conditional intensity).

For younger teens, there is a much less clear racial pattern. There are no significant
elasticities for either whites or blacks in the MTF or YRBS data. For the natality data, the
elasticities are once again significant for whites and wrong-signed for blacks.

One explanation for this higher price sensitivity among black youths is lower incomes. A
number of articles have found for adult smokers price elasticities that fall with income (e.g.

Evans et al. 1999). If the same is true for teens, then the lower incomes of black seniors may
explain their increased responsiveness. Unfortunately, none of these data sets contain
information on income. But the YRBS data do have an excellent proxy for permanent income:
parental education.

In the final panel of Table 8 we therefore present results which divide the YRBS sample
into those whose mother and father are high school dropouts or graduates, and those whose

mother and father have some college or are college graduates. There is a striking difference
across these groups for seniors: the elasticity of participation is -4.4 for the low education group,

and is only -0.2 for the high education group (and is highly insignificant for the latter). This is

32

offset to some extent by a very large conditional intensity elasticity for the high education group.
But, overall, there is a clear negative correlation of price responsiveness and socioeconomic

status measured this way. Once again, however, there is no clear relationship for younger teens;
the elasticity of participation is actually positive and significant for younger teens with less
educated parents, and is positive and insignificant for younger teens with more highly educated
parents.

Taken together, the results in Table 8 suggest two important conclusions. First, for
seniors, there is a strong cross-elasticity between price and incomes. Lower income groups,
either racially or by parental education, are much more price sensitive. Moreover, the fact that
the results by race for teen mothers are reversed is consistent with the fact that, while white teens
are much more advantaged than black teens as a whole, among teen mothers blacks actually have

a higher median income.9 Second, there continues to be evidence that the smoking decisions of
younger teens are determined primarily by non-economic factors. Not only are younger teens not
price sensitive, there is no pattern of increased relative sensitivity with income, as proxied by
either race or parental education.

Part LV: Intertemporal Correlation in Youth Smoking
While the previous discussion has suggested that seni.ors are responsive to the price of
cigarettes, it does not resolve the more important question: the long run intertemporal

implications of youth smoking. That is, what does rising youth smoking today imply for the
9Specifically, in 1997, median family income for white teens was $47,000, while it was
only $25,000 for black teens. At the same time, among white teen mothers median income was
$3000, while it was $4300 among black teen mothers.

33

adult smoking rate in the future? If shifts in youth smoking imply long run increases in adult
smoking, then we are headed towards a substantial reversal in the downward trend in smoking in
the U.S.
There are two extreme possibilities for thinking about the linkage between youth and

adult smoking. At one extreme, which we label the "public health view", all that matters for
adult smoking is youth smoking decisions. Since almost all smokers start as youths, if we could
end youth smoking, we would end adult smoking. At the other extreme, which we label the
"delayed initiation" view, there is a fixed predisposition to experiment with cigarettes, and

setting up bathers to smoking as a youth simply delays the period of experimentation until after
the teen years. Under this view, reducing teen smoking has little impact on long run adult
smoking.
Some casual evidence on this issue is provided by Table 9. This table presents crosstabulations of the odds of smoking at older ages against the age of initiation, using data from the

1992 and 1995 NHIS surveys. We find that, as the public health view would suggest, initiation
at 12-14 is worse than in later teen years in terms of subsequent likelihood of smoking. On the
other hand, initiation at age 21-25 appears to have similar implications for later smoking

participation, if not intensity, as does initiation at ages 12-14. This is not simply an artifact of the
feature of the data that at any age past 25, ages 21-25 are closer than ages 12-14. As the age
group used for this table ages, the relative relationships persist; indeed, for those age 38 and over,
the odds of smoking participation are higher for those who started at ages 21-25 than for those
who started at ages 12-14.
Of course, this evidence does not provide definitive evidence for either view described

34
above, since it may simply represent individual heterogeneity; the set of persons who begin

smoking after age 20 may intend more to continue smoking at later ages. But it is nevertheless
suggestive of the merit of the delayed initiation view.

In this section we take two approaches to trying to assess more rigorously the extent to

which more smoking by youth will translate into increased adult smoking. The first, and most
direct, is to examine whether shifting patterns of smoking across cohorts of youth are reflected in

the smoking rates of those cohorts as adults. This approach will yield an estimate of the
relationship between rising youth smoking and rising adult smoking that is free of individual

heterogeneity bias; this is akin to using cohort dummies as instruments. But, while we attempt
several approaches below, this method may not be able to disentangle general time series effects
from true cohort shifts in smoking propensities.

The second method is therefore to assess the implications for adult smoking of
differential taxes on youth. That is, if there are two adults who face the same tax regime today,
but who faced different tax regimes as teens, by how much does their smoking differ? This
approach has the advantage that it best approximates the experiment of interest, which is to

exogenously induce some groups of teens to smoke and others to not smoke. But it has the
disadvantage that one can only indirectly infer the implications of our findings for the long run

implications of youth smoking. To the extent that this indirect inference yields similar results to
the first method, then these provide two reinforcing approaches to estimating this important
intertemporal correlation.
The only paper of which we are aware which attempts to carry out an exercise of this
nature is Glied (1999), who examines the impact of cigarette taxes in the state where you were 14

35

on later smoking, using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), and who finds no

effect of youth taxes. But her relatively small sample does not permit the inclusion of fixed
effects for either the state of birth or residence; as well, the standard errors on her estimates are
too large to rule out relatively sizeable impacts of youth taxes on later smoking.

Intertemporal Correlation Across Cohorts
We first consider the extent of intertemporal correlation in smoking across cohorts, in

two ways. First, we use data on smoking by seniors from the MTF data, matched to the smoking
of this same cohort 10 years later, as 27-28 year olds, from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS) data, which provide a annual survey of smoking rates for a large

representative sample of the U.S. population. We match data from 1976-1987 on smoking of
seniors to data from 1986 to 1997 on the smoking of this same cohort as 27-28 year olds. We
focus on young adults because this maximizes the number of cohort comparisons we can make,
given that the MTF data are not available before 1976.

The results of doing so are presented in the first panel of Table 10. We first show a
simple bivariate regression of smoking of 27-2 8 year olds on smoking of this cohort as seniors 10

years earlier. We find a very strong correlation, with a coefficient of 0.65. Of course, this
finding may reflect simple secular trends in the data; if smoking is declining over time, even in
the absence of any within-cohort correlation one will find that cohorts born later have lower

smoking both as teens and as adults. We attempt to control for this in two ways in Table 10.
First, we include a linear time trend. This time trend is marginally significant, indicating a
secular decline in smoking of 0.3 percentage points per year for this population over our 12 year

36

sample, and the coefficient on the lagged youth smoking rate falls to 0.4. Second, we include the
smoking rate in each year of 42-43 year olds, as a proxy for trends in adult smoking that should

not be determined by the smoking of seniors ten years earlier. This additional control is
insignificant, and when it is included with the time trend the coefficient on lagged youth smoking
actually rises to 0.5.

The disadvantage of this approach is its relatively narrow historical coverage. We
therefore next turn to data from the National Health Interview Survey (N}IIS), which in several
years (1978, 1979, 1980, 1987, and 1988) asked current and former smokers the age at which

they initiated smoking (as well as when they quit, if they are former smokers). This allows us to
calculate by cohort not only their current smoking rate in the survey year, but their smoking rate
when the cohort were seniors (age 17-18), as well as when they were 27-28 and 42-43 as well.10

We can then draw comparisons between the smoking rate of seniors and the smoking rate of
those same youths as they age, but over a much larger historical range. We restrict the data to
those persons age 60 and below, to minimize any bias to this exercise through differential
mortality of smokers. As a result, the earliest cohort is those who were 60 in 1978, or high
school seniors in 1936 and 42-43 year olds (our "control" group) in 1960. Data are available on
adult smoking from these lookback surveys through 1988, and then from cross-sectional NIFIIS

datasets through 1995. Thus, we can model the smoking of 27-28 year olds on their smoking

'°For most years, we can backcast from more than one NIHIS survey (e.g. for the cohort
that were 17 year olds in 1940, we can use those who were 55 in 1978, 56 in 1979, and 57 in
1980); in those cases, we average the smoking rates for each cohort that we obtain from the
various NHIS surveys, to reduce measurement error in the backcasted smoking rates. The NETS
also asks about age of initiation in 1992 and 1995, but not about age of quitting for former
smokers, so that this backcasting exercise is not possible in those years.

37
rates as 17-18 year olds, and include 42-43 year olds as a control, from 1960 through 1995 (36
observations).

The results of doing so are shown in the next panel of Table 10. Once again, when one
simply examines the correspondence between smoking of these cohorts as youths and young

adults, the correlation is quite strong, with a coefficient here well in excess of one. But, once
again, when we control for time trends, the coefficient falls, and here it falls further when we
control as well for the smoking of 42-43 year olds (to capture general trends in taste for

smoking). The final column reveals an intertemporal correlation of 0.5, with a time trend of -0.3
percentage points per year over this period, and a very significant positive effect of the smoking
of older adults.

Thus, the findings from this first exercise suggest that higher smoking rates among youths

translates in a significant way to the smoking rates of adults. The final estimates are strikingly
similar across these data sets, suggesting an intertemporal correlation of 0.5. On the other hand,
the fact that this estimate is significantly smaller than 1, even observing cohorts ten years later,
suggests that the pure "public health" view is not appropriate; there is more to reducing adult
smoking than simply stopping youths from smoking.

Youth Taxes and Adult Smoking

The advantage of the cohort approach is that it yields relatively straightforward estimates

of the intertemporal correlation across cohorts. The disadvantage is that it is not definitively
prove that there is an important intertemporal correlation, since there may be underlying time

series trends that cannot be captured by my controls. We therefore attempt the second approach

38

laid out above, examining the impact of taxes on youth on their smoking as adults. Once again,
the motivation is to use variation in taxes that individuals faced as youths, conditional on the tax
environment in which they current live, to provide exogenous variation in youth smoking for the
purposes of assessing intertem.poral correlations. There is significant variation in youth taxes,
conditional on current taxes, even for non-movers, due to changes in state tax policy over time.
We do this using the Natality data used earlier, which in addition to its other strengths
also has data on the state of birth of these mothers, to assess the impact of the tax rate that teens

faced on their smoking as adults. The regressor of interest here is the average tax rate in the
teens state of birth during the years when they were 14-17 years old. Of course, state of birth is
not the ideal measure for this exercise, since some individuals will move between birth and the

teen years. However, in the 1990 census, 74% of 13-17 year olds lived in their state of birth, so
this is a reasonable proxy for state of residence as a teen. Moreover, we (crudely) correct the
estimates for mobility by using information on state of birth and state of residence. If the
mother's state of birth is the same as her current state of residence, we assume that she was in
that state as a teen. If not, we assume that she only moved from the state of birth to the state of
residence (no other moves), and assign her a weighted average of the tax rates in the two states

when she were a teen. These weights come from tabulations from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY), which was used to compute, for movers of a given age, at what age
they moved; this provides a means of averaging the state of birth and state of residence to reflect,
given current age, the odds of moving before age 14.11 In practice, this correction has little

impact on the estimates; for the most reliable estimates, we will use non-movers only, to mitigate

'1We are grateful to Phil Levine for providing me with these estimates from the NLSY.

39

this measurement error concern. We focus on women age 24 and older, to allow for a sufficient
lag to separate current and teen tax rates.
Since estimating this model on the 15 million observations in the micro-data is
impractical, we first convert the 8 years of natality data into a set of year of birth* year of survey
state of birth * state of residence cells. We then use the means of smoking rates in these cells

to estimate models of smoking today on the tax rates in both the current state of residence and the

state of birth, including a fixed effects for each of these sets of states (residence and birth), for
year of birth, for year of the survey, and for age. We also control for the racial composition of
the cell and the share of the cell that are high school dropouts, high school graduates, or have at

least some college. All regressions are weighted by the cell counts.
The primary dependent variable is the average number of cigarettes smoked by women

giving birth in the cell, incorporating zeros. We then decompose this impact into the effect on
smoki.ng participation and the effect on conditional smoking intensity. On average in the sample

(as is shown in the bottom row of the regression Table 11), women who give birth smoke
roughly 1.95 cigarettes per day. This consists of a participation rate of 15.8%, and conditional
cigarette consumption among those who do smoke of 12.85. These smoking rates can be
compared to the full population of 24-45 year old females over this period, where smoking rates
were 26%, and conditional cigarettes per day were 17;12 women giving birth smoking less than

the typical adult, but smoking is still distressingly common in this population.

Table 11 shows the results that include both the contemporaneous tax and the teen tax,

'2Authors' tabulations from the 1989-1997 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveilance System
data.

40

along with the control variables described above. For total cigarettes smoked, we find an
elasticity of -0.47.' This is almost identical to the overall elasticity of cigarettes smoked for
adults estimated in either aggregate data (Becker, Grossman, and Murphy, 1994) or micro-data

(Evans, Ringel and Stech, 1999), although it is somewhat lower than Gruber and Koszegi's
estimate through 1996 using aggregate data (an elasticity of -0.6). This effect is then
decomposed into a large negative effect on participation, with an elasticity of -0.6, and a small

positive effect on conditional intensity. As discussed earlier, this wrong-signed effect may be the
result of sample selection into who remains a smoker as the tax changes. But the elasticity here
is small in any case.

There is also a strong negative effect of the tax as a teen. The overall elasticity is
-0.24,which is over 40% as large as the effect of current taxes. This arises from a participation
elasticity of -0.06, and a negative conditional intensity elasticity.
One problem noted above is that the tax rate is assigned with some error, since we know

only birthplace and not the state of residence as a teen. To mitigate this measurement error, in
the second set of columns of Table 7 we use only the sample of non-movers, for whom we can

presume that the state of both birth and current residence is the state in which the mother resided
as a teen. For this sample, the impact of both current taxes and taxes as a teen are somewhat
larger, and the impact of youth taxes is somewhat larger, so that the overall elasticity with respect
to youth taxes is -0.22, and the participation elasticity is -0.078.
These findings clearly provide evidence for the addictive nature of smoking: if you

'3Even though we are using tax rates as the regressor here, we show price elasticities,
assuming one for one passthrough of taxes to prices.

41

exogenously shift women to non-smoking status early in life with higher taxes, they will smoke

less later in life as a result. But their magnitudes are difficult to interpret in a vacuum. To do so,
we can compare the elasticity of adult smoking with respect to youth taxes to the earlier estimates

of the elasticity of youth smoking with respect to youth taxes. Such a comparison is not fully
direct, since these women were youth during the period 1957 to 1985, and our estimates pertain

to the 1990s, but these youth elasticities nevertheless provide a sensible benchmark. In the MTF
data, over all youth (since this exercise compares average youth taxes to adult smoking), the

elasticity of smoking participation with respect to price is -0.31. We find here that the elasticity
of participation as an adult with respect to youth taxes is -0.078, or 25% as large. Thus, these
results imply that there is an intertemporal correlation coefficient of -0.25.
Thus, we conclude that there is evidence for both hypotheses about the potential impact

of youth smoking. Youth smoking is clearly an important determinant of adult smoking, with an
intertemporal correlation of -0.25 to -0.5, and our second piece of evidence suggests in particular
that the taxes that youth face clearly have an important impact on the decision to smoke many

years later. But youth smoking is by no means the sole, or even the primary, determinant of
smoking later in life; indeed, the taxes that smokers face as adults are significantly more
important than the taxes that they faced as youths.

Part V: Conclusions
The 1990s is a decade which has produced a very mixed track record with respect to risky

behaviors among youths. While teen births and crime rates are steeply down (Levine, 1999;
Levitt and Lochner, 1999), we have shown here that rates of substance use, and particularly

42

smoking rates, are rising. The increase in smoking rates is particularly vexing given the
expected, widely postulated intertemporal conelation between the decisions of youths to smoke
and their subsequent smoking as adults, with the conesponding costly impacts on health.
We have attempted to investigate several aspects of the youth smoking question in this

paper, in an effort to advance our understanding of what drives these important decisions. We
have four findings of interest. First, smoking participation is not simply concentrated among the
most disadvantaged youth; indeed, increasingly over time youth smoking is taking place among

white, suburban youth with college educated parents and good grades. Second, we show that
neither changes in demographic characteristics nor changes in attitudes towards smoking can
explain the striking increase in smoking rates in the 1990s.
Third, we find that the single greatest policy determinant of youth smoking is the price of

cigarettes. We consistently estimate across several data sets that older teens are very sensitive to
the price of cigarettes, with a central price elasticity estimate of -0.67. This estimate implies that
the sharp reduction in cigarette prices in the early 1990s can explain roughly 26% of the increase

in smoking over the subsequent six years. Moreover, this price sensitivity rises for more
socioeconomically disadvantaged groups such as blacks or those with less educated parents.
At the same time, we find that younger teens are not sensitive to prices on average, nor is
there any relationship between price sensitivity and socioeconomic status for younger teens.

These findings suggest important heterogeneity in the teen population. Younger teens appear to
be price insensitive experimenters who evolve into more price sensitive smokers by their older

teen years. An important priority for future work in this area is to understand the evolution of
smoking between the younger teen and older teenage years.

43
These findings also hold out little hope for other policies as a means of reducing youth

smoking. We do find some evidence that policies that restrict the access of youth to cigarettes
reduce the quantity of cigarettes smoked by those youth, but this finding is not nearly as robust as

the price relationship. There is no consistent evidence that restrictions on smoking in public
places lowers smoking.

Finally, the results imply that this rise in youth smoking will have important implications

for the long run stock of smokers in the U.S. Evidence from two different approaches,
examining the intertemporal correlation across cohorts and modeling the impact of youth taxes
on adult smoking, suggest that between 25 and 50% of the rise in youth smoking will persist into

adulthood. Over this period, smoking rose by 8 percentage points for seniors in the MTF. This
implies a long run rise in the adult smoking rate of 2 to 4 percentage points. Compared to the
current adult smoking rate of 25%, this is a rise of 8 to 16 percent, a non-trivial increase. Of
course, whether this recent rise will persist into adulthood in the manner suggested by past cohort

shifts is unclear. The technology for quitting smoking has improved dramatically in recent years,
and these youths are moving into workplaces which almost universally ban smoking, raising

significantly the hassle costs of maintaining a habit. But the historical record speaks clearly,
which should indicate a very significant rise in adult smoking going forward.
On the other hand, the recent decline in youth smoking in the face of modest price
increases suggests that this may not cause a permanent upward shift in adult smoking, but

perhaps a "bulge" in smoking rates across cohorts. The prices of cigarettes rose by roughly 30%
over the course of 1999, as a result of shifting forward by tobacco manufacturers of the costs of
settling their state lawsuits. Using the estimates presented here, this price rise should cause a

44
20% decline in youth smoking, which would almost fully undo the rise from 1991 to 1997.
Even if the rise from 1991 to 1997 was a transitory one, however, the long run health

consequences could be substantial. A 2 to 4 percentage point rise in smoking for this seven year
cohort, along with a somewhat reduced increase for the 1998 cohort of seniors (as prices began to

rise), implies 477,000 to 954,000 more adult smokers. Of course, some of these adults will then
quit in their adult years, and those who quit sufficiently before the age of greatest medical risk
from smoking (age 60 onwards) can substantially reduce their mortality risk. Based on the NETS
data for 1987/88 on age of initiation and age of quitting, of those who started smoking as youths

and are still smoking at age 35, 45% will quit by age 60. So a conservative estimate is that
263,00 to 525,000 additional persons will have their lives shortened due to increased smoking.

As noted above, smoking throughout one's life shortens life expectancies by 6.5 years for
men and 5.7 years for women. Taking a simple average across men and women, this implies that
the rise in youth smoking will cause a reduction of 1.6 to 3.2 million lifeyears, even if this rise is
totally undone. At a value of $100,000 per life year (Cutler and Richardson, 1997), and
discounted at a real 3% rate from age 69 (typical life expectancy for smokers) to age 19, this is a

foregone value of life years in today's dollars of $36 billion to $73 billion. Once again, this is a
vast oversimplification, as both quitting technologies and the mortality impacts of smoking are
evolving rapidly over time. But it suggests the importance that even a potentially transitory rise
in youth smoking for the health of the U.S. population.
Overall, these results imply that policy makers should be concerned about rising youth

smoking; even if there is not a one-for-one translation into higher adult smoking rates, the health
implications can be enormous. And this concern should lead them to considering cigarette taxes

45

as the most effective means of reducing youth smoking. Of course, with youths only smoking
about 2% of cigarette packs, taxes are a very blunt instrument to address youth smoking issues.
Thus, there are a host of additional issues that must be considered in deriving the optimal

cigarette tax beyond considerations of youth smoking; Chaloupka and Warner (1999), Evans,
Ringel, and Stech (1999) and Gruber and Koszegi (1999) provide further discussions of these

factors. But the results here suggest that consideration of optimal cigarette tax policy must
include the very strong effect that taxes have on smoking by teens.

46

Appendix: Youth Access Index
Our Youth Access Index (YAI) is based upon the National Cancer Institute's (NCI)

Decision Criteria For Rating State Youth Access Laws. The NCI's Criteria include nine
categories: minimum age of purchase; packaging; clerk intervention; photo identification;
vending machine availability; free distribution; graduated penalties; random inspections; and

statewide enforcement, For each category, a score is granted on a scale of 1-4 or 1-5 as a
function of the stringency of state regulation in that area. For example, states get a score of 0 if
the minimum age is below 18; a score of 3 ii the minimum age is 18 but there is no requirement
of sign posting and/or there is no specific penalty for failure to post a sign; a score of 4 if the
minimum age is 18 with specific sign posting requirements and penalties for failure to post; and a
score of 5 if there is a minimum age above age 18 and there are posting/penalty provisions.

These points are then summed across categories to get a total access index score. Then, states
points are reduced by two points (to a minimum of zero) if they allow their state regulation to
preempt a stricter local ordinance.
While the general framework of the two indexes is the same, the YAI contains several

variations in order to describe state tobacco laws in more detail. The largest difference is the
inclusion of three categories in addition to the nine utilized by the NCI. These were Advertising,
Licensing, and Restrictions on Minors. Points are awarded for advertising restrictions on a scale
between one and four. A state earns one point for minimal limitations (no advertising on school
buses, etc.) and four points for a ban on all tobacco advertisements. Including licensing in the
YAI captures the extent to which retailers, vendors, and wholesalers are regulated by state

agencies. Maximum licensing requirements (applicable to retailers, vendors, and wholesalers)

47

received four points while states mandating only wholesale licenses received one point. The
Restrictions on Minors category encompasses laws relating to underage purchase, possession,

and use of tobacco. Those states outlawing these actions, but implementing no penalties for
violating the laws received between zero and one point. The highest possible score, four points,
is given to states outlawing purchase, possession, and use and implementing graduated penalties.

The YAI also allows for more point levels under each category than the NCI index, to
create a finer gradation between the stringency of various laws. For example, one problem with
the minimum age categorization noted above is that some states mandate signage at the point of
purchase, while others mandate signage but not at the point of purchase; we awarded the latter
group of states 3.5 points instead of 4. This affected twenty-one states overall. Similar half point

steps were added to each the nine original NCI categories. The purpose of this variation from the
NCI index was to distinguish more clearly between the stringency of varying state requirements.
We also in several instances altered scoring decisions made by the NCI in the final

computation of state scores. After extensive investigation of state laws and statutes, several
inconsistencies were discovered between the laws and the NCI point allotment. For example,
upon consultation with NCI representatives, it was revealed that Connecticut received two points

for the vending machine category in 1996. The justification for this score was that a 1996 law
added new restrictions. However, certain sections were not effective until after the time period
of the NCI study. Since the law had already passed, though, NCI awarded points to reflect it in

their study. For this project, however, this point assignment was inappropriate. Credit for laws
was only awarded after the law came into effect. Therefore, the YAI contains several
modifications to the factual basis of the NCI index.

48

References
AJciati Marianne H. et. al. (1998). "State Laws on Youth Access to Tobacco in the United States
Measuring Their Extensiveness with a New Rating System," Tobacco Control, 7, 345-52.

Becker Gary S., Michael Grossman, and Kevin Murphy (1994). "An Empirical Analysis of
Cigarette Addiction," American Economic Review, 84, 396-4 18.
Chaloupka Frank J., and Grossman Michael (1996). "Price, Tobacco Control Policies and Youth
Smoking," NBER Working Paper No. 5740.
Chaloupka, Frank, et. al (1998). "Do Higher Cigarette Prices Encourage Youth to Use
Marijuana?," NBER Working Paper No. 6939.
Chaloupka Frank J. and Rosalie Pacula (1998). "Limiting Youth Access to Tobacco: The Early
Impact of the Synar Ammendment on Youth Smoking," mimeo, University of illinois at
Chicago.
Chaloupka Frank J., and Kenneth Warner (1999). "The Economics of Smoking," forthcoming in
Anthony Culyer and Joseph Newhouse, eds,, Handbook of Health Economics.
Coalition on Smoking OR Health, American Lung Association (various years). State Legislated
Actions on Tobacco issues. Washington, D.C.: American Lung Association.

Cutler, David et al. (1999). "The Economic Impacts of the Tobacco Settlement," mimeo,
Harvard University.
DeCicca, Philip, Donald Kenkel, and Alan Mathios (1998) "Putting out the Fires: Will Higher
Cigarette Taxes Reduce Youth Smoking?", presented at the Annual Meetings of the
American Economic Association, 1998.
Dee, Thomas (1999). "The Complementarity of Teen Smoking and Drinking," forthcoming,
Journal of Health Economics.
Department of Health and Human Services (1994). Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young
People: A Repon of the Surgeon General. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.

Dee, Thomas, and William Evans (1998). "A Comment on DeCicca, Kenkel, and Mathios,"
mimeo, University of Maryland Department of Economics.
Evans William N. and Lynn Huang (1998). "Cigarette Taxes and Teen Smoking: new Evidence
from Panels of Repeated Cross-Sections", working paper, University of Maryland
Department of Economics.

49

Evans, William, Jeanne Ringel and Diana Stech (1999). "Tobacco Taxes and Public Policy to
Discourage Smoking," in James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economyl3.
Cambridge, MA: MET Press, p. 1-56.
Glied, 1999. "Youth Tobacco Policy: Reconciling Theory and Evidence," mimeo, Columbia
University.
Gruber, Jonathan (2000). "Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Prices and Policies," NBER Working
Paper #7506, January.
Umber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi (2000). "Is Addiction Rational?: Theory and Evidence,"
NBER Working Paper #7507, January.

Jacobson, Peter D. and Jeffrey Wasserman (1997). Tobacco Control Laws: Implementation and
Enforcement. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
Jason, Leonard A., Peter Ji, Michael Anes, and Scott Birkhead (1991). "Active Enforcement of
Cigarette Control Laws in Prevention of Cigarette Sales to Minors," Journal of the
American Medical Association, 266, 3159-3161.

Keeler, Theodore, et al. (1996). "Do Cigarette Producers Price-Discriminate by State? An
Empirical Analysis of Local Cigarettte pricing and Taxation", Journal of Health
Economics, 15, 499-512.
Levine, Phillip (1999). "Teen Sex and Pregnancy," forthcoming in Jonathan Umber, ed., Risky
Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis.
Levitt, Steve, and Lance Lochner (1999). "Teen Crime," forthcoming in Jonathan Umber, ed.,
Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis.
Lewitt, Eugene, Douglas Coate, and Michael Grossman (1981). "The Effects of Government
Regulation on Teenage Smoking," Journal of Law and Economics, 24, 545-69.

Lewitt, Eugene, and Douglas Coate (1982). "The Potential for Using Excise Taxes to Reduce
Smoking," Journal of Health Economics, 1, 121-45.
Rigotti, Nancy, et al. (1997). "The Effect of Enforcing Tobacco-Sales laws on Adolescents'
Access to Tobacco and Smoking Behavior" New England Journal of Medicine, 337,
1044-51.

Tobacco Institute (1998). The Tax Burden on Tobacco. Richmond, V.A.: Tobacco Institute
Wasserman Jeffrey, Willard Manning, Joseph Newhouse, and John Winfler (1991). "The

50

Effects of Excise Taxes and Regulations on Cigarette Smoking", Journal of Health
Economics, 10, 43-64.

Table 1: Percent of Ever Smokers who Initiated at Each Age
Age

6
7
8
9

10
11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

20
21

22
23

24
25

26
27
28
29
30

% of Ever Smokers
Starting at Age
0.47%
0.79%
1.05%
1.24%
2.67%
1.85%
6.50%
6.63%
8.81%
11.52%
13.53%
8.73%
11.09%
4.47%
5.48%
3.21%
1.76%
1.05%
0.85%
1.47%
0.39%
0.42%
0.40%
0.19%
0.98%

Cumulative Percent
0.47%
1.26%
2.31%
3.55%
6.22%
8.08%
14.57%
21.21%
30.01%
41.53%
55.06%
63.79%
74.88%
79.35%
84.82%
88.03%
89.79%
90.83%
91.68%
93.16%
93.54%
93.97%
94.37%
94.56%
95.53%

SOURCE: National Health Interview Survey Smoking Supplements,
1992 and 1995

Table 2A
1997 MTF Public Use Regression Results: Participation
covariate
Smsa

#ofsibs
Race (1 = black)
Race unknown
captures Latino, etc. + no response

Parents 'c 2
Omilted= two-parenthousehold

Sex (1=male)
Grew up in rural
omitted = 'grew up mostly in suburbs"

Grew up in a town
omitted = grew up rnostiy in suburbs

Grew up in city
omitted = grew up mostly in suburbs

Father ed chs
omitted = high school education

Mothered < hs
omitted = high school education

Fath some college
omitted high school

icalion

Moth some college
omitted = high schoot education

Fath college
omitted = high schoot education

Moth college
omitted = high school education

coeff
(SE)
-.0276
(.0102)
-.0015
(.00403)
-.30
(.0118)
-.141
(.00891)
.0209
(.00862)
-.0122
(.00769)
-.0357
(.0139)
-.0178
(.0116)
-.0307
(.0109)
-.0082

Adjusted R-sguared

''

°=
Engaged

omitted = unmanied

Seperated/divorced
CoIl prep prog

Omitted = general high school program

Voc prep prog
omitted general high school program

No plan do coll
omitted = plan to attend college

Prob won't coil
oinitted= plan to attend college

Prob will coil
Mom worked

(.0136)
.0076
(.0117)
.0232
(.011)
.0248
(.0108)
.0373
(.0103)

omitted = mom never worked w/growing up

(.0108)
-.0263
(.0099)
-.0546
(.0127)
.1125

omitted=midwestregion

Married

-.03 18

.0 134

West region

GPA

normalized by regional annual average

oniitted= plan to attend college

omitted= midwestregion

omilted= midwestregion

Age<18

(0133)

Northeast region
South region

covariate

Works 1/0
Job hrs/week
$/wk from job

$/wk oth sources

Religion important
Attend rel. services reg

Days Missed School

N

coeff
(SE)
.0126
(.00746)
-.265
(.0197)
-.0368
(.0274)
.0689
(.016)
.045
(.0414)
-.0233

(0091)
.0269
(.014)
.0741
(.0142)
.0418
(.0139)
.0175
(.0101)
.00753
(.0101)
-.0177
(.0124)
.00224
(.000559)
.000458
(.000109)
.000665
(.000131)
-.00545
(.00451)
.000242
(.00439)
.0161
(.001)
15525

Notes: Regressions estimated using 1997 cross-section ot MTF data, by linear probability model; mean of dependent
variable is 0.353. Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 2B
1997 MTF Public Use Regression Results: Conditional Intensity
covariate

coeff
(SE)

covariate

coeff
(SE)

Smsa

.143
(.303)

Agec18

.318

-.0114
(.127)
-5.61
(.492)
-2.57

GPA

(.234)
-4.35

#of5jbs
Race (1 = black)

Race unktown
captures Latino, etc. + no response

Parents <2
Omitted= two-parent household

Sex (1=male)
Grew up in rural
omitted

"grew up mostly in suburbs"

Normalized by regional annual average

(595)

Married

1.55

°n =

unmarried

Engaged

(33)

(443)

1.1
(.265)
.867
(.244)

Seperated/clivorced

-.394

Voc prep prog

5.29
(1.19)
-1.02
(.285)
.915
(.409)
1.77
(4 19)
.776
(.416)
-.279
(.321)
-.0113
(.321)
-2.2
(.419)
.0837
(.0177)
.0135
(.00347)
.0209
(.00394)
.2
(.142)
-.419
(.138)
.187
(.028)
5450

(.4 18)

Omitted unmarried

CoIl prep prog

Omitted = general high school program

Omitted = general high school program

-.761

No plan do coil

omitted = grew up mostly in suburbs

(359)

Omitted

Grew up in city

-.994
(.341)
.569

Prob won't coll

omitted = high school education

(417)

omitted = plan to attend college

Mothered < hs

.059

Mom worked

(.441)

oniitted= mom never worked w/growing 11P

-.3 12

Works 1/0

Father ed chs
omitted = high school education

Fath some college
omitted = high school education

Moth some college
omitted = high school education

Fath college
omitted = high school education

Moth college
omitted = high school education

Northeast region
omitted = midwest region

South region
omitted = midwestregion

West region
omitted=midwestregion

Adjusted R-sguared

1.55

Omitted = unmarned

Grew up in a town

omitted = grew up mostly in suburbs

(944)

plan to attend college

Omitted = plan to attend college

Prob will coll

(.367)
.25

(.342)
-.188
(.334)
-.042
(.321)
.205
(.322)
-1.06
(.312)
-2.48
(.405)
.139

Job hrsfweek
$/wk from job
$Iwk oth sources

Religion important

Attend rd. services reg
Sch days missed

N

Ni: Regressions estimated using 1997 cross-section of MTF data, by linear probability model; mean of dependent
variable is 7.329. Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 3: Smoking Participation Coefficient Stability, MTF Public Use Data
Covariate

(2)

Smsa
Age*
Black
Other Non-White
Works 1/0
Job hours per week
Job inc/week (/100)

0th inc/week (/100)
Male
Grew up rural
Grew up town
Grew up urban
Dad's edch. school
Mom's ed<h. school
Dad's ed some coil
Mom'sed some coil
Dad college-ed
Mom coilege-ed
GPA
Northeast
South
West
Mom ever worked
Parentsc2
Married
Engaged
Seperated/divorced
Coil prep program
Voc'l program
No plan attend colI
Prob won't go coil
Prob will go coil
Days missed school
Relig services reg'ly
Religion important
AdjustedR-sguared

N

1976
-.041 (.01)
.017 (.009)
.025 (.013)
-.011 (.013)
.009 (.012)
.003 (.0004)
.04 (.001)
0.00 (.01)
-.063 (.008)
-.028 (.013)

(3)

1986
-.034 (.01)
-.003 (.008)
-.2 (.012)
-.075 (.011)
.001 (.012)
.002 (.001)
.03 (.01)
.04 (.02)
-.067 (.007)
-.039 (.013)
-.035 (.011)

(4)

1997
-.028 (.01)
.013 (.007)
-.31 (.012)
-.134 (.01)
-.018 (.012)
.002 (.001)
.05 (.01)
.07 (.01)
-.012 (.008)
-.036 (.014)
-.018 (.012)
-.031 (.011)
-.008 (.013)
-.032 (.014)
.008 (.012)
.023 (.011)
.025 (.011)
.037 (.01)
-.265 (.02)
.014 (.011)
-.026 (.01)
-.055 (.013)
.008 (.01)
.021 (.009)
-.037 (.027)
.069 (.016)
.045 (.041)
-.023 (.009)
.027 (.014)
.074 (.014)
.042 (.014)
.017 (.01)
.016 (.001)

(7)

1997-1976
.013 (.014)

*.004 (.011)
-.326 (.018)
-.124 (.016)
-.027 (.017)
-.0004 (.0007)
0.00 (.02)
.07 (.02)
.051 (.011)
-.008 (.019)
-.02 (.016)
-.055 (.015)
-.018 (.017)
-.009 (.018)
.014 (.018)
.017 (.017)
.003 (.016)
.057 (.016)
.017 (.028)
-.008 (.015)
-.019 (.014)
.056 (.017)
-.004 (.013)
.022 (.013)
-.077 (.037)
.015 (.022)
-.022 (.071)
.015 (.013)
-.005 (.018)
-.019 (.019)
-.003 (.019)
-.008 (.015)
-.003 (.001)
.036 (.006)
.024 (.006)
.119

.123

.013 (.01)
.009 (.01)
-.203 (.018)
.009 (.01)
-.029 (.009)
-.106 (.011)
.016 (.008)
.022 (.008)
-.095 (.025)
.053 (.015)
.004 (.042)
-.061 (.009)
.023 (.012)
.073 (.012)
.042 (.012)
.004 (.01)
.016 (.001)
-.029 (.004)
-.014 (.004)
.112

0 (.004)
-.005 (.005)
.113

16078

15310

15525

31388

30835

probability >P

probability >F

probability >F

=0

=0

=0

.001 (.011)
.024 (.011)
.01 (.011)
-.023 (.011)
-.007 (.014)
.007 (.013)
.021 (.012)
-.02 (.013)
-.282 (.02)
.022 (.01)
-.007 (.01)
-.11 (.011)
.007 (.008)
-.001 (.01)
.039 (.025)
.054 (.015)
.066 (.058)
-.038 (.01)
.032 (.011)
.093 (.012)
.044 (.012)
.025 (.011)
.019 (.001)
-.035 (.004)
-.029 (.005)

-.012 (.01)
-.019 (.011)
.001 (.011)
.003 (.011)

.002(.01)

stihi1itvinterncts

the

-.065 (.017)

(6)

1997-1986
.006 (.014)
*.o16 (.011)
-.1 (.017)
-.059 (.015)
-.019 (.017)
.0004 (.0008)
.02 (.02)
.02 (.02)
.055 (.011)
.003 (.019)
.017 (.016)
-.019 (.015)
.011 (.017)
-.033 (.018)
.005 (.016)
.021 (.015)
.012 (.015)
.029 (.014)
-.063 (.027)
.005 (.015)
.003 (.014)
.051 (.017)
-.008 (.013)
-.001 (.012)
.058 (.037)
.016 (.022)
.042 (.059)
.038 (.013)
.004 (.018)
.001 (.019)
0 (.018)
.013 (.014)
0 (.001)
.029 (.006)
.008 (.006)
.117

-.008 (.017)
-.0009 (.0007)
-.01 (.01)
.04 (.02)
-.004 (.011)
-.011 (.019)
-.036 (.016)
-.035 (.015)
-.029 (.016)
.023 (.016)
009 (.018)
-.004C016)
-.009 (.016)
.028 (.016)
.08 (.027)
-.013 (.014)
-.022 (.014)
.004 (.015)
.005 (.012)
.022 (.013)
-.134 (.036)
-.001 (.021)
-.062 (.071)
-.023 (.013)
-.009 (.016)
-.02 (.017)
-.003 (.017)
-.021 (.014)
-.003 (.001)
.006 (.006)
.016 (.006)
.127

Joint F-test of

* MTF data

(5)

1986-1976
.007 (.014)
-.02 (.012)
-.226 (.018)

provides only ageo=18 in 1997; year

31603

of birth in 1976 and 1986. We construct a <>18 measure in

1976 and 1986 data, but the mean and distribution differ substantially from 1997. Accordingly, the stability

tests for age in columns (6) and (7) are

probably inaccurate.

Table 4: Means of MTF, YRBS, and Natality Price Regression Samples
Any Smoking

Cigs/Day
when smoke

Real Price
($1982)

Real Excise Tax
($1982)

Monitoring the Future Data - 199 1-97
(N=91,567)

0.309
(0.462)

7.21
(8.87)

8-10th grade
(N=213,527)

0.217
(0.412)

5.42
(8.38)

8-12th Grade
(N=336,665)

0.246
(0.431)

6.13
(8.63)

12th Grade

1.39

0.21

(0.17)

(0.10)

1.38

0.21

(0.17)

(0.10)

1.39

0.21
(0.10)

(0.17)

Youth Risk Behavior Survey Data - 1991,1993,1995,1997

(N=14,346)

0.358
(0.479)

6.06
(6.13)

9-11th Grade
(N=38,932)

0.315
(0.464)

5.15
(5.70)

(0.15)

0.21
(0.10)

9-12th Grade
(N=53,278)

0.326
(0.469)

5.42
(5.85)

1.28
(0.15)

0.21
(0.10)

0.19
(0.10)

12th Grade

1.28

(0.15)
1.28

0.21
(0.10)

Natality Data - 199 1-1997

17-18 Years Old
(N = 666)

0.180
(0.075)

10.23

1.23

(1.31)

(0.14)

13-16 Years Old
(N =1319)

0.127
(0.071)

9.21
(1.70)

1.22

13-18 Years Old

0.164
(0.078)

9.93
(1.51)

(N= 1985)

(0.14)
1.22

(0.14)

0.19
(0.10)
0.19
(0.10)

Notes: Author's tabulations of MTF, YRBS, and Natality data. All prices and taxes in 1982
dollars. Micro-data for MTF and YRBS; cell-level data for Natality, as described in text, with
means weighted by cell count. Cigs/day when smoke is cigarettes per day smoked on days when
smoking. Standard deviations in parentheses.

TableS: Impact of Price and Regulations on Youth Smoking in MIT Data
12th Graders

8th & 10th Graders

8th - 12th Graders

Panic.

Cigs/Day

Panic.

Cigs/Day

Partic.

Cigs/Day

-0.148
(0.078)
[-0.666]

-0.310
(2.388)
[-0.059]

-0.033
(0.035)
[-0.21]

-0.013
(1.243)
[-0.003]

-0055
(0.034)
[-0.311]

-0.129
(1.132)
[-0.029]

Access
Index/100

0.084
(0.106)

-3.48
(2.76)

0.033
(0.060)

(1.640)

0.066
(0.056)

-5.22
(1.49)

Private
Work

-0.041
(0.028)

0.462
(0.589)

-0.006
(0.017)

1.464
(0,489)

-0.021
(0.017)

1.045

(0.348)

Gov't

0.022
(0.026)

-1.128
(0.517)

-0.019
(0.015)

-0.813
(0.394)

-0.001
(0.013)

-0.834
(0.251)

Rest

0.032
(0.030)

2.166
(0.783)

0.012
(0.017)

0.868
(0.615)

0.016
(0.015)

1.318
(0.483)

Schools

0.050
(0.030)

0.93 1

(0.915)

0.044
(0.018)

0.788
(0.553)

0.040
(0.015)

0.645
(0.392)

Other

-0.080
(0.041)

-2.791
(1.234)

-0.032
(0.020)

-1.424
(0.775)

-0.038
(0.019)

-1.617
(0.621)

Male

0.016
(0.004)

1.235

(0.115)

-0.009
(0.003)

0.926
(0.085)

-0.001
(0.003)

(0.069)

-0.153
(0.007)

-1.908
(0.171)

-0.076
(0.004)

-0.436
(0.119)

-0.1

-0.088
(0.018)

-2.746

Price

Work

Non-White
Grade 8

-5.520

(0.576)

Grade 10

1.041

(0.005)

-0.962
(0.115)

-0.185
(0.014)

-3.815
(0.538)

-0.098
(0.019)

-1.055
(0.632)

Grade 8,
Age.c=13

-0.027
(0.018)

0.217
(0.573)

0.03
(0.014)

0.181
(0.519)

Grade 8,
Age>=14

0.026
(0.018)

1.829
(0.572)

0.083
(0.014)

1.8
(0.5 15)

Grade 10,
Age<=15

-0.037
(0.003)

-1.211
(0.104)

0.019
(0.019)

-1.334
(0.625)

0.055
(0.019)

-0.119
(0.627)

-0.012
(0.003)

-0.512
(0.112)

336665

82795

Grade 10,
Age>=16
Grade 12,
Age <=17

-0.013
(0.003)

-0.546
(0.113)

Number of

106539

32868

230126

49927

Obs
Notes: Standard errors (corrected for state/year clustering) in parentheses; standard errors in square
brackets. All regressions also include full set of state and yearfixed effects.

Table 6: Impact of Price and Regulations on Youth Smoking in YIRBS Data
12th Graders

9th - 1 1h Graders

9th - 12th Graders

Panic.

Cigs/Day

Partic.

Cigs/Day

Partic.

Cigs/Day

-0.429
(0.200)
[-1.534]

-7.462
(3.461)
[-1.576]

0.103
(0.134)
[0.419]

-0.912
(1.847)
[-0.227]

-0.032
(0.103)
[-0.126]

-2.228
(1.937)
[-0.526]

IndexJlOO

-0.060
(0.169)

0.461
(3.985)

-0.098
(0.092)

-0.804
(2.223)

-0.098
(0.088)

(2.308)

Private
Work

0.006
(0.047)

-2.723
(1.742)

0.064
(0.046)

1.146
(0.552)

0.051
(0.042)

0.905
(0.476)

GoVt
Work

-0.075
(0.032)

-0.168
(1.459)

-0.088
(0.037)

-1.800
(0.473)

-0.087
(0.034)

-1.971
(0.396)

Rest.

-0.162
(0.028)

-1.435
(1.466)

-0.006
(0.025)

0.383
(0.627)

-0.050
(0.025)

-0.447
(0.783)

Schools

0.006
(0.060)

-0.578
(1.161)

0.008
(0.045)

0.517
(0.567)

0.008
(0.034)

0.578
(0.533)

Other

0.012
(0.065)

6.164
(2.260)

-0.015
(0.054)

0.775
(0.813)

0.002
(0.048)

1.842
(0.950)

0.002
(0.014)

1.283
(0.268)

-0.001
(0.010)

0.846

0.000

(0.164)

(0.008)

0.048
(0.028)

0.585
(0.634)

0.046
(0.014)

-0.148
(0.506)

0.044
(0.012)

0.071
(0.382)

Black

-0.206
(0.033)

-3.16
(0.621)

-0.128
(0.018)

-2.69
(0.541)

-0.149
(0.015)

-2.73
(0.417)

Hispanic

-0.013
(0.030)

-2.10
(0.627)

0.003
(0.016)

-2.09
(0.448)

-0.002
(0.014)

-2.02
(0.354)

Grade 10

-0.055
(0.010)

0.261
(0.366)

-0.055
(0.011)

0.266
(0.363)

Grade 11

-0.076
(0.017)

0.289
(0.455)

-0.075
(0.017)

0.379
(0.452)

-0.092
(0.022)

0.103
(0.55 1)

0.079
(0.013)

(0.370)

Price

Access

Male
White

Grade 12
Age 15

Age 16

-0.052
(0.211)

-12.28
(6.70)

0.079
(0.013)

-0.044
(0.161)

-14.86
(4.93)

0.146
(0.016)

1.04

(0.369)
1.39

(0.443)

0.146
(0.016)

-0.3 16

0.984
(0.146)

1.00
1.36

(0.444)

Age 17

-0.106
(0.145)

-15.50
(4.62)

0.191
(0.020)

2.28
(0.542)

0.191
(0.020)

2.13
(0.544)

Age 18

-0.086
(0.144)

-14.95
(4.66)

0.244
(0.035)

2.71
(0.772)

0.218
(0.023)

2.53
(0.618)

Dad Ethic
115 Grad

0.014
(0.022)

-0.349
(0.431)

-0.007
(0.015)

-0.384
(0.252)

-0.002
(0.012)

-0.362
(0.215)

Dad Educ
Some Coil

0.008
(0.027)

-1.07
(0.549)

-0.035
(0.018)

-0.488
(0.410)

-0.025
(0.014)

-0.660
(0.332)

Dad Educ
Coil Grad

-0.004
(0.024)

-1.26
(0.493)

-0.055
(0.019)

-0.905
(0.305)

-0.042
(0.015)

-0.971
(0.232)

Mom Ed
HS Grad

-0.058
(0.024)

-0.701
(0.403)

-0.014
(0.017)

-0.640
(0.416)

-0.027
(0.015)

-0.686
(0.339)

Mom Ed
Some Coil

-0.031
(0.030)

-0.382
(0.508)

-0.030
(0.013)

-0.935
(0.429)

-0.030
(0.015)

-0.751
(0.326)

Mom Ed
Coil Grad

-0.044
(0.027)

-0.785
(0.446)

-0.038
(0.017)

-0.908
(0.423)

-0.041
(0.015)

-0.891
(0.338)

Number

14346

4429

38932

11368

53278

15797

Ohs

Notes: Standard errors (corrected for state/year clustering) in parentheses; standard errors in square
brackets. All regressions also include full set of state and year fixed effects.

Table 7: Impact of Price and Regulations on Youth Smoking in Natality Data
17-18 Year Olds

13-16 Year Olds

13-18 Year Olds

Panic.

Cigs/Day

Panic.

Cigs/Day

Partic.

Cigs/Day

Price

-0.055
(0.018)
[-0.376]

-1.209
(0.527)
[-0.145]

-0.025
(0.018)
[-0.240]

-0.436
(0.638)
[-0.058]

-0.047
(0.016)
[-0.353]

-1.003
(0.440)
[-0.124]

Access

-1.771
(0.718)

-0.006
(0.024)

-1.010

0.013

-1.485

IndexIlOO

0.023
(0.026)

(1.106)

(0.023)

(0.651)

Private
Work

0.009
(0.007)

0.037
(0.329)

0.013
(0.007)

0.555
(0.466)

0.011
(0.005)

0.134
(0.254)

Gov't

0.000
(0.003)

0.014
(0.109)

-0.005
(0.004)

0.180
(0.160)

-0.002
(0.003)

0.021

(0.089)

Rest.

-0.012
(0.004)

-0.493
(0.233)

0.002
(0.005)

-0.972
(0.355)

-0.007
(0.004)

-0.597
(0.193)

Schools

0.002
(0.004)

-0.195
(0.175)

0.006
(0.005)

-0.613
(0.220)

0.004
(0.004)

-0.316
(0.148)

Other

-0.003
(0.005)

0.231
(0.238)

-0.011
(0.006)

0.299
(0.327)

-0,006
(0.004)

0.300
(0.205)

%White

0.179
(0.093)

2.16
(2.67)

0.131
(0.056)

-0.839
(2.59)

0.171
(0.046)

-0.016
(1.61)

% Black

-0.263
(0.096)

2.09
(2.80)

-0.139
(0.052)

-2.40
(2.39)

-0.203
(0.044)

-2.42
(1.49)

% Hispanic

-0.255
(0.044)

-1.90
(1.64)

-0.238
(0.028)

0.34
(1.13)

-0.238
(0.025)

-1.15
(0.896)

Age 14

0.017
(0.004)

-0.158
(0.366)

0.009
(0.004)

-0.187
(0.363)

Age 15

0.024
(0.005)

0.3 17

(0.354)

0.009
(0.005)

0.213
(0.349)

0.033
(0.007)

0.734
(0.375)

0.011
(0.006)

0.557
(0.354)

0.014
(0.007)

0.912
(0.368)

0.019
(0.007)

1.362
(0.376)

1985

1855

Work

Age 16
Age 17
Age 18

0.003
(0.002)

0.502
(0.055)

Number

1319

1189

666

666

Obs

Notes: Standard errors (corrected for state/year clustering) in parentheses; standard errors in square
brackets. All regressions also include full set of state and year fixed effects.

Table 8: Price Coefficient Heterogeneity by Race
Older Teens
Younger Teens
Partic.

Cigs/Day

-0.091
(0.010)
[-0.350]

0.721
(2.637)
[0.130]

-0.323
(0.163)
[-2.324]

-7.690
(3.749)

Whites

Blacks

Whites

NonWhites

Whites

Blacks

Partic.

All Teens

Cigs/Day

Partic.

Cigs/Day

[-0.300]

-1.611
(1.214)
[-0.393]

-0.057
(0.041)
[-0.277]

-0.848
(1.225)
[-0.181]

[-2.03]

0.025
(0.050)
[0.226]

4.962
(2.843)
[1.488]

-0.039
(0.045)
[-0.327]

2.417
(2.395)
[0.691]

-0.198
(0.271)
[-0.628]

-13.70
(4.554)
[-2.662]

YRBS Data
0.083
(0.177)
[0.303]

0.470
(2.326)
[0.106]

0.026
(0.123)
[0.092]

-3.563
(2.344)
[-0.775]

-1.187
(0.485)
[-9.259]

-22.78
(20.50)

-0.132
(0.372)
[-0.874]

12.48
(12.44)
[4.958]

-0.369
(0.351)
[-2.530]

11.24
(10.81)
[4.393]

Natality Data
-0.060
(0.023)
[-0,385]

0.307
(0.682)
[0.040]

-0.079
(0.021)
[-0.433]

-0.639
(0.453)
[-0.076]

-2.809

0.028
(0.015)
[0.671]

-3.256
(1.144)
[-0.539]

4.464
(5.4)
[0.103]

-0.079
(0.023)
[-0.412]

0.026
(0.017)
[0.534]

[-8.248]

-0.934
(0.556)
[-0.109]

-3.357
(1.286)
[-0.5391

MTh Data
-0.054
(0.047)

0.033
(0.019)
[1.115]

(2.113)
[-0.494]

YRBS Data - Parental Education
Mom&Dad
HS Drop
or Grad

[4.387]

Mom&Dad
Some or
Grad CoIl

-0.067
(0.238)
[-0.2361

-1.266
(0.583)

-2.036
(8.497)
[-0.401]

0.79
(0.369)
[2.721]

10.806
(5.889)
[2.514]

0.207
(0.206)
[0.715]

-10.068
(4.159)

0.228
(0.231)

-1.432
(3.144)

[-2393]

0.157
(0.188)

-3.285
(2.353)

[0.9561

1-0.3901

[0.6451

1-0.8741

Notes: Coefficient on price from regressions in MTF (first panel), YRBS (second and fourth panels), and
Natality data (third panel). Regressions include all of the controls shown in Tables 2,3, and 4, including
full set of state and year fixed effects. Standard errors (corrected for state/year clustering) in parentheses;
price elasticity in square brackets.

Table 9: Age of Initiation vs. Current Smoking
Start age 12-14

Start age 15-17

Start age 18-20

Start age 21-25

Those Age 28+

Smoke Now?

0.52

0.49

0.46

0.52

Smoke Every
day?

0.45

0.41

0.36

0.42

Cigarettes Per
Day

19.6

18.1

15.8

16.7

Those Age 33÷

Smoke Now?

0.49

0.46

0.43

0.49

Smoke Every
day?

0.42

0.38

0.35

0.40

Cigarettes Per
Day

20.4

18.6

16.3

16.8

Those Age 38+
Smoke Now?

0.45

0.43

0.40

0.46

Smoke Every
day?

0.40

0.36

0.33

0.38

Cigarettes Per
Day

21.2

19.1

16.8

17.4

Notes: Authors tabulations of the 1992 and 1995 National Health Interview Survey. Each cell
shows either the proportion smoking or the cigarettes per day, for the group that is labeled in the
top row, at the age denoted for each panel.

Table 10: Intertemporal Conelations Across Cohorts in Smoking Behavior

No Controls

Time Trends

BRESS 27-28 Year Olds (N =

MTF Senior
Smoking Rate in
year t-10

0.648
(0.088)

Time Trend

0.397
(0.157)

Smoking
Among
42-43 Year Olds
12,

1986-1997)

0.781
(0.273)

-0.0030
(0.0016)

42-43 Year Old
Smoking Rate

Time Trends &
42-43 Smoking

0.500
(0.298)

-0.0029
(0.0017)
-0.202
(0.389)

-0.148
(0.354)

NFHS 27-28 Year Olds (N=36, 1950-1995)

NHIS 17-18
Smoking Rate in

1.817
(0.096)

0.833
(0.119)

0.544
(0.186)

0.506
(0.135)

year t-l0
Time Trend
42-43 Year Old
Smoking Rate

-0.0048
(0.0005)

-0.0033
(0.0006)
0.811
(0.112)

0.402
(0.110)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions in first panel match data from BRFSS on 2728 year olds and 42-43 year old controls for 1986-1997 to corresponding MTh data from 10 years
earlier; second panel matches backcast data from NIF11S for 27-28 and 42-43 year olds to data
from ten years earlier on 17-18 year olds. First column is just bivariate regression of 27-28 year
old smoking rates on 17-18 year old smoking rates; second column includes linear time trend;
third column includes contemporaneous smoking rate of 42-43 year olds; and final column
includes both time trends and 42-43 year olds.

Table 11: The Effect of Current and Teen Taxes on Smoking of Pregnant Women
All

Non-Movers Only

Cigarettes
Smoked

Participation

Cigs/Day
if Smoke

Cigarettes
Smoked

Participation

CigslDay
if Smoke

-0.810
(0.033)
[-0.455]

-0.080
(0.002)
[-0.552]

0.536
(0.131)
[0.046]

-0.970
(0.064)
[-0.513]

-0.086
(0.004)
[-0.559]

0.327
(0.186)

-0.480
(0.061)
[-0.188]

-0.013
(0.004)
[-0.061]

-0.678
(0.242)
[-0.040]

-0.598
(0.111)
[-0.221]

-0.017
(0.007)
[-0.078]

-0.500
(0.324)
[-0.030]

% HS
Dropout

5.73
(0.038)

0.390
(0.002)

4.66
(0.134)

3.98
(0.228)

0.256
(0.017)

7.26
(0.677)

% HS
Grad

2.93
(0.018)

0.214
(0.001)

1.90

(0.079)

3.59
(0.136)

0.255
(0.010)

3.94
(0.409)

% Some
College

1.56
(0.021)

0.121
(0.001)

0.797
(0.094)

2.84

0.902

(0.166)

0.260
(0.012)

(0.5 12)

% White

0.838
(0.045)

0.022
(0.003)

2.58
(0.189)

2.31
(0.347)

0.102
(0.026)

6.19
(1.14)

-0.047
(0.049)

0.015
(0.003)

-1.87
(0.205)

2.72
(0.361)

0.210
(0.027)

1.47

(1.18)

Hispanic

-2.71
(0.042)

-0.178
(0.003)

-3.17
(0.181)

-3.20
(0.258)

-0.218
(0.019)

-6.11
(0.844)

Number of

337690

338167

182379

9941

9947

8945

1.95

0.158

12.85

2.07

0.167

12.86

Current
Tax

Teen
Tax

% Black
%

[0.028]

Obs.

Mean of
Depend.
Variable

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses; price elasticities in square brackets. Coefficients are those
from regressions which also include full set of dummy variables for state of birth, state of
residence, year of birth, year of survey, and age.

Appendix Table 1: Means of Regulatory Variables in MTF
12th Graders

Accesslndex

8th

& 10th Graders

- 12th Graders

11.91

1169

11.76

(529)

(5.46)

(5.41)

Clean Air:
Private Workplace

0.44

0.44

0.44

(0.50)

(0.50)

(0.50)

Clean Air:
Government Work

0.73
(0.44)

0.71
(0.45)

0.72

Clean Aft:
Restaurants

0.64
(0.48)

0.61
(0.49)

(0.49)

(0.30)

0.85
(0.36)

0.87
(0.34)

0.93
(0.25)

0.91
(0.29)

0.92

Other

(0.28)

Number of Obs

106,539

230,126

336,665

CJean Air:
Schools

Clean Air:

0.90

(0.45)

0.62

Notes: From authors' tabulations of 1991-1997 MTF restricted sample data desribed in text. Standard
deviations in parentheses.

o mtf 12th graders

a nhis ages 18-19

C nhsda
.435 -

.199377 76

79

I

82

85

I

88

I

91

nhsda: age 17-19 thr/91, 18-20 in 96-7

p

94

p

97

Figure 1. Smoking Participation: Older Youth Time Series

0 mtf ages 12-17

t yrbss 9th-l2th graders

.36 -

.315 -

.27

.225 -

.18 91

94

Survey Year

Figure 2. Youth Smoking Participation in 90s

97

0 participation

predicted participation

.39 -

36 -

.33 -

.3 -

.27
—

I

76

I

79

I

82

I

85

88

91

pvais generated using 85-86 coefficients

94

Figure 3. Smoking Participation Predicted v. Actual

97

o cond'I intensity

A predicted cond'I intensity

9.3 -

8.65 -

7_as -

6.7 ——

I

76

I

79

I

82

I

85

I

88

I

91

pvals generated using 85-86 coefficients

I

94

Figure 4. Smoking Intensity Predicted v. Actual

97

Omale

Aternala

Awliite

Qnanwhue
.41 -

41

.37

.35

.33

.29 -

.29

.23 -

.17 -

.25

76

81

86
year

76

97

91

Figure 5a. Smoking Participation by Gender

J auburba

61

66

year

91

Figure 5b. Smoking Participation by Race

Atop 25%

Obottom 25%

A urban

.39 -

.35 -

-43

.31

.34

.27 -

.25

.23 -

.16
76

91

61

year

97

Figure öc. Smoking Participation: Urban v. Suburban

76

81

86

91

year

Figure 5d. Smoking Participation by GPA

Figure 5: Smoking Participation by Sub-Group

97

a participation

a predicted participation

.36 -

.3-

.27
I

89

I

91

I

I

93

95

pvals generated using 89-90 coefficients

97

:igure 6. Predicted vs. Actual Participation wI Attitude VarE

.39

.73

.36

.67

.33

-.61

.3

.55

.27

.49

year

Figure 7a. Alcohol v. Cigarettes

.39

.36

33.

.27

year

Figure 7c. Other Drugs v. Cigarettes

Figure 7. Other Substance Participation v. Smoking

participation

price

.39 -

- 1 .5

.36 -

- 1.325

.33 -

- 1.15

.3 -

- .975

C

0

4-.

a
CD

C.)

1

a
CD

.27 82

87

year

92

97

Figure 8: Smoking Part icipation v. Cigarette Price

a)
C)

a

