NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC VOLATILITY IN LATIN AMERICA:
A VIEW AND THREE CASE STUDIES

Ricardo J. Caballero

Working Paper 7782
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7782

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

July2000

I am thankful to Olivier Blanchard, Jeff Frankel, Enrique Mendoza, Roberto Rigobon, Andres Velasco and
participants at the Economia meeting in New York for their comments. I am also grateful to Adam Ashcraft
for outstanding research assistance. Prepared for the first panel meeting of Economia, LACEA, May 2000.

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
2000 by Ricardo J. Caballero. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the
source.

Macroeconomic Volatility in Latin America: A View and Three Case Studies
Ricardo J. Caballero
NBER Working Paper No. 7782
July2000
JEL No. F3, F4, G00, 054

ABSTRACT
After decades of trial, error, and occasional regress the pieces of a successful Latin American

economic model can be seen scattered among the leading economies of the region. The most
traditional macroeconomic maladies of the emerging world - such as chronic fiscal imbalances and
monetary gimmicks — are gradually being left behind. Many of these economies have made
significant progress in their regulatory and supervisory frameworks and, at times, have been leaders
beyond Latin American boundaries in allowing private sector co-participation in a wide array of ex-

public sector activities. Despite these significant efforts, several structural sources of volatility

remain, and new ones have emerged as a result of the new and otherwise better economic
environment. In this paper I review these sources through the recent experiences of Argentina, Chile

and Mexico.
Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT, Department of Economics
E52-252A
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

MACROECONOMIC VOLATILITY
IN LATINAMERJCA: A VIEW AND
THREE CASE STUDIES
B RICARDO J. CABALLERO1

I.

INTRODUCTION

After decades of trial, error, and occasional regress, the pieces of a successful Latin
American economic model can be seen scattered among the leading economies of the
region. The most traditional macroeconomic maladies of the emerging world — such as
chronic fiscal imbalances and monetary gimmicks -- are gradually being left behind. Many of

these economies have made significant progress in their regulatory and supervisory
frameworks and, at times, have been leaders beyond Latin American boundaries in allowing
private sector co-participation in a wide array of ex-public sector activities. Despite these
significant efforts, several structural sources of volatility remain, and new ones have emerged
as a result of the new and otherwise better economic environment.
Chile offers a concrete example, having experienced a sudden and sharp recession during the
recent global turmoil after a decade of solid performance. This setback raised concerns not
ouly to Chileans but also to regional policymakers accustomed to see in Chile's stability the

eventual reward of their reformist efforts. However we have learned repeatedly that the
reward for successful reforms may not come in the form of a dramatic decline in economic
fluctuations, at least in the short to medium run.2 As Asia has recently shown, an advanced
developing econom,y is still fragile. The fast pace required by dynamic growth and restructuring,

unbalanced development across different institutions and markets, and still-limited range of
precautionary options make for a delicate and potentially volatile scenario"4 The main goal
'MlTandNBER

See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (1999) and Aghion et a! (1999) for models where the correlation between financial
development and economic stability is non-monoronic. imporrandy, however, welfare is monotonically increasing with
respect to institudonal and financial development.
'It does seem, however, that the rewards of successful reforms come in the forms of high average growth, a decline in the
frequency of crises (although these can be deep), and an increase in the speed at which the economy recovers from such
crises.

1.

of this paper is to identify some of these imbalances, and to hint at policy considerations
raised by these.

While emerging economies suffer from multiple problems, I have pursued a minimalist and
parsimonious account of volatility, highhghting that which is relatively new and focusing on
countries that have akeady attenuated most of the traditional sources of macroeconomic
instability in Latin America. The paper is based on three case studies -- Argentina, Chile and
Mexico — whose combined experiences illustrate the most central dilemmas faced by

emerging economies. While embodied differently in each country, there are clearly two main
common factors behind structural volatility. (a) weak international financial links; and (b) a still
limited development of domestic financial markets, particularly for medium and small size firws.5 Once

interacting, these two ingredients not only create volatility but they also generate externalities
that require policy intervention. Most other shocks and deficiencies are leveraged — even
made possible — by these two factors, and to the frustration of highly competent

policymakers, the environment becomes intolerant of policy mistakes. Each of these
countries expenence is sufficiently different to identify these interactions between the core
ingredients and more traditional factors. Some of these interactions include: (a) the exchange
rate ystem and monetary credibil4y, (b) fiscal imbalances, (c) afragile banking ystem, (d) labor market
nAiditiei, and (e) an inadequate — in the sense a/lack of contingenfy -- central bank mandate.

The paper is organized in three parts. Section II sketches the basic view, outlining the main
line of argument with a simple model. The second and main part summarizes each country's
recent experience with real volatility while establishing connections to the core ingredients
discussed above. The main policy lessons are finally extracted in Section IV.

The serious decline in electricity provision in Chile during 1998, primarily created by a severe drought, is a symbolic
example of the lack of precautionary options. Shocks that compromise the single "pipeline", be it electricity distribution,
6nancial services, or a road, have a deep impact While precautionary options and the ability to handle complex scenarios
are sometimes viewed as luxury goods, their rewards come precisely in the Form of tamed volatility.

The essence of the conceptual framework is no adaptation of that in Caballero and Krishnamurthy (1999, 2000). The
examples and applications ate mosdy from Caballero (1999a,b,c, a series of reports that 1 wrote for the IADB's Reseaeh
Department. All of these papers can be downloaded from http://web.mit.edu/caball/www.

2

IT. THE VIEW
In this section I describe a simple organEting framework, building on the observation that
emerging economies are distinctly charactethed by two fundamental weaknesses: (i) a weak
link to international financial markets, and (ii) underdeveloped domestic financial markets.
One can think of these two ingredients as the core, in the sense that even after addressing the
traditional imbalances they remain present and ready to cause and leverage crises.
Weak international financial links are simply financial constraints, possibly time-varying, that

limit the public and private international borrowing (broadly understood) of emerging
countries. These constraints limit the smoothing of shocks over time and are themselves a
source of shocks, creating excessive volatility in the real economy. Underdeveloped financial
markets limit the prompt reallocation and proper aggregation of resources, creating wasteful

contractions in those markets most affected by shocks or less plugged into the financial
pipelines.6 Most significantly, following Caballero and Krishnamurthy (1999, 2000), I will
argue below that it is this domestic underdevelopment that naturally creates externalities that

justify macroeconomic policies aimed at improving the country's international liquidity
management. With the help of a few diagrams, in this section I outline a structure to think
through the macroeconomic consequences — and later on, the policy implications — of the
two core-ingredients highlighted above:
Environment

It is not too farfetched to think about an emerging economy's timeline in the following
terms. Date 0 corresponds to "normal" times, when investment, planning and prevention are

all very relevant. A significant part of this planning has to do with anticipating and
prevenmig a crisis in the perhaps not too distant future at date 1. Moreover, policy makers
frequently create business cycle recessions at date 0 in an attempt to prevent a deep crisis at
date 1. Date 2 represents the future, always brighter than the present, but a significant
obstacle is that the country — both its sovereign as well as its corporations — often falls to
persuade foreign financiers fully that they will share in that bright future if they help to avert
the crisis (weak international financial links).

On the other hand, as financial development rises so does leverage, and with it the vulnerability of the financial system to

shocks also increases. Many Latin American economies have suffered at both ends: chronic financial repression and
underdevelopment and, when moving away from that, large collapse of the banking system. I return to this issue in the
next section.

See Caballero sad ICrishnamurthy (1999) for a fudy-fleshed model along these lines.

3

External Crisis

Figure 1 describes the elements creating a crisis driven entirely by insufficient external
resources, but with a perfectly functioning domestic financial system — that is, when only the
first ingredient is present. We can think of a crisis as a time when, (a) a significant fraction
of firms or economic agents are in need of financing to either repay debt or implement new
investments needed to save high return projects --- I will refer to these agents as "distressed
firms" -- and (b) on net, the economy as a whole needs substantial external resources but

does not have enough assets and commitment to obtain them. Loosely, I refer to these
assets and commitment as "collateral," which needs not be interpreted literally as pledged
assets but as the resources that are likely to be recouped by a lender. In order to make things
as stark as possible, imagine that distressed firms have no assets of value to foreigners, but
that the high date 2 return A,, on their investment projects, if successfully maintained, is fully
pledgeable to other domestic agents. To be concrete, think of A,, as the date 2 value of a
building (nontradeable), and assume that absent a crisis the discount of future flows is simply

zero, the international discount rate. For convenience, the mass of these projects is
normalized to one.

Figure 1: Equilibrium in Domestic Financial Markets
Domestic Agents
Distressed Firms

Intermediaries

Foreigners

AI,
(Face value

of
date 2 assets;
only accepted
as collateral by
domestics)

Date I
resources

(Face value of
date 2 assets;
accepted as
collateral by
foreigners)

Loan of up to A,A, date I
resources itring A, as collateral
at interest rate R =

+
Bomiu'.r at most

A,,/L date I
Resources

Loan of dale 1 resources
using A11 as collateral at

interest rate L 2 1

• Distressed firms have profitable projects but need date I resources
• Foreigners require collateral when lenduig date I resources at the international interest rate
• Only domestic intermediaries own internationally-accepted collateral

Other domestic firms and investors (or foreign specialists) have assets, A, that are "good
collateral" to foreigners. For example, U.S. T-bills, the present value of exports as well as
other domestic assets -- like telecoms -- that may be deemed more transparent and trustable

4

by foreign investors. As it is highly unlikely that foreigners would be willing to provide
fmancing equivalent to the full value of these assets — due to a sovereign problem, for
example -- assume that one unit of A only secures a loan of X<1 date 1 resources.8 Much of
the policy discussion later on has to do with increasing the value of this parameter.
Domestic fmancial markets are essentially the place where up to ?4date I resources are lent

to the distressed firms, who have date 2 assets A,, to pledge as collateral. When the
economy's pledgeable resources are greater than the needs of distressed firms, arbitrage
keeps the mternal cost of funds L equal to the gross international interest rate (of one by
assumption). All distressed firms are able to borrow funds, and only a fraction of domestic
collateral A needs to be pledged. This is the case in panel (a) of Figure 2. In this simple
example where all projects have the same high return, the domestic demand for international
liquidity by distressed firms is flat up to the point where all projects are fully refinanced. The
supply, on the other hand, is flat at the international interest rate until international collateral
runs out, where it becomes vertical.9 When the aggregate needs of distressed firms are
greater than pledgeable resources, competition among distressed firms transfers all of their

private surplus (return above the international interest rate) to the domestic suppliers of
international liquidity. Panel (b) illustrates this fire sale of domestic assets. The fraction of

projects financed is A1A1 <1, and the domestic discount rate jumps from one, the
international level, to L = A,, >1.

Once in the environment described above, the bulk of modern Latin America's volatility can
be sufficiently described using only two canonical external shocks. While sometimes it is the
direct effect of these shocks that creates volatility, in many cases it is simply the fear of them
that leads the authorities to create precautionary recessions or the private sector to speculate
on their potential arrival.

The most direct shock conducive to a fire sale and crisis is indeed a sudden loss in the
international appeal of a country's assets. This can be due to country-specific factors as well
as to changes and shocks in the segments of international fmancial markets relevant for the
country. The turmoil after the Russian crisis in October 1998, as well as the debt crises that
followed U.S. interest tightemng during the early 1980s, are two prototypical examples of the

latter. This shock is captured in the model simply as a deterioration in the quality of an
emerging economy's international collateral, A, that shifts the supply curve to the left as the
country's capacity to borrow abroad is reduced. As the spread between the domestic and
international interest rates increases, there is a fire sale of domestic assets because the

In addition to binding microeconomie incentive problems, there may be sovereign risk associated to many of these assets,
especially in the event of crises. The latter affects foreigners' valuation of these assets even when they acqaire the private
control rights
These abrupt changes in slopes are only meant to capture as clearly as possible the fact that there are regions where most
firms can satisfy their financial needs and the cost of credit is determined by international conditions, and others where it b
the domestic availability of international assets that determines such cost.

5

domestic opportunity cost of holding these assets is high when credit is scarce.1" The
counterpart of the fire sale is the limited reinvestment and costly termination of distressed
high net present value projects.

Shocks need not come directly from external financial factors to reflect the weakness of
financial links. For simplicity assume that international collateral is constituted only of
tradable goods while domestic collateral represents non-traded goods!1 An adverse terms of
trade shock is simply a decline in the value of traded goods, A, which reduces the country's
borrowing capacity and shifts the supply curve to the left in a manner similar to the financial
shocks above. A sufficiently large or sufficiently long sequence of terms of trade shocks can
significantly reduce a country's international liquidity, causing a fire sale and corresponding
real decline. Needless to say, the extent to which this is likely to happen depends critically on
the tightness of external financial markets.

Foreigners or non-specialists are unable to capture these high returns because at times of crises they only hold and
arbitrage claims backed by international collateral. 'While their arbitrage during normal times keeps the international spread
at '.ero, it is immaterial when the international collateral constraint binds. That is, the interest parity condition shifts urril
domestic equilibrium, rather thno international arbitrage. holds.

The international economics literature has bog recognized the importance of international collateral and its relation with
a country's tradeable sector. See Simonson (1985). Formal models of sovereign debt renegotiation are built around the
question of what international lenders can threaten sovereign countries with in the event of default. Jo this literature,
international collateral is 'picafly taken to be some fraction of exports. See Bulow and Rogoff (1989). Cash revenues from
exports can be sei2ed before they make it back into the country. This feature was used by Mexico during the 94-95 crisis
when its oil revenues were made part of the collateral backing the liquidity package it received.

6

Figure 2: Fire Sales
(a) Equilibrium with adequate
mternational collateral

L
A.

/

demand

(b) Fne Sales

L demand

supply

—
4-.

supply

Marginal

product

4—
1

I,—

1

1

AA projects (%)

AA

i

projects (%)

•Lirnited number of profitable projects
•Scarcitv of international collateral limits the transfer of funds to distressed firms
•A decline in the quality of a country's international collateral can cause a fire sale
Extenia/iy and PoIiy Pro b/ems

Under-provision. While the scenario described above can indeed represent a great source of
uncertainty and volatility for a country, it is not clear that there is a role for policy, aside
from a structural one (see section IV). Since domestic providers of international liquidity ate
transferred all of the surplus during crises, they are given the right incentives to supply this
liquidity. It is here where the second ingredient highlighted above plays a central role. When
domestic financial markets are imperfect in the sense that distressed firms without direct
access to international financial markets do not have the means to fully pledge their returns

to other domestics or informed investors, the ex-ante incentive to hoard and supply
international liquidity is weakened. Market-making is not a great business in a market with

constrained demands. Imperfect domestic financial markets are captured here by the
assumption that only a fraction A,1<i of a distressed firm's value can be pledged to other
domestics. As the capacity to compensate domestically available international liquidity is
reduced for any given level of investment, the price of this liquidity L also falls.

7

Figure 3: Excess Vulnerability
(a) Equilibrium with underdeveloped
domestic financial markets

(b) Externality

L

L

supply
An

A

demand
1

1

I

projects (¼)

XA' X1A1 1

projects (¼)

• Imperfect domestic collateral reduces the effective demand for funds

• Lower demand reduces intermediaries' expected returns forlending
• These lower returns reduce date 0 investment in international collateral
• Less international collateral increases the vulnerability of the economy to bad shocks.

Panel (a) in Figure 3 illustrates the scenario just described. Given the date 0 allocations, a
decline in A,, reduces the effective demand for (payment capacity oO international liquidity as
the maximum payment per unit of investment is now only A,,A,, C A,,, leaving the marginal
product curve (dashed line) unchanged While the returns to supplying liquidity fail, liquidity

providers will continue their lending, given the fixed supply of international collateral, as
long as pledgable assets are greater than the opportunity cost of funds (the international
interest rate).12

-

Of course the problem here is that the domestic availability of international collateral will
not remain unchanged. In this environment, frictions in the market for domestic assets
distort the private returns of holding domestic and international collateral. The ex-ante
equilibrium response to such distortion at date 0 is captured in panel (b), with an inward
shift in the ex-ante supply of international liquidity/collateral. Since domestic fmancial
constraints limit the returns received by international liquidity providers below the full return

of distressed projects, the incentive to provide such liquidity declines. In so doing, the
economy experiences more frequent fire sales and more severe distress in the event of an
international squeeze on the country. The economy is in the end made too vulnerable to

Note that a lower L does not necessarily mean that the explicit domestic rate is lower than in the case with well developed
financial markets (for given supply of international collateral). It essentially means that a lower fraction of investments and
loans can be collaterali,ed and is likely to be recouped by the lender.
12

8

external shocks as domestic investors do not value international liquidity enough, creating
less international collateral than is socially optimal.13

Distorted External Matudtj Structure and Curren9' DenominatiojL A similar situation arises with

respect to short versus long term debt. Long term debt is like short-term debt plus rollover
insurance. When domestic financial markets are underdeveloped, there is less incentive to
buy the insurance than is socially optimal since the holders of that insurance that do not
experience distress and financial needs at date 1 do not receive the full social return of their
guaranteed debt-rollover.14 The same holds true for debt denominated in external currency,
which does not include insurance against events that put pressure on the exchange rate. I will
return to these issues in the policy section.
To summarize, I have portrayed the core of an advanced emerging economy in terms of two
basic features. First, it frequently finds itself near the hunt of its capacity for international

financing (stocks or flows). In such a position, intertemporal smoothing is limited and
changes in external or domestic conditions can have potentially large effects on domestic
activity. Second, domestic transfers of value are limited by underdeveloped financial markets
and the institutions that support them (see policy section). As a result, the incentive to
reduce the vulnerability brought about by the first feature is undervalued by the private
sector, and the decentralized equilibrium is excessively volatile.

III. CASE STUDIES
While each of the countries discussed below has its idiosyncrasies, the framework sketched
above highlights the unifying theme behind their volatility: the underdevelopment of their

financial markets, both domestically and in their integration to international financial
markets. After documenting unabated volatility, each of the cases illustrates the presence of

these core volatility-factors in practice, and documents the different forms they take in
different scenarios. A discussion of other more idiosyncratic factors fmally follows, stressing
the interactions with core ingredients.

The particular order in which I have chosen to present the first two cases ---Argentina and
Mexico--- is irrelevant. I have chosen to discuss Chile at end, however, because it is arguably

the most advanced country in the region in terms of its financial and institutional
13 This
does not mean that internaitonal liquidity is valued less than in the first best, quite the contrary. The claim is that i is
valued less than the second best indicates.

See Caballero and Krishnarnurthy (2000).

9

development. Its weaknesses, therefore, offer lessons for the next stage of Argentina and
Mexico, as well as the rest of the region.

111.1 ARGENTINA
The Argentine economy has experienced a dramatic transformation over the last decade.
Inflation is a matter of the past due to a strong convertibility law; the government is no
longer an important player in the production of goods and services; trade and capital

accounts have been largely liberalized; the pension system is being modernized and
privatized; and the solvency, transparency, and liquidity of the banking sector have been
solidly raised. Symptoms of success abound. An important exception to this rosy scenario
is the untamed, or even increased, volatility of output and employment.

Figure 4: Argentine Growth and Volatility
a) QDP G,o98, Rats 1988 prices)

(b) GDP Grov4h Rain deviation 1mm period overage)

10%

"ri "1

i" ijd:ujIt
finn

__________
______________ _____________

lOllltl000lOlllllalOilrli80900rolO
9
02 02 94 00 00 07 80 09 9) SI 92 06 04
50 90 07 00 89
01

No/er: Pro-torn er//bib?5 period' /981-1990. Po.r/-urn:vrhbthtypenwl.- 1991-1999. U.nedpndirniaavy dr/a Jar /998 andprrdicted data Jbr 1999,
Sowne:

IFS.

While panel (a) of Figure 4 highlights the clear success in terms of higher average output
growth during the 1990s, panel (B) illustrates that aggregate volatility has remained vividly
present. During the 1980s, aggregate volatility was mainly driven by stabilization attempts

and their failure, but steady output growth in the post-convertibility period has been
mterrupted mainly by external factors, although these have been amplified by domestic ones.

A parsimonious account of Argentine's volatility can be built around the two coreingredients, as well as three idiosyncratic factors which are troublesome mostly due to the
presence of the core factors:
Systematic crowding out. The lack of fiscal adjustment and absence of incentives and
markets for prime firms to internalize their relative access to international fmancial
markets worsen the credit crunch on PYMES during crises.

•

Labor market rzgidities, both nominal and real, amplify external financial shocks.

10

• Real exchange rate thflexibili& created by the convertibility system, when combined with

labor market rigidities and limited access to external financial markets, delays
expected recovery.

After presenting evidence on the core ingredients, each of these elements is discussed in turn
below.

(i) Weak links to international financial markets
The relatively small size of an emerging economy's current account deficit is a perennial
indication of its limited access to international capital markets. Argentina is no exception as
its current account deficit has never exceeded four percent of GDP during the 1990s, despite
the fact that its average growth rate has exceeded five percent, more than double that of the
OECD nations during the same period. With respect to aggregate volatility, however, it is
not only the level but also the fragility of this limited access that is important. Panel (a) in
Figure 5 describes the path of capital flows to Argentina, and their close connection with the

two crises of the '90s, especially the "tequila" episode. Stark as it is, this figure
underestimates the severity of the external constraint during crises since it ignores strained
renegotiations and other mechanisms that smooth capital flows movements.15 Some of this
underestimate can be determined from price data, illustrated by the dark line in panel (b)
through the dramatic rise in its sovereign spread around crisis dates.

Figure 5: Argentine External Conditions in the 1990s
-

(a) Capital e,lbss (S SDP)

(5) 591/ore is spreads

-

1992

[lull
___

- _______——-.----._—______ .--.
993
1954
1955
1900
Itt?
5108-I
l99l

•—

Source:

1100

1991-el

__

t 4 4 314 4 3 4 4t 44t14 4 3

190011

_ial

US benchmark (30 years). Lit/n i.i- the
Capital he/More finn IFS (colunins 78hcd and 786/el). Panel (6): Sprrad ofBrady hooch ye/el
Ary,eniina. Mex*o, Breçil cord Venecehj. Sonrct: Daia,ri,ram.. lthmationalpdccrr [mm JNDEC

al.eraycc of

The high correlation between Latin American sovereign spreads also illustrated in the panel

certainly does not free Argentina from its share of responsibility for the weak nature of its
international financial links, but it does hint that the shocks are not solely-driven by domestic
conditions.

The Capital flows reversal during the last crisis can be seen mote clearly in the non-financial private sector, where they
came down to 2,7b in 1998, from 8.2b the previous year. Official flows, on the other hand, rose supported by loans from
the Worid Bank and IADB.

11

Figure 6 illustrates yet another dimension of the weak and volatile international financial
links. Panel (a) uses U.S. stock returns data to illustrate the variance of returns over a 12month-period centered on the indicated date. The thick line corresponds to a prime firm
index (S&P100), while the other two represent mote inclusive indices (S&P400 and
S&P600). As one would expect, the more inclusive indices are more volatile, especially at
times of aggregate turbulence and distress, reflecting the greater vulnerability of smaller
firms. This sensible volatility ranking is in sharp contrast with that found in Argentina. While
the relative vulnerability of small firms is at least as large as in the U.S., the pattern of relative
volatility portrayed in panel (b) is reversed for Argentina, which plots with a thick line the
variance series for the MERVAL (prime-companies) and with a thin line that of the more
comprehensive IGPSA index. One interpretation of this finding is that foreign investors
focus mainly on the MERVAL, and hence it is mostly these stocks that reflectlarge capital
flows swlngsJ6

Figure 6: Variance of Stock Returns. United States vs. Argentina
(a) United Slates

(b) Argentina

0_es' •--•—---—-

—

a not

_

1-MbaJ0
4jLsO,j *Jita A6jSOojae A
aral a
93949494949€ 90 91 9694159499
97 sidoj.
i ni 9. 199090

°klNojJ
j,MjjSaSJllNeMJUIp9alJi4pJoM JiANeMJlj9ejJ J4i a
909091 9111 n59305930393

94949€951690%94971707e9- 94

I=sst l0d—_SOP 400

H?Ae99—T9l

Scans: Sink mark-ri shila /rim Daiaa,-vam.

Finally, there is evidence of a premium on Argentine sovereign bonds ascribed to persistent
aggregate volatility. Consider the historical spread over US Treasuries of Argentine
sovereign bonds relative to similarly-rated U.S. corporate bonds. In the last decade, a sample
of Argentine sovereign bonds paid on average a premium of more 100 basis points, and the
time-series variance of Argentine spreads was more than double that of equivalently—rated
U.S. corporate bonds.t7 This spread-premium is probably a result of this "excess volatility"
created by weak hnks and underdeveloped financial markets, as the bulk of this volatility
comes from episodes when financial markets tighten for emerging markets. The bottom
line is that Argentine bonds look "illiquid" from the point of view of spreads and volatility,

despite the fact that their volume is often much larger than that of the specific U.S.
corporate bonds used in the above contrast.

Anothet interpretation -is that the finding is spurious, as the more comprehensive series is polluted by too many notrades. Although this remains as a possibility, aggregate volume data for both indices do not reveal a pronounced relative
decline of transactions in the IGPSA. It is also important to (eah2e what the relative-volatility claim in the text is not aFout:
it does not say that large Hrms' financing is more distressed than that of smaller firms during crises- Indeed reality is quib
the opposite, as concerned local banks reallocate their loans toward larger companies. It just says that an important segment
of the demand for the shares on pdnie companies fluctuates with international sentiment about emerging markets.
17 See Caballero (l999a) for details on the bonds included in each sample.

12

(ii) Underdeveloped domestic financial markets

In general, the development of domestic financial markets is instrumental not only in
fostering investment and growth, but also in aggregating resources during distress.
Underdeveloped financial markets limit the prompt reallocation of resources and, as a result,
cause wasteful contractions in those markets most affected by shocks or less plugged into
the financial pipelines.

Figure 7 highlights Argentina's "level problem." Regardless of how it is measured, and
despite significant improvements over the last decade, Argentina's financial markets and
level of financial intermediation are sub-standard. M3, loans, and stock market capitaliiation
-- all of them measured as a fraction of GDP -- fare poorly, both within the region and
certainly with respect to OECI) economies.

Figure 7: Financial Market Development
I 20%

1 20%

% 50%
SO
50%

40%

20%

0%

Argenilo.

BrotH

iii

Chili

M..ioo

Gs..o.

Portugal

Spain

USA

• Claims on Prisat. Sector C Stock Markel Ca plalisslion

No/cs: Do/oar çf end r /997.
Sour' C:

Mi and loans its pr/tate from IES Stock markel capiiaiçaiion/rons Do/ar/roam (hnarl but soot uttsmp It/s csstorag,ej

Domestic financial markets have played an important role during the two crises of the 1990s.

Panel (a) of Figure 8 depicts time series of deposit and loan growth rates, each less their
respective interest rate. Albeit imperfect, these measures capture banks' and firms' flow
availability and needs. Fears that the convertibility system would not survive during the
"teqa" cnsis led to a run on banks and on the monetary base. As a result, there was a
massive credit crunch despite the astute use of the few degrees of freedom with monetary
policy allowed by the convertibthty law.18

The Banco Central & Ia Repubkca Aryntina (BCRA) can buy Argentine treasury bonds denominated in dollars (which are
counted as reserves) as long as this does not lead to a decline in the ratio of international reserves (net of these bonds) to
base below 2/3. Government notes in the BCRA rose by about 25 percent from 1994 to 1995 (from 1901 to 2543 billions
of pesos), and declined shaiply since then.

13

Figure 8: Argentina's Credit Crunch
(a)

Effectiye MonDay Groesh Rate

Deseosas nod Loans (3-month MA)

(b) Wornjnal and Real Interest Rates

__________________

A

_____________

l

5%

'5.__'

-

99'J 4j[j Os a

3,. .naJLanaNaJMk.J[jn.N.Je h*MJWS. WnJ.M MJkSnSaJbMUJ0at.Nsa
Seeladadadansadananeeadeoeensaen?a,gnnno7adadoeaaoeadesIe

Os .0 a .51 Os Je 99 .15 Os a aja 01 Ja
an Se ad ad a, 95 aS a, an an as Ia a? ala? a? aaao ae ad 99 aS
I—aastsao —an1

No/cc: In panel

'a,l, dx 'cn 'qecihr' of!rs to fix/ic! that com.ondbng intrre.if rain.' urn .oeh.c/racied/rum /bc1nnvih rates CD roles (.30-59 clap,) terre used

as dep unit pa/cc Creel/i-line rater arm, used u.n loan ru/re (k) Aonualiçyd 30-okay/sea duos to prime /inn.r. Real interest rate calcakaied y .ruhiractin.3

annualiyd. srnterr4 6-mon/h PH inflation /hms nominal nab.
Swore: /3(11,1.

There are several reasons why the aggregate figure on loans is somewhat misleading in

measuring the contribution that reduced domestic intermediation and financial distress may
have had on the sharp decline in teal activity during the recent crisis. First, the increase in
financial depth during the last five years has in all likelihood made the economy more credit
dependent. Second, panel (b) illustrates that real interest rates increased even more due to
the expected deflation required to adjust the real exchange rate within the context of the
convertibility law. Fmally, there is also evidence of an increase in the cross sectional
dispersion on prime loan rates, reflecting that the composition of borrowers and lenders may
have changed significantly during the crisis.19

Prompted by the deep economic distress experienced during the tequila crisis, Argentina
mounted a massive effort to improve the liquidity position of banks and the financial system
as a whole. Not only were banks' liquidity requirements raised (self-insurance), but insurance
features were introduced through a series of domestic as well as international "repo"
facilities. The effort paid off, as there were no traces of systemic bank runs during the recent
crisis, and lending slowed down but not nearly as sharply as during the previous crisis?9

The consequences of underdeveloped and unstable domestic financial markets are ultimately
reflected in the economy's failure to reallocate resources in an expedient manner, especially
at times of crises. Figure 9 reports the path of a measure of the cross-sectional dispersion of
the Argentine stock market returns for a group of approximately 25 industries with a dashed
19 The

inteiquantile tange (75°/o-25'/o) of cross section of nominal interest rates on 30-day peso loans averaged less than 2
percent in the months before the Tequila crisis, but then jumped to more than 16 percent in March 1995. Similarly, the
same measure jumped from 'ens than 2 percent to more than 6 percent during the Russian financial crisis.

20 See Figure 3 in Powell (1999) for clear evidence on the improved systemic liquidity of the Argentine fmancial system. As
described in that figure, starting fromjanuary of 1996, liquidity requircmcnt increased steadily from 10 percent of deposits
to over 15 percent by Match of 1999. Excess reserves add a more or less constant tO percent, and the Repo program adds
yet another 10 percent starting irs January of 1997.

14

line, and illustrates a dramatic surge in this cross-sectional dispersion during the 94-95 crisis
and the recent global turmoil.21 As a comparison, the thin and thick lines illustrate the path

of the same cross-sectional dispersion measure for Chile, Mexico and Australia. It is
apparent that Chile, and even more so Australia, both countries with deeper financial
markets, exhibited a milder increase in dispersion, suggesting that resource aggregation does
play an important role in limiting the damage caused by crises. Argentina, on the other hand,
has responses closer to those of Mexico, which is consistent with the fact that its financial
markets are also very underdeveloped.22 I will return to these points after reviewing the basic
financial factors in connection to Mexico.

Figure 9: Cross Sectional Variability of Industry Stock Returns
35,00%

30.00%

25.00%

C 20.00%
0
0-

8

0 15.00%

C-

1 0.%

0.00'!,

Q05O 1q0G

$qo

———argsritfr1a——U——auslraPia—.I-—meajco-—e-—-ehjIe

Noter: [ntcrqucmlile range 15%-85% (3-month AlA).
Sorer Data.ctrr rim.

The industries correspond to the stock market subsectors at level of disaggregation 5 of the Datastream classification,
which includes 116 potential entries. For Argentina, Chile, Australia, and Mexico, 26,20,25 and 24 sectors respectivcl
were represented during the period considered. Similar resu]ts were obtained when using different measures of dispersion.
22

There is an important caveat to this figure: Ideally, these comparisons should be made with ex-ante rather than a-post

returns.

15

(iii) Crowding-out (public and private)
One of the main features of financial crises is that funds lose their fungibility. It is no longer
irrelevant where the government gets its funding. Except for extreme cases of lack of fiscal
discipline -- which is not the case of Argentina today -- it is the government that normally
has the most opportunity to access international fmancial markets, so the government

should shift its financing away from domestic markets. International crowding out is

probably not too important as a large share of government's borrowing abroad during crises
comes from international organizations, which are probably more difficult to access directly
by the pnvate sector.23 Conversely, domestic crowding out can be significant. Who buys the

domestic debt, and whether these sources are available to the private sector as well, are
important questions. In particular, does the government facilitate a "flight-to-quality"
process by domestic lenders?

Panel (a) of Figure 10 shows net public borrowing from banks, as a percentage of bank
credit to the private sector. It is apparent from the figure that during the "teqa" crisis the
government turned to the domestic banks for fmancing. Moreover, much of the slow
recovery of private loans was caused by the government's crowding out as it borrowed to

pay back for its "monetary" intervention, and by the sharp consolidation process
experienced by the Argentine -banking

if it can be called such as it is mosdy foreign by now --

sector following the cnsis. During the recent episode, on the other hand, the

government seems to have redirected its fmancing efforts toward the AFJPs, which can now
absorb larger volumes of bonds than they did in 1995.

Figure 10: Argentine Amplification Mechanisms
(a) Nel P,tks Borroer,ng role Dronedic Banks (% oar's Is povale sector)

vfI

)b) Nominal Wage versus Producer Price Inflation

-

aa

0%

a

a

IN5uWPrslsoamPdv,ilaloh

a

a

4

Saucer Pane/ (a) in/crc.'] ruler Jhrns JICR-4, PPJ from INDEC PanscI(h):Mthicly f&anony and INDEC

As external financing tightens for large firms, they too turn to domestic markets as preferred
customers, exacerbating the ongoing "flight—to-quality". The social cost of this strategy,
nonetheless, is that PYMEs generally do not have access to international financial markets,

regardless of price. Along the same lines, there was a reallocation of deposits and loans
within the banking sector toward the larger banks. This probably resulted in a credit crunch
Of course, it would have been better had the government borrowed those resources not to solve its own fiscal
imbalances, but to support a financially distressed private sector.

16

on the clients of smaller banks, which are likely to be biased toward the PYMES, These
two facts combined probably explain why the share of loans made by large banks continued
to rise over the period.24

(iv) Labor market rigidity
While the credit crunch experienced by the Argentine economy during 1995 could probably

not have been averted by a more flexible real wage, it is probably true that in the recent
episode such rigidity enhanced the crisis by generating a "collateral squeeze," reducing the
appeal of the firm's outlook from the point of view of the banks.
Although significant reforms are underway, Argentina has European style labor market
institutions and traditions. Ultimately an inflexible labor market yields costs of labor -- not
all of which come in the form of wages -- that are too slow to adapt to sharp downturns.
While in theory these frictions are mostly real, in practice nominal and real factors are easily
confounded, particularly on the face of rapidly changing nontinal events. Panel (b) of Figure

10 seems to support this nominal-rigidity conclusion by comparing the time series of
producer price and wage inflation. With a little bit of imagination, one can see the priceinflation series as a straight downward sloping line, crossing zero with no difficulty. The
wage-inflation series comes down early on, but then "flattens at zero," Despite the
conventional wisdom on the matter, this decline is not purely due to the sharp decline in
primary goods' prices. Indeed, this description does not require much imagination, but for
the wage-deflation of 1996. However, most of this wage deflation can be explained in terms
of a compositional effect and a few outliers.25 The costs of such rigidities are well-known,
amplifying external shocks by forcing a larger share of adjustment onto real output and
employment.

(v) Real exchange rate inflexibility
The relative rigidity of wages in Argentina during crises underestimates the extent of the
relative rigidity of the Argentine system; especially once one considers that in the presence of
international financial constraints the equilibrium real exchange rate fluctuates more than
otherwise. Much has been said about the advantage of a fully credible exchange rate for the
peso-dollar spread. This is certainly supported by panel (a) of Figure II, which compares the
path of nominal interest rates in Argentina to those In Mexico and Brazil, where most of the
volatility is indeed tied to the uncertainty surrounding the respective currencies. But there is
another side to this: the credibility of the exchange rate also means that the exchange rate is
not expected to adjust in the near future even if doing so would help during the recovery. A
crisis that brings about a perceived overvaluation — for example as a result of devaluation by
neighbors or a large terms-of-trade shock has no hope of a quick remedy. This depresses
effective loan-demand, both for purely neoclassical as well as financial constraint reasons,
The share of loans made by large banks increased from 36 percenr in late i996 to 42 percent at the end of 1997 and 48
percent a year later.
2-I

Outliers not in the sense of measurement error, but in that nomsnal rigidities are not very relevant for sectors in deep
distress and with high turnover rates, e.g. construedon.

17

which may be part of the reason why it is not only the peso-dollar spread that does not rise
as much in Argentina, but also the real interest rate level remains more subdued

Figure 11: Relative Performance: Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico
(SI Inle,t,ank Inbred Raise

I

t*4 I,

.-.--

(b) Indusdal Production (seasonally Hd(LaIGd -- Au 57—1

t&

u_I

1pat.&s —O.snS -----

Sauna: Panel (4: In/er-bank in/elms! rater/ran BCRA, Federa//unds raia /rrnr Dana, Can/pal eki Brgril and inter-hank in/cnn ral&r from Ba/wa tic Matho.
Panel (h) Saunas: IND!IC, Dana-a Cen/nilda J3ra.il Daiwa & Mn-ks.

A simple comparison of interest rates is thus not the proper measure of the relative distress

across economies with different exchange rates systems and degrees of labor market
rigidities as the relation between these rates and the real side of the economy chan,ges across
these systems. Panel (b) shows that despite its better performance in terms of interest rates,
industrial production did not fare well in Argentina, even when compared to Brazil, which
was the regional epicenter of the recent crisis. Perhaps most significantly, while Brazil and

Mexico recover rapidly, Argentina remained trapped in a highly uncertain scenario. The
question arises whether the relative calm during the crisis comes at the cost of a slower
recovery, and whether that was indeed anticipated by economic agents.

The connection between the basic framework and the Argentine experience is not only
apparent for its ingredients and basic outcomes, but also its idiosyncrasies exacerbate the
latter and matter mostly because of the presence of the former. In section IV, I return to the
policy recommendations that follow from Argentina's scenario, once interpreted under the
perspective in section II.

18

111.2 MEXICO

After a rudderless path during much of the 1980s, Mexico started to embrace dramatic
reforms in 1989. Since then, inflation has been dramatically reduced, banks and a wide range

of public corporations were privatized, the land tenure system was modernized, and the
private sector was authorized to participate in infrastructure projects. In addition, the public
deficit vanished and public debt markets were developed, exchange rate controls were
abolished, foreign investment and imports were liberalized, NAFTA was implemented, and
the list goes on. Prompted by the implementation of the Brady plan, these reforms were
welcomed by the international financial community, which supported them with substantial
capital flows. This cooperation found an abrupt end in late 1994, when Mexico was again at
the epicenter of an emerging markets crisis. Even Mexico's relative "success" during the
recent emerging markets crisis surprised most, demonstrating that the fear of yet another
crisis is still present.

Figure 12 documents that while the post-reform period is an improvement from the 1980s

in terms of GDP growth and inflation, it is still far from the stability and overall
performance of the economy during the 1970s and earlier. Moreover, the latter crisis has
made it apparent that Mexico's reforms have not shielded it from aggregate volatility.

Figure 12: Growth and Volatility
(a) GDP Gro,4l, Rain

(b) lSOIalion and Irsornal Rain

I
S

MI.IiiItffl1fLI1
00

10

04

II

II HIi
I

71

IS

iU
00

10

12

14

S
S
ii II

10

No/u: Urcdpnlbninary dada Jor 1998 and jl rod/c/ed ekila fir 1999. iancl (ci,): A
Soune: IFS INI-IGJ and Banco & Me*ico.

ele/neuoe in

12

04

15

00
10
Ml
Mi
On
II 50
II,r.Oa,iD.- l.a.] — Iral.i OS. CII] I
SO

14

90

00

lix Real Euhaore Rule index noean,r ckpenoia/ion,

As with the case of Argentina, there is a parsimonious representation of Mexico's sources of
volatility that rests on the two core factors, although with somewhat different weights and
manifestations. Complicated by and complicating these factors, there are two idiosyncratic
factors that seem relevant in accounting for Mexico's volatility:

• Even though the government's finances are in order, the systematic bailout of
private sector excesses and dependence on oil revenues has createdfiscalfragilitji.

• The lack o/credib.iliy in monetaypoligi has reduced the benefits of nominal exchange
rate fluctuations.
19

Each of these factors is discussed in greater detail below, after illustrating the core factors.

(i) Weak international Imancial links

Panel (a) in Figure 13 illustrates the path of Mexican capital inflows and their close
connection to the business cycle during the 1990s, especially during the "tequila" crisis in
1994-95. As both residents and foreigners became aware of the dollar-illiquidity of the
government and country, confidence vanished and private capital inflows rapidly turned
from an annual inflow well above five percent of GDP into a rapid outflow No country
can withstand such turnaround, and Mexico experienced a deep recession despite the rapid
response of the U.S. and the TMF, illustrated in the panel by the temporary rise in public
capital niflows.

Figure 13: Mexican External Conditions in the 1990s
a) Capilal Inliows

) Change in trade Balance Due In TOT

a _________________

:Is
'see

lC

leer

Ilfl

1101

1594

lISS

11w

laIr

ri

lSSSlOClSSlllSSlOSJl10dlssslssOlesTl 995

1500

i.__ •P_
No/er: Panel (a): Pub/it rector caf ifalj/osie rnc/u&.çgencralolrrnment and monetary ant/ant//es, ext/we/in1 rr.renec and or hi/rd

Pr/c ate icc/or conoy5ondr to

tntalcapeta/Jtoiorminar)wh/ici-ector Facet (bj reec ca/cu/a/ed we/cr Un/ri//ow/ni cr/a/toni dP/P.7 - awdP,,,/P,.,,, is/mr a = P,,c,Ml//&rcXf I
Sower: IFS ccsrptpanel'h,): EMBI-l-JP-Morran Emergio.rAiarkete Iiondrlndcxfmm Va/ar/cram.

Panel

(b) plots the impact of terms of trade changes as a fraction of total exports. Since
volatile oil represents a large share of its exports, Mexico experiences large terms of trade
shocks. It is apparent, nonetheless, that it is not a terms-of-trade shock that negatively
affected Mexico at the end of 1994, and that Mexico's good relative performance during the
recent global cnses is despite the weak terms of trade it faced.2' While terms-of-trade shocks
are an ongoing source of concern, particularly because they may be leveraged and trigger a
tightening in international financial constraints, they do not seem to have been the main
factor during the post-reform period volatility.
26 Ii is certainly inaccurate to blame foreigners exclusively for the outflows. See, e.g., Garber (1998) for a discussion of the

role of domesdc banks' off-balance sheet activities before the 1994/95 crisis. These activities "inflated" capital inflows
before the crisis and automatically reversed them after the crisis.
27 Much has been said about the positive role the U.S. expansion had in insulating Mexico from a large share of the recent
global turmoil. By the same token, it seems unreasonable to solely blame Mexico for its pour growth performance —
particularly on its exports -- during the early 1990s since the U.S. was not growing much either.

20

There is further evidence of weak Mexican links to international markets through an inverted
volatility ranking of Mexican equity indicies and a volatility premium for its sovereign debt.
Similar to the case of Argentina above, the variance of stock market returns for prime firms

is much larger, especially during financial crises, than the variance of the total market.
Mexican sovereign bonds also on average paid a premium of more than 50 basis points and
had more twice the time-series return variance relative to U.S. corporate bonds of equivalent
credit rating.25 Each of these points is suggestive of international financial constraints.

(ii) Underdeveloped domestic financial markets
Figure 7 above illustrated that Mexico also has "level problems." Regardless of how it is
measured, and despite significant improvements over the last decade, Mexico's financial
markets and level of fmancial intermediation are sub-standard relative to OECD countries
and leading countries within the region.

But the levels in the figure hide important dynamic and cyclical aspects of Mexico's financial
markets, and banks in particular. After a period of severe financial repression in the 1980s,
banks were privatized and the government turned to a newly created domestic debt market
for its financial needs, making way for a sharp credit boom in the early 1990s. Not only does
panel (a) of Figure 14 illustrate this boom, but it is clear that the subsequent contraction in
loans actually led the contraction in deposits, unlike the case of Argentina. This decline was
largely driven by a decline in new loans that imploded early on during the crisis, especially as

the currency depreciated sharply and pulled the already weak balance sheets of Mexican
banks with it. There is no doubt that the severe credit crunch significantly leveraged the
"tequila" cnsis and that the collapse in the banking system will impose costs on the economy
and the public accounts for many years to come.

-

Figure 14: Mexican Amplification Mechanisms
(a) Rank Low,s end Doç,ds

ego

1091

laag

log'

a,.

196

(b} Tolal Sal Public DebI (Average)

I9G

lee'

1090

1099

peeaat7-cu iii
(Voles: Panel (a): Law.'- crinr.spandto hank. intEl/a Ifte pth-afr .rri/or mb/k ekpau/c wn the rum oJ demand, fine and sailer r ekparlf.r
Souurer: IFS, Bano ek Me\1CO

See Caballero (1999c) for the details of this anaLysis and further discussion:

21

But was it the banks' reckless behavior that caused the crisis, or were the banks victims of
the crisis itself? The majority of opinions are supportive of the former, which probably
means that there is plenty of truth behind it. On the other hand, the consensus view has
been influenced by the outcome: ex-post the loans did not perform hence they must have
been bad loans.29 There is a point to be made in "defense" of the Mexican banks. At least
from the perspective of a sample of large Mexican firms available in Datastream, banks'
lending seems to have been directed to firms that were perceived to be profitable .by the

stock market as measured by price-earnings ratios at the end of 1992. There is clear
evidence that firms with higher initial P/E ratios were at the receiving end of the 1992-1994
credit boom.3°

If not only misbehavior and corruption, what else? After a period of deep financial
repression during the 80s, banks were privatized at the same time that the economy was
undergoing a deep structural reform. The first ingredient -- the history of financial
repression -- is bad because after years of lending to the public sector there was litde
expertise on the analysis of credit-risk, Banks substituted for this lack of knowledge by
requiring collateral, mostly in the form of real estate, a great idea in the case of idiosyncratic
shocks but not when these are aggregate.3t The second ingredient — deep restructuring -- is
always bad for banks, especially for existing loans that cannot adjust their risk premium,
because their gains are limited on the winners side while they take a large share of the losses
of those secrors and firms that are on the destruction end of the creative-destruction
process.32 Moreover, this process and the problems it generates may have been worsened by

the difficulties faced by the expanding side of the economy as growth in the U.S. was
subdued at best through much of the late 80s and early 90s?3

As with Argentina above, the consequences of underdeveloped domestic financial markets

are ultimately reflected in the economy's failure to reallocate resources in an expedient
manner, especially at times of crises. Evidence presented on the time series of dispersion for
' of course, this is not to deny that Mexican banks were vulnerable and had already shown an increasing trend of nonperforming loans before the crisis.

Sec Caballero (1999c) for the details of this analysis and more discussion. Finns with P/E ratios greater than 11 at the
end of 1992 more than doubled their debt over the next three years while firms with PIE ratios less than 11 increase their
debt by less than 50 percent.
31 The proportion of loans over 20 million pesos that were collateralized right after the crisis is around 7O/o of the total for
most banks. Gelos and Werner (1999) document that banks' use of collateral increased after privatiaarion.
32

This is a statement about a transitional surge in restructuring, nor about a steady-state relation between restructuring and
banks' performance.
33 In the literature, the latter factor seems to have been underplayed relative to the exchange fate overvaluation argument as
an explanation of depressed growth in Mexico. The overvaluation, the argument goes, was primarily due to exchange rate
based srabilisation program. An alternative --or at least complementary-- interpretation, especially for those years well after

the initial adjustment to the stabiliaation program, is that the 'overvaluation" was an equilibrium consequence of the
massive credit inflows largely made possible by the low U.S. interest rates. Of course, when these flows turned around
abruptly, the exchange rate became overvalued.

22

industry cross-sectional stock market returns presented above in Figure 9 confirms this
hypothesis. Both Mexico and Argentina had similar increases in cross-section dispersion of
stock market returns relative to Australia and Chile, which have more developed financial
markets.

(iii) Fiscal fragility
Mexico's fiscal discipline is not, at least directly, at the heart of its volatility. More often, than

not, the public sector has been the residual claimant of its private sector's imbalances.
Moreover, Mexico exhibited a consistent primary surplus over the post-reform period, often
to match the significant interest payments on the existing stock of public debt. It is panel (b)
of Figure 14 that best hints at a fragility problem, describing a steady and fairly dramatic

decline in both external and domestic debts throughout the period, abruptly interrupted
during the 94-95 crisis, when the government had to once again fetch new resources from
abroad to bailout a distressed banking system.

While many have argued that it is this systematic bailout practice which is responsible for
some of the private sector "excesses," I believe that the importance of this form of moral
hazard, while significant, is often vastly exaggerated. Regardless of whether this is the case or
not, the bailout practice does have another negative side: It raises the specter of fiscal
fragility even when the official accounts look fine. A sudden burst in the government's
financial needs and illiquidity is always around the corner, which means both real and
nominal interest rates are ready to jump at any sign of distress anywhere in the economy,
which in turn creates further distress. This feature probably compounded with the large
dollar-amortizations coming due on early 1995 to trigger the crisis.
Moreover, the sharp rise in interest rates that followed the devaluation and crisis was just the
last chapter of the pressure building during the previous months. This increased pressure is
reflected in the sharp reserve losses as well as in the shift in public financing away from
peso-denominated CETES and Ajustabonos, toward cheaper short-term dollar-denominated

Tesobonos. Perhaps more relevant to the point being made here is the sharp response of
domestic interest rates during the recent emerging-market crises, despite the fact that the
fiscal and external accounts looked healthy.

Regardless of whether the crisis materializes or not, these increases in interest rates put
enormous pressure on fiscal targets, which often triggers offsetting contractionary forces on
the primary surplus side. While the growth rate of interest payments was negative from
1989-1994 as Mexico reduced its debt, the "tequila" crisis caused interest payment to grow
by more than 80 percent in 1993. Low to negative growth in interest payments since was
rudely interrupted in 1999 by a 20 increase caused largely by the previous Russian financial
crisis. Furthermore, these flows are probably an underestimate of the present value
consequences of a period of high rates, as not all debt is contracted at variable rates.
Volatility in oil prices also has significant impact on the Mexican fiscal position. The growth

rate of oil revenue turned from a 1990s peak of more than 15 percent in 1996 to

23

contractions of 20 percent contraction 1998 and 10 percent in 1999? The absence of a
stabilization fund or significant insurance makes these shocks equally harmful.

The fiscal fragility problem is particularly clear once one looks for metrics for its public debt
other than GDP. Figure 15 compares the situation of Mexico to that of Chile and the US.,
two countries whose fiscal situation is not perceived as problematic?5 The first bar shows
that in terms of their respective GDPs, Mexico's public debt situation is far from critical. It
looks substantially worse once norma1Eed by fiscal revenue, but so does that of the U.S. The
real difference, however, starts arismg when that debt is compared to the size of domestic

financial markets, here indexed by claims on the non-financial private sector. The size of
Mexico's public debt is large relative to its minute financial markets. And it looks its worst
when multiplied by the volatility of fiscal revenue, which captures the speed at which fiscal
conditions may deteriorate.3

Figure 15: The Fragility of Mexico's Public Debt

2.0

1.5

I .0

Chile

n.hLp0p flp.iII.V.M.

M.xico
•fl•bULe•e•t, Pd?

oe,

U.S.
1D.bsL..,.I.

I

No/c: .4//data an/nm 7997. Rnesssee inhilibty is ca/aehild wing rra/g,rwflh ta/cs aodnormabrcrrim asrnegc Jva&ilikb seer
stun/nec.

Swine: J/::ç and Banso &

Mi'*o.

(iv) Credibility of monetary policy
The conduct of monetary policy in emerging economies is extremely difficult, not only being
subject to many political pressures, but also constrained by the fragility of its financial system

and the large fluctuations in the demand for local assets. During the early stages of the
"fixed" exchange rate system, monetary policy was continuously tight in a fruitless attempt
to sterili2e massive capital inflows as foreign reserves accumulated rapidly and the real
N Statistics reported by SHCP (Ministry of Finance), INEGI, and Banco de Mexico

3 Although in the case of Chile, one should add the outstanding debt of the Central Bank, which amounts to ab out 25
percent of its GDP.
And this is an underestimate since expenditures (whcn including those below the line) are much mote volatile in Mexico
as we11, as a result of the recurrent bailouts.

24

exchange rate appreciated steadily. By 1994 the opposite, and much harder fight, took place.
As the international perception of the health of the Mexican economy began to change and
the U.S. tightened credit, panel (a) of Figure 16 illustrates that the Bank of Mexico chose to
keep interest rates low, worried about the health if its banks. The result was a massive loss of
reserves and confidence, matched by further expansion in domestic credit to support the
banking system, and eventually a collapse of the exchange rate system at the end of the year.
Banks' balance sheets collapsed, leveraging the recession and depositing on the government
a large amount of future commitments.

Figure 16: Monetary Policy in Mexico

flH
(a) Moesisal hinresi Rains: Mnaho vs US.

'a
no

So

S

'go
25

(b) Non,(esaI Exchange Rales

°. !: ,1I1117
55oaJTrarSWo erir,. Mn

O

VT

en. i. JO e. a cx

Jo ih I€joiAie

V7•J1

HAmenoa.wsj

SooIrrc: INEGI asd Bancn do Mexico.

Without the fundamentals, and perhaps with no good reason to commit to an exchange rate,

Mexico has adopted an almost free float. And float it did as emerging markets felt the
pressure during the recent crises. It is useful to compare the experience of Mexico to
Argentina, a country with a much stronger exchange rate and monetary commitments. It is
apparent from panel (b) that the exchange rate moved substantially during the recent
emerging market crises and a large component of it was reflected in inflation. Interest rates
also rose sharply, mostly reflecting the rise in actual and expected inflation. Nothing similar
was observed in Argentina, although the latter suffered much more dearly on the real side.

While the float and the good health of the U.S. economy seem to have served Mexico well
during the recent round of international crises, lack of monetary credibility had its toll both
on interest rates and inflation. Table 1 compares the experience of Mexico to that of more

advanced economies with flexible exchange rate systems: Australia and Canada. It is
apparent from the figure that while all these countries experienced large and comparable
nominal depreciations during this period, Mexico had much less to show for it in terms of a
real devaluation. Rather mechanically, one can interpret this in terms of a very high passthrough. My view is that the problem results from a lack of a credible monetary anchor that
drives both the exchange rate and domestic inflation up at the first sight of trouble. Thus
Mexico gets some of the real exchange rate depreciation it needs, but it also gets a rise in
expected inflation thar limits the Central Bank's chances to support the market-desired real
exchange rate adjustment.

25

Table 1: Relative Performance: Australia, Canada, and Mexico
Asia

Russia

Boih

Australia

17.33

-0.07

17.25

Canada

4.47

6.60

11.36

Mexico

10.71

15.76

28.15

Australia

17.46

-0.07

17.38

Canada

4.94

7.09

12.38

Mexico

0.04

7.67

7.72

A. Nominal Depreciation

B. Real Depreciation

C. Ratio of Real to Nominal Depreciation
Australia

1.01

1.11

1.01

Canada

1.10

1.08

1.09

Mexico

0.00

0.49

0.27

NokcJanuay i997 is the hare year in each panel. Nominal exchan<ge rake air irkathe to cix [Jo/ted S/alec Real exchange rates air cowlncctedx'hg the
CraergmerP,ele Index and air pr/a/in/i/he
StaRr: Aria incliede.c lix def redalianfinin 7:3 1098:2 while Rae cs/a incl,edc,r ckprreiaiiena/mm 98:2 Ii
98.4. Data air/mm the IFS.

Once again, the evidence on the presence of the core volatility factors is also present in the
case of Mexico. Moreover, the fiscal and monetary instability are closely tied to these
weaknesses as well. In section IV I return to the policy implications of the Mexican scenario.

26

111.3 CHILE
In many respects, Chile is a prototype for Latin America's next economic stage. An early

reformer, Chile has left behind the most traditional macroeconomic maladies of the
emerging world. It has made significant progress in its regulatory and supervisory
framework and, at umes, has been a leader beyond the Latin American boundaries in
allowing private sector co-participation in a wide array of ex-public sector activities. Despite

these important advances and a decade of stellar performance, last year's sharp recession
clearly indicates that significant volatility remains present in the Chilean economy.

The success of the post-86 period, occasionally referred as the "Chilean miracle," is apparent

from the increase in average GDP growth illustrated in panel (a) of Figure 17. Panel (b)
describes a steady decline in inflation, which was never fully tamed before the debt crisis.
Real volatility has not vanished, nonetheless, a phenomenon expressed most dramatically
during last year's recession and in the occasional surge in real interest rates.

Figure 17: Chilean Growth and Volatility
(C) GDP Growth Halo

(b) Inflalior, and lrdereso Rate

I.

flflnfl

Ncte.r:pninthoary data etcedjer / 998 and prwliaed data für 1999. Panel (a): For the 1982.85, the arerage rule rjirowth ous 2.1%, izthlk from /976/c 1981
andfrvm 1986 In 1999 orru 6.8%.

Jrilcrrr: ThE and Dance Go/nil ek Gil/C.

In a sense, and despite its greater development, aggregate volatility in Chile is best explained
by the aforementioned core weaknesses. While Chile's greater financial development means

that neither of these core ingredients are as binding as in Mexico and Argentina, the
implementation of monetary policy becomes exceptionally difficult. Thus, additional but
very related volatility factors are:
• The mandate —or its interpretation-- of the Central ban/c has amplified recent external financial
shocks, creating large volatility in real interest rates.

• I/liquid domestic financial markets have exacerbated the impact and standard roughness of
monetary policy.

The next subsections elaborate in more detail on how these structural factors contribute to
Chilean volatility.

27

(i) Weak links to international financial markets
Figure 18: Chilean Excess Sensitivity to Copper Prices

{ Peai —th€d 5 raTTh S sat Sicada

(b) Auslrasa GDP Growth and Coal Price

C
C

a

a
C

2
'5

0

€5

tw ac lac ac ac ac ac ac ac isa ,ac ac ac
lr.4,ifra,nsal pi,iei

law iean las lSfl€ less 1551 lass ,s,al,wrsasasaslasn, sea
[apr easels Ret, —CJ Palsc I

Sohirrrs: grnaaJhj%m IFS, copperpine.i icondon 3kb! Exc/xrn) tram Dalcachwam. copper e4orls firmn Mm. de 1-lacienda.

Aside from the small size of its current account deficit relative to a neoclassical benchmark, a
cleat manifestation of weak — actual or perceived -- international financial links, there is a
strikingly strong relation between the Chilean business cycle and the price of its main export

product.37 At the heart of the problem is a close time-senes correlation between the spot
price of copper and quarterly GDP growth, violating basic principles of smoothing through
international financial markets. Panel (a) of Figure 18 documents the excessive sensitivity of
Chile's GDP response to copper prices by plotting, together with the rate of growth of
GDP, the annuity value of the expected present value impact of the decline in copper prices,
as a share of GDp.35 It is apparent from this figure (the different scales on the axes, in
particular) that fluctuations in GDP are an order of magnitude larger than a smoothing
model would dictate.39

37 During the late 90s, Copper exports accounted for about 40 percent of Chilean exports, which is equivalent to about 9
percent of its GDP. Chile has a Copper stabilization fund (FEC) aimed primarily at stabilizing fiscal revenues: At the
beginning of each year the Budget Office sets a "reference" price; withdrawals ot deposits are made quarterly as a stepfunction of the deviation between actual and reference pflces. In practice, the largest yearly net deposit to the fund occurred
in 1995 and amounted to 5% percent of fiscal revenues, when the price of copper exceeded by 22% its average in the
1985/99 period. The largest yearly net withdrawal occurred in 1998 and amounted to around l.5%percent of revenue when
the copper ptice was SG°/s below the average.

3 The present value effect is computed assuming an AR(4) process for the spot pricc of copper, a constant growth rate for
copper production (7°/o) and a fixed discount rate (7.5°/c).
The price of coppcr has trends and cycles at different frequencies, some of which are persistent (see Marshall and Silva
1998). But there scems to be no doubt that the sharp decline in the price of copper during the curtent crisis was mostly the
result of a transitory demand shock brought about by the Asian crisis. As thc latter economies have begun recovcring, so
has the price of copper. I would argue that conditional on the information that the current shock was a transitory demand
shock, the univariate process used to estimate the present value impact of the decline in the price of copper in figure 3,
overestimates the extent of this decline. The tower decline in future prices is consistent with this view. The variance of the
spot price is 6 times the variance of 15-months-ahead future prices. Moreovcr, the expectations computed from the AR

process track reasonably well the expectations implicit in future markets but at the very end, when liquidity pretnia
considerations ma)' have come into play.

28

Panel (b) offers a cross-sectional dimension to the excess-sensitivity problem, reporting the

paths of GDP growth and the price of their primary export for Australia. While more
advanced than Chile, Australia also has its exports concentrated on a few commodities° It is

apparent from this figure that Australia does not experience nearly as much correlation
between the price of their primary exports and its respective rates of growth as Chile does,
further emphasizing the "excessive" nature of Chile's response to copper prices1

Figure 19: Chilean External Conditions
(a) Balarna 5 Payments and copper Ptica

(A) Conan) Accoun) Defid)

lEa

lit

ix

I'

a

A

S

09

rIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIISI
9ff

IWA7 laM IOM lOst

Ao.o9 £000104
— C001 fanoos —CoepyAo.i
___________________

091

IOnS 1003 1004

CA 000th Ma

1005 1096 097 IOM 1000

C5. DaFn)I

Sounr IN/i and Banns Onlndrk (]/i//c Paid (b): Latin is atcr4gc of Arcntina, Bra z1 Mexito and l/ineçsek iptrads on Brady bonds ins vsrdyn dr/il For
6/ilk .prnad on rnp orals sb/il (linsrsi.çi

Why does Chilean economic activity respond so strongly to the price of copper? In my view,
the fundamental problem is one of weak links to international financial. Panel (a) in Figure

19 demonstrates that unlike what one would expect form standard smoothing arguments,
there is a clear positive correlation between the cunent account deficit, capital flows, and the

puce of copper. The "tequila" crisis of 1995 appears to be the exception that proves the
rule, as the high copper price gave the Chilean economy enough "liquidity" to ride the crisis

and experience fast domestic growth despite the large international credit crunch
experienced by emerging economies.4 Most importantly, exactly the opposite occurred
during the recent crisis as the price of copper plummeted, erasing Chile's liquidity at the
precise time that international financial markets tightened.

Finally, there is evidence of an inverted volatility ranking in Chile as in the other two
countries above, again consistent with a hypothesis that foreign investors focus their trading
on prime firm equities. The variance of returns for stocks listed in the IGPA is much greater

° For Australia, Coal represents a bit more than 10 percent of exports and together with wheat and wool, this share rises to
around 20 percent. Australian terms of trade was severely hurt by the sequel of crises starting in mid 1997,

41 Sce Caballero (1999b) for more discussion. Norway also has similar export diversification and also appeared to have
output less sensitive to terms of trade shocks.
42

Capital flows were high matching the high copper price, but the current account was not. The other exception reflects a
domestically induced recession, as it resultcd from the monetary tightening implemented at the beginning of the ncw
government to offset the inflationary pressures of the preceding political cycle. Capital flows remained high but ultimately
led to the accumulation of international reserves rather than financing a current account deficit

29

than that of the total market, so it is these stocks that reflect large swings in capital flows.
This hypothesis is supported by the fact that most of the disparity in volatility arose during
the recent recession, which Figures 18 and 19 show is clearly related to external financial
factors.

(ii) Underdeveloped domestic fmancial markets
While a leader in the region, Chile still has only limited development of its fmancial markets.

The domestic corporate bonds marker is negligible, and the equity market, while large in
terms of capitalization ratio, is both selective and fairly illiquid. Bank dependence is large,
especially for small firms, which amplifies other shocks.43 When banks squeeze, firms have
few other sources of funding.
Limited financial development is reflected even in places where one would not expect to
find it, as is the case of the stock market. While the dark bats of panel (a) of Figure 20 show
that the Chilean stock market has world-level capitalization values, the light bars in the panel
describe a very substandard turnover ratio.44 Panel (b) reinforces the concern about the
ability of the Chilean financial system to handle abrupt changes in the demand for its
services. The figure reports the results of runnmg a simple regression of the absolute value

of daily price changes (a measure of volatility) on the change in the fraction of total
capitalization traded. Literally mterpreted, it reveals that on average an increase in the
volume traded, in terms of total capitalization value, is associated to an increase in price
volatility that is about ten times larger in Chile than in more developed economies.

Figure 20: Chilean Stock Market flliquidity
a) A,yeniiia, B,azil, Chile, and Mexico

{b) I5Fquity

flea'
CSaa

.h,

No/er: (/1) IIkqwidiy mraswrrd the coefficient of 'the rrqri'.rien of rk4 a/trohtt tether price cIxJw.r on daily volume met market cap itaEç'alion.
Sourrn: (a): Banco Greet pal de Us'k Stock market ce4'ita1iation in % of GD?, jumo,rranet ii ineoceroter market capitrthç,at;on (ía %). (e) Data.rt,ram

ylobalinthin. Peñod 1/90-9/9.

These features need not be a problem for, as many European economies have demonstrated, banks credit can do most of
the job. But this seems less likely to be the case in a scenario 'here banks are often subject to credit cmnches.

'" While excessive churn can be wasteful, it is highly unlikely that Chile's depressed levels are enough to support a solid
infrastructure of market-makers, able to provide optimal levels of immediacy and liquidity. Moreover, one could argue that
the wastes associated with normal churn are a cost worth paying to reduce the extent of systemic liquidity crises when these
arise.

30

Why are Chilean equity markets so illiquid? The first component is the high concentration
ratio of ownership. In an average top-lO traded Chilean company, over 45 percent of the
shares are held by the top 3 shareholders (excluding the government), as compared with a
much lower percentage for economies like the U.S. (20%), the U.K. (19%), Australia (28%)
or Japan (18°/). As for the rest, a large share is held by the AFPs, with a still limited role
for other institutional investors. The assets of Chilean pension funds account for more than
25 percent of Chile's capitalization, more than twice the assets of all other institutional
investors combined. While there ate many benefits associated with the sound practices of
AFPs for the development of good corporate governance and the stock market itself, they
do not help with turnover and in attracting liquidity providers, since they also tend to buyand-hold rather than churn assets.

This problem was further compounded in the recent episode when limits on the AFP's
investments abroad were relaxed in mid-1997, right before the onset of a sequence of crises.
While it is certainly reasonable to argue, at least in partial equilibrium, that such measures
helped the AFPs and its members, it came at the worst of times from the point of view of
domestic liquidity provision as the pensions indeed used this new margin actively throughout

the crisis.
The consequences of underdeveloped domestic financial markets again are ultimately
reflected in the economy's failure to reallocate resources in an expedient manner, especially
at times of crises. Figure 9 above represented the path of a measure of the cross-sectional
dispersion of the stock market returns for a group of approximately 24 Chilean industries.
While Chile fares better than other regional economies, represented by Argentina here, it

does not have the stability of more developed economies, as represented by Australia
(iii) Monetary policy shocks

Figure 21: Chilean Targets and Policies
(b) Real lraaresl Rate arai Soversgn Risk Spreads

(a) Ncanjnal Exchange Rate are Daed

IR

riW - - - ssRe...Lfl2seaMJ
Hrt..eaaraLe
Uced j5rrb>ninary data/sr 1998 and predi c/ed data for /999.
.Iourre.c Barns Central di Chile and Misiqe 'is di flacdinc.&,

ta(eet aMa staeM —sea.ie, spr..s —,e.xenterq xatxe4

NO/CS:

See La Porta et al. (1997).

' This i8 a remark about the th-ning, not the long run consequences and adequacy of the measure.

31

The mandate ---or the interpretation given to it by its authorities--- of the Central Bank of
Chile has two basic components: to meet a declining inflation target and to prevent the
current account deficit at the "normal" terms of trade from going too much beyond four
percent. Under this mandate, the current scenario represented the Central Banks's "worst
mghtmare." Panel (b) in Figure 17 above illustrated the path of inflation, which closely
followed targets until the late 1990s. The failure to meet targets at the end of 1997 and
through most of 1998 is largely explained by the pressure that tighter external conditions and
a decline in the terms of trade began having on the exchange rate, illustrated in panel (a) of
Figure 21 While low inflation on the tradeables component of CPI had been essential in
bringing inflation down through the I 990s, this contribution subsided due following the
Asian crisis. The sharp decline in terms of trade put pressure on the peso, and hence on
inflation, and directly worsened the current account via its income effect.

The Central Bank's situation was further complicated by a sequel of attacks on the peso,
which reached its apex during the Russian cnsis. Largely constrained by its mandate
discussed above, the Central Bank responded to the attack with a sharp hike in domestic
short-term interest rates, well above the increase in the country's risk spread. Panel (b)
illustrates that the sharp use of interest rates made Chile an outlier when compared to other
more advanced economies that were affected by the recent turmoil through more or less
similar mechanisms, although to a lesser extent.

(iv) Monetary policy without mufflers: illiguid financial markets
The large fluctuations in the Chilean nominal interest rates have significant consequences for
its real side. Why might interest rate volatility affect Chile more than other Latin American
countries? A plausible story for a larger Chilean responsiveness to interest rates, may have to
do with financial development. As Figure 7 above demonstrated, Chile's degree of financial

development seems closer to that of more advanced economies than to that of the rest of
Latin America. While financial development is undoubtedly a positive feature in that it
facilitates an adequate reallocation of resources, it also builds the leverage for a larger impact
of an interest rate hike. Evidence on this point is illustrated in Panel (a) of Figure 22, which
shows the paths of the relation between the output gap, measured as the deviation of output
from a determistic trend, and the ex-post real interest rates multiplied by the average ratio

ratio of loans to GDP.47 This is done for Chile, Mexico, representing a country with less
developed financial markets, as well as Australia and Norway. It is apparent that not only are
Chile's interest rates very volatile, but that its output-gap moves more for a given change in
interest rates than in any of the other countries. When looking at the real interest rate
unscaled by financial depth, the basic message remains unchanged: Chile has both a relatively
volatile interest rate and output, and these are distinctly negatively correlated

'

While in principle only the real interest rate should matter, in practice there are several factors that justify plotting the
relationship with respect to nominal interest rates as well. For example, a sudden rise in the flow payment associated to a
sharp increase in the nominal rate may induce financial distress on a constrained finn.

32

Figure 22: More Chilean Amplification Mechanisms
a) Real loIe,e Rale'Loans vs. Output Gap

Ib) Excess reeeoes xl the liriancial eyoten, (% ol deposits)

a.'
3%

-it

-I
0%

Ps lMat FuIsLoaxOOP

Nv/eiv t& in/c rrr/ pair ic/Is kndin rairpah/i cIted hy i/s fF5.

Sount: Baina Ccxu/rai c/c C/J/k.

Thus, while Chile has mote fmancial depth than others in the region, this also makes the
system vulnerable to large interest rate hike, This is particularly relevant as illiquid financial
markets make the banks the almost exclusive source of funds, and these are also affected by
thin financial markets. It appears that Chile does not have many good ways to muffle the
direct and rough impact of monetary policy. The first important point to make is that the
daily volatility of the changes in the Chilean inter-bank market rate appears relatively large —
50 percent larger than Mexico, 3 times as large as Argentina, and more than 10 times the size
of Austraha, Norway, and the United States. While there are several institutional factors that
difficult the comparison of very short term interest rate data across countries, it is probably

the case that such volatility reflects the illiquidity of that market. Panel (b) highlights the
sharp liquidity-droughts (measured by average excess reserves) that took place when the
Chilean peso was attacked, particularly during the first and third quarters of 1998, as well as
the prudence exhibited by the banks after the episode.
In response, banks squeeze borrowers. Panel (a) in Figure 23 portrays the path of net deposit

and loan flows, measured as the rate of change in these variables minus their respective
interest rates. It is apparent that hikes in interest rates are soon followed by credit crunches8
As always, the firms most directly affected by credit crunches are the PYMES. In the case of
Chile perhaps there is an additional twist. As the perception that the cnsis had passed and
that the contraction was more severe than expected began to emerge, interest rates were

lowered sharply, so much that large firms may have found it advantageous to turn to
domestic financial markets to obtain flnancmg which was still difficult abroad. Panel (b)
shows approximate measures of the cost of borrowing abroad (U.S. prime rate, plus a
measure of the international spread on Chilean corporate debt, plus two different measures
of the peso's real devaluation) versus the cost of doing so from domestic banks, for a prime
Chilean firm. It is apparent that while before the crisis borrowing abroad was probably much

Banks have also played a more indirect but significant role in the initial rise in interest rates, as they seem to have been
one of the main forces behind the "attack" on the Chilean peso during 1998. Although there is no public information on
the subject, the presumption is that they do so not for speculative reasons, but to bridge currency mismatches. If the latter
is indeed the case, the appropriate response by the Central Bank should have been not to hike interest rates but to "rent"
the reserves to the banks (more on this in the policy section). Decentralizing reserves holdings, while markets can still do it,
seems to be a reasonable component of an efficient international liquidity management arrangement.

33

cheaper for these flxms, especially given the real appreciation of the peso, the opposite holds
after the crisis.49

Figure 23: Chile's Credit Crunch and Crowding Out
(b) Coal of Borrooaig

(a) Loara ard deposits en,ctiv groe.als (8 mcolhs MA(

_____

EEiEIIIIEEIIEII:IIIiEIII1
t

H'a.5 —

C

bs. S.o.p,. -

—
________________
No/cc: Panel (a): I/ic V/cc/itt growth rate i.r a mca.oar oJnclfinancia/J/awe. i/ti compiled as I/ic rate slArcoeth tlhe nominal clock mimer the nominal in/civil
rn/c, (h) The domed/c interrcl rate corre.pondcio theJmancial.9.clemasvra,e rate/or/cans en/h maIuriy POle, 365 days ad/us/able in "un/dad dc/omen/c"

(UP). The .eo2rrren .tprradie the cat o/ hoovozzosgg abroad oja prime company (Hnerrir) minter the [75 'fl'ra.eury B/il The terms ?thet "and &detye,)
corn qamd In the annuc.diredmonlk4 era1 dettth,a/ion and year /0 year era! deralualion, et.pec/tre(y. Snwcr: Banas Crn'elrct4 Mt,eicterss de Hacienda, and Federal
Resent.

Sante.,: ABlE. [/3/f.; and Minis/cob tIe Hacienda.

experience over the last decade illustrates that successfully tackling traditional
macroeconomic maladies is certainly not enough to tame real volatility. Moreover, the
Chile's

increase in leverage associated with financial development and mandate of the central bank
appear to have amplified the effects external shocks, themselves important only because of
the continued presence of core deficiencies. The policy lessons from Chile's experience are
described below in Section IV.

With rime, if the situation persists, probably local banks will borrow abroad to lend to the PYMEs. But in the short run,
given uncertainty and the conservative attitude of banks, this mechanism ii limited. In fact, one may think of the crowding
out mechanism in reverse: its is the sharp increase in the banks' appetite for quality that lowers the equilibrium rate and
exacerbates the rauoning mechanism.

34

IV. MAIN LESSONS
IV.1 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM
Latin American economies are weak along two central dimensions: links with international
financial markets and developmcnt of domestic financial markets. As most
five forms
of macroeconomic volatility lose their importance as a result of reforms and regained fiscal
and monetary discipline, it is these two ingredients, either directly or by leveraging a variety
of standard shocks, that probably account for much of fluctuations and crises in modern
Latin America. While conventional advice for conventional maladies remain, focusing on
these two primitive and ingrained features offers a clear and potentially rewarding policy
target.

Weak links to mternational financial markets are simply financial constraints, possibly time-

varying, that limit the public and private international borrowing of emerging countries.
These constraints limit the smoothing of shocks over time and are themselves a source of
shocks. The small size of Latin American current account deficits relative to a neoclassical

benchmark and the pro-cyclical behavior of fiscal policy suggest the presence of an
international borrowing constraint. Large swings in capital flows and sovereign spreads that
seem to bear little relation — at least in terms of magnitude —- to economic fundamentals in
Mexico and Argentina illustrate the fragility of this constraint. The crowding out of small
firms by the government in Argentina and by large firms in Chile in hand with the inverted

volatility ranking of Latin America's prime firm equity markets illustrate some of the
mechanisms through which external fmancial shocks affect the private sector. Excessive
sensitivity of the Chilean economy to the price of copper and the "volatility" premium on
Mexican and Argentine corporate debt issues further support the fragility of these links.

Turning to the second ingredient, financial markets not only are key in fostering investment
and growth, but also in allowing adequate aggregation of resources during distress. In the
presence of weak international links, financial development affects an emerging economy's
abthtv and incetive to aggregate its international collateral in order to intermediate funds to
firms in need of international liquidity. The level problems discussed above in Mexico and
Argentina as well as the illiquidity of Chilean stocks illustrate that Latin American financial
markets still require further development. On the other hand, as financial development rises
so does leverage, and with it the vulnerability of the system to shocks also increases. While
Mexico 94-95 offered an extreme example of this, the excessive sensitivity of the relatively
more financially-developed Chilean economy to changes in interest rates is also supportive
of this hypothesis.

Underdeveloped financial markets ultimately limit the prompt reallocation of resources,
creating wasteful contractions in those markets most affected by shocks or less plugged into
the financial system. The negative correlation between financial development and crosssectional dispersion in mdustry stock returns discussed in each of the three cases is evidence

35

that the development of financial markets is an important factor in explaining aggregate
volatility.

IV.2 STRUCTURAL SOLUTIONS: THE LONG RUN
Dealing with these weaknesses requires two type of policies: First, structural policies aimed
at deepening domestic financial markets and foreign participation in them. Second, policies
aimed at dealing with and preventing crises during the transition toward a sounder financial

system. I briefly discuss the first type of policies in this subsection, to then focus more
extensively on the latter policies in the next subsection.
There are three basic and general points to be made here:

1) Aim nght There is currently a widespread consensus on a series of general
recommendations to improve external fmancial links, which can be found in most
"international financial architecture" pamphlets. These recommendations include norms
of transparency and accountability; banks' sound practices for supervision, settlement,
accounting and disclosure; aggregate risk management; and a series of related measures
and practices aimed at improving a country's contractual environment and corporate
governance.
2) Use the ptvate sector. Fostering the development of well-supervised institutional investors
is an efficient mechanism to delegate the enforcement of good corporate governance
standards to the private sector, as these institutions often consider such factors in their

investment decisions. For example, TIAA-CREF, one of the largest institutional
investors in the U.S. has made pubhc that it simply does not invest in claims issued by
companies with poor corporate governance standards. (See pages 10-11 in May 1999

issue of "Participant," TJAA-CREF's quarterly news and performance magazine.)
Among its requirements are that: (i) a company's board consist of a substantial majority

of independent directors (i.e. no significant personal ties, current or past); (ii) a
company's board must obtain shareholder approval for actions that could alter the
fundamental relationship between shareholders and the board; (iii) companies must base
executive compensation on a "pay for performance" system, and should provide full and

clear disclosure of all significant compensation arrangements. It does not take an indepth knowledge of Latin American corporations to realize that very few of them would
make it into TIAA-CREF's good corporate governance list. And as an example of the
impact of institutional investors on market development, it is well known that the
Chilean stock market owes much of its relatively large capitalization value to the
investments and monitoring of its pension funds.

3) Be

On a gray area, since it entails a tension between the short
and long term, capital controls or their removal should be considered. Capital controls
can supplement sterilization or, in principle slow down capital inflows of a targeted
maturity by themselves. On the other hand, while these controls may be justifiable
wary of short nm measures.

36

in terms of static second-best arguments, they may hurt in the medium-term once the

endogenous arrival of international market makers and corporate governance
improvements are considered. This hints at an important synergy in fostering a deeper
integration with international financial markets: not only is good corporate governance
needed to succeed on integration, but also integration may be an essential ingredient to
achieve good corporate governance as well. A reasonable recipe, I believe, is that if the
country's institutions are so far off the ideal ones that the decentrali2ed equilibrium is
very unstable, taxing capital inflows contingently (remove them during external distress)

may be justified. If that is not the case, however, it may well pay off to bear the
additional risk in exchange for a faster development of financial links and markets°

IV.3 MACROECONOMIC POLICY: THE SHORT
AND MEDIUM RUN
As structural change in emerging economies will certainly take several years, the role of
macroeconomic policy in the short-term is to take steps to prevent and manage crises. Since
underdeveloped domestic financial markets typically lead to a situation where, ex-ante,
international liquidity provision is undervalued, the goal of macroeconomic policy is to
reallocate international liquidity use and availability from booms to crises. During the latter,
the goal is to reallocate it to those economic agents that need it the most, but this must be
done with care not to affect significantly and perversely ex-ante incentives to hoard and

create international liquidity. Below I highlight a few features of policies that appear
desirable from the perspective adopted here, as well as some caveats to standard advice.

1) International liquidity management.
1)

Monetaypo/4y. The quintessential monetary policy to deal with this international

liquidity management problem is a sterilized intervention — essentially, the central
bank sells public bonds for international reserves — during the capital flows

boom. The counterpart ought to be the selling back of these reserves during
external crises. Experience and theory suggest that the first half of this policy, the

sterilized intervention, is hard and expensive to implement for prolonged
periods, and it may even backfire as the private sector reacts perversely to the
quasi-fiscal deficit, appreciation, and reserves accumulation at the central bank.51

Thus, this is probably not an instrument that can be used for medium term
prevention.

5°

Recently (May 2000), Chile has opted for the latter —permanently removing capital controls—together with a series of
measures aimed at improving corporate governance, inregradon to international Enancial markets, and the development of
domestic financial markets.

See Calvo (1991) and Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2000).

37

ii)

Fiscal Polig. Grounded on Keynesian mechanisms, optimal fiscal policy over the
business cycle is traditionally thought of as being counter-cyclical. The pattern of
pro-fyclical fiscal deficits in Latin American has thus been interpreted as a seriously
sub-optimal policy, and most likely the result of the financial constraints faced by
the governments themselves. However, when external financial shocks are an
important source of fluctuations, the economy should optimally distribute the
scarce available international resources across domestic economic agents so as to

smooth differences in financial distress. It is highly unlikely that government
expenditure, unless used very selectively to solve financial distress in the private
sector, is the right place to allocate the marginal dollar.52 Fiscal poliy maj need to be

It is important to realize that the latter is an optimal policy
argument, as opposed to the more standard one that explains the fiscal pattern in
terms of the financial constraints faced by the government itself. Which effect

pro-gclical after all.

dominates depends on whether the private sector (perhaps a specific sector
within it) or the government faces the tightest financial constraints during the
crisis.
iii)

Labor Markets. Most countries in the region are in need of a modern labor code,

the pervasive income inequality problem also present makes such reform more
complicated. The main point to emphasize here is the fact that --- leveraged by
financial problems --- Latin American economies are exposed to much larger

short-term adjustment needs. These needs are highly unlikely to be
accommodated fully -- and to a different degree in different countries -- by

exchange rate movements. A new labor code must allow for a more or less
automatic recession/crisis-package. I believe, for example, that following the
advice of those who argue that temporary contracts have not been effective in
Europe, as Argentina did in the recently, is misguided.'3 While the European
problem is primarily one of lowering structural unemployment, Latin American

economies need also to deal with sharp short-term crises. Thus the Latin
American solution should at the very least allow for a contingent relaxation of
temporary contracts constraints, fostering this form of hiring during crises.
iv)

Debt Management. Since the government itself may trigger a crisis in the face of
large debt renewal or payment, it has become a common practice to advocate a
debt management strategy that avoids lumps. While this is sound advice, as the
government rightly reduces its own bottleneck the private sector will probably

undo part of the smoothing. It is not simply the public debt schedule that
matters, and the private sector may undervalue the benefits of smoothness in the
repayment of aggregate debt.

52 This also suggests that fiscal adjustments during crises ought to be done on the expenditure rather thaa taxes side. And if
the latter is unavoidable they should probably be targeted away from the supply side of the economy.

The argument against temporary contracts is not that they don't create employment, but that they separate even further
insiders from outsiders by reducing the pressure on insiders and creating a class of temporary —and unskilled-- workers.

38

v)

Exchange rate ystem. Since the optimal policy is one of reallocation of international

reserves from high to low capital flow states, it clearly has an element of real
exchange rate stabilization. Reserve management must be active and transparent.
While Mundell-Flentg type considerations give an edge to flexible exchange
rate systems if sterilization is to be tried, the other side of the coin is that such

policies may have a large transfer component from domestic suppliers of
international liquidity to potential borrowers during crises (e.g., as it would
happen if sterilization acts through a lending channels whereby intermediaries are
hampered in their ability to reallocate liquidity during booms)?4 This effect may

eventually reduce the incentives to supply international liquidity.55 In other
words, if sterilization succeeds by choking intermediation during booms, it also
represents a tax on savers and liquidity providers in general. On the other hand,
a fixed exchange rate system probably requires that a very large share of the
country's international liquidity be held by the central bank (or mandated on the
private sector) if it is to succeed in improving the use of this liquidity.
vz)

Liquidity Ratios and Banks.

Active management of banks' reserves, capital
adequacy ratios, and possibly international liquidity ratios can also affect the
aggregation of international collateral. The level of these ratios should be
decreasmg in the degree of financial development and be made procycical.
However, there are two practical problems with the latter recommendation. First,
for those countries where the health of the banking system is suspect, weakening
standards may make a run more likely — this was a concern in Argentina during
the recent crisis. Second, the policy may be ineffective during crises since the
constraint may not be binding. This appears to be especially true when foreign
banks have large market shares. For example, in Chile foreign banks capitaladequacy ratios rose significantly vis-à-vis those of domestic banks during the
recent crisis.6 While there is no doubt that importing solid international banks is
a must, it is also important to understand the implications they may have for
aggregate liquidity management.

2) International Insurance
Without the core weaknesses described above, an emerging economy could easily smooth
external shocks. As long as these structural problems are present, however, a significant
component of the aggregate risk associated with external shocks should be insured away
when feasible. Aside from controversial taxation of short-term capital inflows,governments
often resort to stabilization funds and other self-insurance mechanisms. Industrial policy
See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2000).

An additional point against a fully flexible exchange tate system is that the it may not be possible for an individual
country to allow the development of sufficiently deep currency-risk hedging instruments. Investors may use them to hedge
the risk on neighbors' currencies, if these do not have their own deep hedging markets. This was a problem for Mexico
around thc Brazilian turmoil during 1998-99, and it is a particularly serious concern if the country's financial markets arc
not deep enough.
u See Caballero (1999b).

39

aimed at export diversification is another.57 The macroeconomic measures discussed above
are also forms of aggregate self-insurance. All of these policies are generally expensive and
inefficient insurance methods, but unfortunately the incomplete nature of the corresponding
insurance and hedging markets often makes them the most viable option?8

Why these markets are so incomplete is a key research question that should probably be
linked to the emerging literature on underdeveloped iccatastrophe risk" markets in more
developed economies. Aside from incentive problems affecting countries, it is probably the
case that the high correlation of commodity prices with global activity makes the capital
required to insure that risk naturally very expensive and too large for insurance companies to
immobilize. It is here where a market-making role by the IFIs may represent a significant
aid.

3) Contingent Policies.

As much of the modern Latin America's volatility problems can be ultimately linked to
external financial factors and terms of trade shocks, themselves important only due to weak
international financial links, the basis to design a solid contingent policy is clearly outlined.
While most macroeconomists would agree in principle on the cyclical features of the policies
described above, much more disagreement would arise in practice. Opposition often comes
from those that put credibility issues ahead of the rest. Most prominent is the example of the
exchange rate system, where the main argument in favor of dollarization and other strongfixed systems is their credibility.

To me, however, the most credible policy is that which is most suited to the scenario faced
by the country. Speculative behavior that is created by discretion can be largely eliniitated
by making the contingent rule explicit. This rule must be simple, easily verifiable, and a

function of variables not directly controlled by the authorities. Terms of trade (in most
cases) and some index of the tightness in international financial markets (EMBI-spread?)
would probably suffice. Some important examples of state-contingent policies include but
are not limited to the following:
i)

MonetapoIiçy and the exchange rate. If the locally preferred exchange rate system is

fixed, for example, this may be allowed to depart transitorily from its long run
panty as a function of the state, with care being taken to eliminate any arbitrage
opportunities. If the choice is flexible, on the other hand, the rule must control

the release of central bank reserves to the open market. Unconditionally, I
n Yet another is to sell domestic assets to foreigners (see e.g. IPES 1995). The issues here are when to sell and, closely
related, whether the perceived agency problems (e.g. risk of expropriation) ate low enough to prevent a steep price
discount.

The need for intervention here is motivated by another manifestation of the underprovision of international liquidity
discussed above: international insurance is undervalued by the private sector. Since long-term external debt is simply shortterm debt plus a rollover insurance contract, the private sector will on average botrow at maturities that are shorter than
socially optimal. From the point of view of the aggregate economy, the private sector will underinsure with respect to terms
of trade and external financial shocks.

40

would probably advocate a flexible exchange rate system coupled with a very
active — but explicit and contingent — reserve management strategy and a

nontradeables inflation target. The former supporting ingredient (reserve
management) is aimed at reallocating international liquidity as discussed above.
The latter, on the other hand, provides an anchor which is not directly affected
by short run fluctuations in the exchange rate, especially those that are needed on
the face of an external shock. When credibility problems are severe, however, a
fixed regime may be preferable while still preserving the reserve management
strategy. As this latter case requires potentially costly mandatory international
liquidity requirements and/or taxes on capital flows, a close eye must be kept on
the consequences of these policies for private sector's incentive to hoard and
produce international liquidity.
ii)

FiscaIpoIi9 All things equal, a fiscal contraction is better designed to handle a

terms-of-trade shock than a monetary tightening. Not only does it reduce
expenditure directly, free up financing to the pnvate sector, and facilitate
expenditure switching, but by allowing the real depreciation to take place it
improves the outlook for exports and hence in international colkteral. It seems
reasonable that fiscal policy ought to have a component indexed to the terms-oftrade. When the terms-of-trade are low, expenses that do not suffer from nonsmooth behavior should be reduced according to some pre-established rule.59
th)

Labor

Similarly, while in normal circumstances firms should insure
workers, rather than the other way around, when crises have severe financial
implications for firms the insurance may have to be turned around and quickly
(at least from employed workers). Indexing labor costs —-e.g., contributions to
unemployment insurance and (future) severance accounts—to terms of trades
markets,

and external financial conditions, may be sound as well.

In concluding, I shall note that I have highlighted domestic ---as opposed to international--reforms and policies to overcome chronic volatility. This focus reflects both, my views on

what is most immediately feasible and the limitations of space that I had. It does not
represent an absolution of the blame that lies on the international financial system, which
will also have to do its part to solidify its relation with advanced emerging economies. The
latter have already undergone substantial changes and, in many ways, exhibit more prudent
and responsible conduct than many developed economies. It is not reasonable, as a medium

and long term outcome, that these emerging economies have to do so much in term of
expensive self-insurance and be deprived of the advantages of short-term and own-currency
borrowing, just to name a few of their constraints. It is perhaps here that the international

financial institutions can play a major role by helping to deepen financial markets and
It is important that this rule be pre-determined, as part of the recent Chilean .Eecession was arguably created by bickering
between the Treasury and Central Bank about who should make the 6rst adjustment.

41

integration, On this account, the World Bank's recent issuance of chilean pesos (V.P.)
denominated bonds represents a significant step forward in the development of an
important missing market.

42

REFERENCES
1) Aglnon, Ph, A. Benerjee, and T.Piketty, "Dualism and Macroeconomic Volatility,"
forthcoming, Quarterfy Journal ofEconomicj 1999.

2) Bulow, Jeremy; Rogoff, Kenneth, "Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?" Ameiican
Economic Rnüw. Vol. 79 (1). p 43-50. March 1989.

3) Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "Emerging Market Crises: An Asset
Market Perspective," MIT mimeo, August 1999.
4) Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "International Liquidity Management:
Sterilization with Illiquid Financial Markets," MIT mimeo, April 2000.

5) Caballero, Ricardo J., "Structural Volatility in Argentina: A Policy Report," L&DB
mimeo, October 1999a.

6) Caballero, Ricardo J., "Structural Volatility in Chile: A Policy Report," IADB mimeo,
October 1999b.
7) Caballero, Ricardo J., "Structural Volatility in Mexico: A Policy Report," IADB mimeo,
October 1999c.
8) Calvo, Guillermo .A., "The Perils of Sterilization," IMF Staff P4er.c 38-4, December
1991, pp. 921-926.
9) Garber, Peter M., <'Derivatives in International Capital Flows," NBER Wp #6623, June
1998.

10) Gelos, R. Gaston and Alejandro M. Werner, "Financial Liberalization, Credit
Constraints, and Collateral — Investment in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector," IMF
WP #25, 1999.
11) La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, R.W. Vishny, "Law and Finance," HIID
DP # 576, March 1997.
12) Inter-American Development Bank, "Hacia una Economia Menos Volatil," in Economic
and Social Progress in Latin America PES), Washington DC: IADB 1995.

13) Marshall, I.L. and E.S. Silva, "Fluctuaciones del Precio del Cobre," in Informe
Macroeconomico para la Empresa #35, September 1998, pp.38-60.
14) Powel, Andrew, "On Liquidity Requirements, Capital Controls and Risk Management:
Some Theoretical Considerations and Practice from the Argentine Banking Sector,"
Mimeo BCRA. April 1999.
15) Simonson (1985). Sinionsen, Mario Henrique, "Indebted Developing-Country Prospects
and Macroeconomic Policies in the OECD," Global Economic Imbalances. Bergsten, C.
Fred, ed., Special Reports series, no. 4 Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics. p 51-64. 1985.

43

