                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      SIMON S. KUZNETS
                                   APRIL 30, 1901-JULY 9, 1985


                                            Robert W. Fogel


                                         Working Paper 7787
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7787



                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               July2000




This paper was prepared for publication in Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, and
has benefited from comments by Daniel Bell, John S. Chipman, Joim T. Dunlop, Katharine J. Hamerton, Max
R. Henderson, Susan Jones, Joim Kenneth Galbraith, Mark Guglielmo, Mark Perlman, Paul A. Samuelson,
Robert M. Solow, Judith K. Stein, David Surdam, and Yasukichi Yasuba. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   2000 by Robert W. Fogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
Simon S. Kuznets: April 30, 1901-July 9, 1985
Robert W. Fogel
NBER Working Paper No. 7787
July2000


                                            ABSTRACT

       This paper, prepared for the Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences,
presents an account of the scholarly career of Simon S. Kuznets. Among the issues considered are
his contribution to the development of the empirical tradition in economics, his transformation of
the field of national income accounting, his use of national income accounting during World War
II to set production targets for both the military and civilian sectors of the economy, and to guide the
implementation of those targets; his development of a theory of economic growth, his investigation
of the interrelationship between economic growth and population growth, his contribution to
methods of measurement in economics, and his legacy to the economics profession.



Robert W. Fogel
Center for Population Economics
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
imok@cpe.uchicago.edu
                                 Simon S. Kennels
                            April30, 1901—July 9, 1985
                                  BY ROBERT W. FOGEL

        Simon S. Kuznets, recipient of the third Nobel Memorial Prize in economics, was

a pivotal figure in the transformation of economics from a speculative and ideologically-

riven discipline into an empirically based social science. Born in Pinsk. Russia. on April

30, 1901, he received his education in primary school and gymnasium in Kharkov. Re

served briefly as a section head in the bureau of labor statistics of the Ukraine before

emigrating to the United States in 1922. He entered Columbia University where he

received his BA. in 1923, his MA. in 1924, and his Ph.D. in 1926. His principal teacher

at Columbia and his life-long mentor, was Wesley Clair Mitchell, a founder of the

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and its director of research from 1920 to

1946.

        Kuznets was a member of the research staff of NBER from 1927 to 1961. It is

there that he met Edith Handler. They were married in 1929 and had two children, Paul

and Judith. Kuznets also held professional appointments in economics and statistics at

the University of Pennsylvania (1930-1954) and in economics at Johns Hopkins (1954-

1960) and Harvard (1960-1971). During 1932-1934 he served in the Department of
Commerce where he constructed the first official estimates of U.S. national income and

laid the basis for the National Income Section. During World War II he served as the

associate director of the Bureau of Planning and Statistics of the War Production Board.

Kuznets was instrumental in establishing in 1936 the Conference on Research in Income

and Wealth (which brought together government officials and academic economists

engaged i.n the development the of U.S. national income and product accounts) and in
 1947 helped to establish its international counterpart, the International Association for

Research in Income and Wealth. He served as advisor to the governments of China.

Japan, India, Korea, Taiwan, and Israel in the establishment of their national systems of

economic information.

        Despite his extensive activities in the design of government programs of
economic intelligence, and his work in consulting with such private agencies as the

Growth Center of Yale University and the Social Science Research Council, Kuznets was

a prolific analyst of economic processes and institutions. During the course of his career

he produced 31 books and over two hundred papers, many of which set off major new

streams of research. Among the fields in which he pioneered, in addition to national

income accounting, were the study of seasonal, cyclical, and secular fluctuations in

economic activity; the impact of population change on economic activity; the study of the

nature and causes of modem economic growth based on the measurement of national

aggregate statistics; the household distribution of income and its trends in the United

States and other countries; the measurement and analysis of the role of capital in

economic growth; the impact of ideology and other institutional factors on economic

growth; changing patterns in consumption and in the use of time; and methods of
economic and statistical analysis.         Kuznets's intellectual contributions were
acknowledged by his colleagues in many ways, including his election as president of the

American Statistical Association in 1949 and of the American Economic Association in

1954.
                                  The Context ofKuznets's Work

        To appreciate the magnitude of Kuznetss contributions to the empirical tradition

in economics it is necessary to understand the intellectual currents in the American social

sciences when lie first encountered them in the early l920s, and the social and political

movements that promoted the social sciences during the last quarter of the nineteenth and

the early decades of the twentieth century. Social sciences were just beginning toemerge

as disciplines before the Civil War. Even though economics was the most articulated of

the nascent social sciences, it was treated, not as an independent subject, but as a segment

of a year-long required course in "moral philosophy," which was usually taught to seniors

by an ordained minister who surveyed revealed knowledge about the operation of the

temporal world. The textbook in the economics portion of this course most widely used

in American Universities during the 1 840s and 1 850s was written by Reverend Francis

Wayland, president of Brown University and a principal leader of the Northern Baptist

Church. The objective of his textbook, he wrote, was to set forth God's laws, so far

discovered, regarding the production and distribution of those products that constitute the

material wealth of a nation.

       The primacy of religious crusaders in economics and the other principal social

sciences continued down to the beginning of the twentieth century. About 40 percent of

those who founded the American Economic Association (AEA) in 1 885 were either

ordained ministers or lay activists in evangelical churches. The platform adopted at that

meeting called for the united effort of churches, the state, and science to promote
Christian social reform. The influence of Richard T. Ely, an economist at the University

of Wisconsin, and other academic leaders of the Social Gospel movement (the name



                                             3
given by historians to a religious/political movement that was influential between 1880

and 1930) in the ABA remained strong down to World War 1. That influence was made

conspicuous by the organizational identification of the ABA with issues that were at the

time as highly controversial as the limitation of female participation in industry, the

promotion of state and local taxes to fund entitlements, and the promotion of severe

restrictions on immigration. This crusading posture was challenged by more secular

economists, by those with affiliations to non-evangelical churches, and by those whose

economic analysis was orthodox. Although the more orthodox economists gradually

became ascendant, it took decades for the AEA to free itself from a lingering
commitment to Social Gospel ideology and to become dedicated to objective presentation

of evidence and rival theories regarding the functioning of the economy.

       There was an important but smaller group of empirically oriented economists.

Some of them were associated with the Bureau of the Census, which included a survey of

economic activity in the decennial census of I 840. As the economy became transformed

by accelerating technological change, the subsequent censuses collected increasingly

detailed information on the agricultural, manufacturing, an.d transportation sectors. The

economists associated with these efforts also produced illuminating analyses of the

structure and development of such pivotal industries as iron and steel, cotton textiles, and

meat packing.

       After the Civil War, a number of states set up bureaus that inquired into the

conditions of labor and the standard of living of industrial workers.              Led by
Massachusetts, these agencies, beginning about 1875, began collecting samples on the

income, expenditures, and housing of industrial workers. Toward. the turn of the century,




                                             4
a similar program was established at the federal level with Carroll D. Wright, the

economist who pioneered such studies in Massachusetts, serving as the first
Commissioner of Labor. Between 1880 and World War I, a number of factors provoked

alarm about the deterioration in the conditions of industrial labor. These included

technological changes that promoted large-scale enterprises at the expense of small ones.

huge waves of immigration that depressed wages, pitched baffles between workers and

factory owners that required federal troops to quell them and that resulted in large losses

of life and property, and the increasing severity in business cycles, culminating with the

depression of 1893-98, when one out of every six workers was unemployed. The belief

that (despite many remarkable technological advances and the obvious affluence of the

upper classes) conditions of life had deteriorated for urban workers and for farmers

persisted down to the outbreak of World War I.

        A number of economists who served in the War Production Board and other

agencies involved in mobilization of the economy during World War I, were appalled at

the lack of relevant economic information. Several of them concluded that this problem

was unlikely to be solved within the federal government and in 1 920 established a

private, nonprofit, nonpartisan agency called the National Bureau of Economic Research

(NBER) to construct national income accounts, collect information on business cycles.

and to study the distributions of the national income among households, with the aim of

making such information available to both public and private agencies that could use

them in the formulation of their policies.

       The leader of NBER from its inception to 1946 was Wesley C. Mitchell, professor

of economics at Columbia University. Mitchell was critical of orthodox theory because



                                             S
its generalizations pertained to a nonexistent world, based on speculations about how

individuals who adhered strictly to the logic of profit and utility maximization would

behave. He sought a comprehensive study of the economic institutions that had actually

shaped production and distribution, and the forces that caused such institutions to vary

over time and place. He emphasized that the study of aggregate economic behavior

under diverse and changing institutional circumstance had to be rooted in the collection

and analysis of quantitative information. While he rejected what he called Ricardian and

neo-Ricardian theories (hypothetico-deductive models of economic behavior) because he

believed they were based on naïve assumptions of human motivations, he did not reject

theory per se. His objective was the formulation of an economic theory that used

postulates based on statistical analysis of existing institutions and of the historical forces

that caused them to change over time. Keenly aware of the imperfections of the available

data on economic life, he sought to develop procedures that could increase the reliability

of the statistics derived from them and establish the range of probable error.

       While Kuznets shared Mitchell's skepticism of neo-Ricardian theory, his thrust

toward theoretical generalization was much stronger than Mitchell's. Throughout his

career Kuznets was influenced by the work of such leading theorists as Joseph A.

Schumpeter (who probed the relationship between technological change and business

cycles), A. C. Pigou (who identified circumstances under which markets failed to

maximize economic welfare), and Vilfredo Parato (who propounded a law governing the

distribution of income among households). Kuznets's theoretical inclination is revealed

in his second book, Secular Movements in Production and Prices (1930). which set forth

a prescient theory of steady long-term modern economic growth in Europe and America.



                                             6
beginning toward the end of the eighteenth century. Although growth was steady at

highly aggregated levels, at the level of particular industries there was a tendency toward

retardation in growth. The logistic curve gave a good fit to the growth pattern of an

industry over its life cycle. The main engine of this process. he said, was technological

change, although he also acknowledged the role of population growth and changes in
demand.

        Another important aspect of Secular Movements was Kuznets's discovery of

"secondary trend," a cyclical movement much longer than a business cycle, which

typically ran 3 to 5 years. The periodicity of secondary trend ran between 15 and 25

years. Kuznets probed the links between primary trends, secondary trends, and short-term

cyclical fluctuations, considering the correlations between the rapidity of the primary

growth rates and the tendency toward both secular and short-term cycles. His analysis

was based on examination of evidence for several industries in the United States and

several European countries.

       Still another notable feature of Secular Movements was Kuznets's concern with

mathematical functions that could adequately describe the regularities he had. uncovered.

He argued that mathematical functions were needed for forecasting purposes. which lie

emphasized was the central purpose of the analysis of time series. In this connection he

introduced into economics, the logistic curve that had been developed by Raymond Pearl

only a few years earlier for the study of the growth of populations of fruit flies in closed

containers, He also introduced to economics the curve that Benjaniin Gompertz. an

English actuary, had published in 1825 to describe the increase in mortality rates with

age. Kuznets's discussion ranged not only over issues of the suitability of these and other




                                             7
 mathematical functions for forecasting specific processes, but also dwelt on the merits of

 alternative methods of fitting such functions. As notable as the care with which he

pursued these issues, was the extraordinary breadth and depth of his reading not only in

matters of economics and business, but also in history. demography, biology, statistics,

and the physical sciences.

                                   National Income Accounting

        In 1931, at Mitchell's behest, Kuznets took charge of the NBER's work on U. S.

national income accounts that had previously been conducted mainly by Willford I. King.

The next 15 years of Kuznets's career was concerned primarily with the construction of

U.S. national income accounts. Residual tasks in this line of work, concerned, mainly

with the measurement of capital formation, continued down to 1961. His first major

project was the estimation of U.S. national income for 1929-1932, begun at th.e NBER

but completed in the federal government and published (1934) by the Superintendent of

Documents, as the result of a resolution by the U.S. Senate requesting such information.

Kuznets then extended those accounts backward to 1919 and forward to 1938. The two

volumes containing this work (1941) included an extended and thorough discussion of

the theoretical foundations for national income accounting and of the practical difficulties

of moving from the available sources to the desired measures. Kuznets also evaluated a

variety of omissions and other mismeasurements, including estimates of the probable

range of error by specific categories and for the annual totals. Kuznets estimated the

national income accounts during World War II and compared them with national product

during World War 1(1945), especially with respect to whether the war effort impinged on




                                             S
the civilian economy or came out of an expansion of total product. In 1946 he published a

volume that extended the national income accounts back to 1869.

       Kuznets transformed the field of national income accounting by bringing to it a

far greater precision than had previously been achieved, by rooting it firmly in welfare

theory (which distinguishes between private and social values), and by solving numerous

problems related to moving from the imperfect sources containing the raw data to the

theoretical conception of "national income." Among the difficult problems that he

probed were the impact of monopolistic control of some professions on income, the

impact of changes in the distribution of income on the market valuation of particular

goods and services, the structure of national product (its distribution across industry) as

measured both by income and by employment, the determination of which activities by

the government properly belonged in a welfare-theoretic concept of "national income,"

the estimation of the contribution to national income of the increase in leisure time, and

the identification and estimation of the bias imparted to national income estimates

(especially when used to measure changes in income over time) by the choice of end-

period or base-period prices, by the inclusion in income of costs of production (such as

the increased cost of controlling crime in large cities), by the omission of home
production, and by the difficulties of distinguishing between net and gross capital

fonnation because, among other reasons, capital replacement frequently involved

technological improvements.

       The depth of Kuznets's theoretical probing was well understood by other
specialists in national income accounting. His 1933 article on national income for the

Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences served for several decades as a guide on theoretical




                                            9
issues to those constructing national income accounts. His agility at theory became niore

obvious to others with his critique of a number of issues about the measurement of

national income raised by S. R. Hicks (one of the preeminent economic theorists and the

co-winner of the fourth Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences).

        One of the most important books that arose from the work on U.S. national

income accounts during the 1 930s and 1940s was Income from Independent Professional

Practice (1946) written jointly with Milton Friedman. That book developed age-earnings

profiles for specific professions, a device that subsequently became one of the main

analytical tools of labor economics. The book also developed and applied the concept of

human capital to explain differences in average earnings by professionals. Human capital

is today recognized as being far more important than physical capital in the contribution

to national income.      Its integration into the mainstream of economic theory and
measurement has been one of the main advances in economic analysis since World War

II, and was an important part of the work of two other Nobel Laureates, Theodore W.

Schultz and Gary S. Becker. Thirdly, that book set forth the distinction betweei.

transitory and permanent income (expected income over the life cycle), a distinction

developed by Friedman, which he subsequently extended to explain anomalies between

cross-sectional and longitudinal measures of consumption and savings rates by income.

and which was recognized as a seminal contribution in the citation for his Nobel prize in

1976. Interestingly, these far-reaching contributions were passed over by reviewers of
the book at the time of its publication.




                                           10
                                     Service During World War Ii

        The power of national income accounting as an instrument of public policy was

dramatically demonstrated during the course of World War II. In 1940 Robert Nathan, a

fonner student of Kuznets, subsequently chief of the National Income Section of the

Department of Commerce, became the chief of Military Requirements and Industrial

Studies in the Defense Commission (later called the War Production Board) that

President Roosevelt established with the aim of making the United States the 'Arsenal of

Democracy." In assessing the capacity to expand military production, Nathan in 1941,

and beginning in 1942, in conjunction with Kuznets. used national income accounting

together with a rough form of linear programming to measure the potential for increased

production and the sources from which it would come, and to identify the materials that

were binding constraints on expansion. Nathan's estimates of the potential for military

production before Pear]. Harbor, which were far greater than the military thought was

possible, were adopted by Roosevelt. After Pearl Harbor, the military set forth ambitious

new estimates, which Kuznets determined could not be met within the specified time

period, pointing out that the effort to do so might result in severe parts shortages and also

place unacceptable pressures on the civilian economy. The Kuznets analysis was adopted

as the basis for both civilian and military targets.

       In an article written in 1944 Paul A. Samuelson called World War JJ "an

economist's war." This was no idle boast. Economists not only played a vital role in the

War Production Board, but also in. the Office of Price Administration. which regulated

the civilian sector of the economy, and in the Department of the Treasury, which was

charged with designing the methods of financing the war (inventing, among other



                                               1]
 devices, the current withholding system for paying taxes concurrent with the receipt of

income). Other agencies in which economists were prominent included the Office of

 Strategic Services, the predecessor to the CIA. Economists in that agency planned the

daily bombing strikes of Nazi territory on the basis of an analysis of which targets, if

destroyed, would most damage war-making capacity. The work of economists during the

war so impressed national leaders that Congress passed the Employment Act of 1946.

which established the Council of Economic Advisors to the President.

                                   Modern Economic Growth

        Immediately after completing his governmental services during World War II,

Kuznets shifted the focus of his research to making use of national aggregate data to

analyze international differences in the process of modern economic growth. His

analysis focused on 14 nations in Europe and America and on Japan, for which time

series went back at least 60 years. There were several aspects to that project. At

Kuznets's suggestion in 1948, the Social Science Research Council established a
Committee on Economic Growth, with Kuznets as chairman, which recruited leading

economists in eleven countries to study the long-term patterns of growth in their
respective countries.

       At the same time Kuznets began to study the available aggregate statistics and

produced a series of ten monographs that were published as supplements to the journal

Economic Development and Cultural Change between 1956 and 1967.                    These

monographs covered such topics as levels and variabilities of growth rates, industrial

distribution of national product and labor input, the structure of consumption. trends in

capital formation, the distribution of income by households, and the structure of foreign




                                           12
trade. This body of research was subsequently integrated and extended in two books.

Modern Economic Growth (1966) and Economic Groii'th o/Nations (1971).

        In these volumes Kuznets set forth an historically-based theory of modern

economic growth. The modern epoch of growth, which began toward the end of tile

eighteenth century, was defined as a sustained increase in per capita income accompanied

by an increase in total population and sweeping changes in the structure of the economy.

The paramount feature that distinguished the modem economic epoch was the systematic

application of scientific knowledge to problems of economic production and the

development of a science-based technology. By science-based technology he meant that

the technology was no longer merely a response to longstanding practical issues, but was

often produced by scientific knowledge well in advance of bottlenecks. In the case of

electricity, for example, theory preceded the technology for electrical generation and

conmiunications by many decades. The development of these technologies induced new

demands for a wide range of consumer durables. Moreover, technological applications of

science provided a powerfhl stimulus to the growth of scientific knowledge by providing

both new information about previously unknown aspects of nature and by greatly
expanding the resource base for the growth of scientific studies.

       This complex interaction between scientific knowledge, technological.
applications, and rapid economic growth. Kuznets argued, required a proper cultural and

institutional environment, which in turn required a new set of attitudes. The three key

elements of the new Weltanschauung were secularism, egalitarianism, and nationalism.

By secularism Kuznets meant a concentration on life on earth with an emphasis on

material attainment. By egalitarianism he meant a denial of inborn differences among



                                            13
human beings except as they manifested themselves in achievements: in other words a

distribution of rewards according to accomplishments rather than by family connections

and social status. By nationalism he referred not only to the capacity of the state to

provide the stability needed for the flowering of modem economic growth within a well-

defined territory but also to an historically formed community of feeling, with an elite
dedicated to modernization.

       Kuznets saw no necessary end to the opportunities for continued economic

growth. He pointed out that the stock of knowledge was increasing at an accelerating rate

without any signs of diminished aggregate returns (although the payoff to particular lines

of investment usually eventually declined). He saw no limit to the potential for economic

growth because of a petering of the rate of technological change.            Although lie

recognized the pressure of population on depletable resources and the environment, he

thought that population would reach a limit well within the carrying capacity of the earth,

and he expected technological advances to provide substitutes for depletable resources

and to curtail environmental degradation.

       Kuznets did, however, envisage a limit to the growth of conventionally defined

economic product (those items covered by the national income and product accounts

[NIPA]). He recognized that at very high levels of per capita product, preferences for

leisure and immaterial products omitted by NIPA might come to predominate i.n an

economy. In a prescient computation published in 1952 he estimated that when the
increase in each hour of leisure was valued at the average wage, the per capita income of

individuals increased by about 40 percent. Other items omitted from the NIPA accounts

included improvements in health and increases in longevity. Of course. there were costs




                                            14
 of production that were improperly included in NIPA, such as the increase in

 expenditures on crime prevention associated with urbanization, but the omitted benefits

 far exceeded the unexciuded costs.

                                 The Role [Fopuiation Growth
        Few economists of his era investigated the interrelationships between economic

growth and population growth as fully as Kuznets. He was impressed more by the

salutary effects of rapid population growth than by its negative effects. The evidence, he

noted, indicated no cases in which large increases in population were accompanied by

declines in per capita income. Rapid population growth tended to increase per capita

income because it increased the number of contributors to useful knowledge. It tendedto

increase savings both because it increased the ratio of savers to dissavers and increased.

the amounts saved by upper income groups. Larger populations also promoted

economies of scale and the responsiveness to new products (because of changes in the

age structure of the population). Despite these generally positive aspects of high rates of

population growth, Kuznets recognized that the sharp acceleration in the populations of

less developed nations, generally brought about by sharp declines in death rates,
sometimes overwhelmed the economies and impeded growth in per capita income.

       Kuzuets pointed out the economic significance of the fact that accelerated
population growth was du.e primarily to a decline in death rates. The associated decline

in morbidity rates served to increase labor productivity, to increase the payoff on

investment in the raising and education of children, and to improve the quality of life.

Moreover, the more rapid decline of death rates in cities than in rural areas promoted

urbanization and speeded industrialization. The tendency of declining death rates to



                                           15
induce lower fertility rates and promote migration also contributed to economic growth

by adapting social institutions to new economic opportunities.        The reduction in
completed family size and the fact that this occurred at differential rates in rural and

urban areas led to a removal of younger generations from the influence of the family and

exposed them to modern ethics that promoted participation in a rapidly changing

economic system. He saw this break between ties of blood and economic rewards as a

central factor in the victory of objective tests of economic performance over the more

traditional rewards to family connections.

       Kuznetss investigations of the synergism between economic and demographic

change were so many-faceted they de' a brief summary. I have therefore selected one

of his various lines of investigation for further comment. It pertains to the impact of

demographic factors on the measured inequality of the distribution of income. Early in

his career Kuznets began to struggle with problems of how to measure the degree of

inequality in the distribution of income and to identify the factors contributing to the

inequality. Such decomposition would point to policies that could relieve the appalling

economic conditions of the poor that prevailed in all countries at the beginning of the

twentieth century. Kuznets believed that unless the poor shared in the benefits of

economic growth at least as fully as the more well-to-do, the stability of society was at

risk. He regarded rapid economic growth and greater distributional equality as desirable

and generally consistent goals.

       During the 1960s and 1 970s when it was apparent that a number of Asian nations

had entered onto the paths of both rapid population growth (due to rapidly declinii.g

mortality) and rapid growth in per capita income, some of the available evidence seemed




                                             16
to indicate that these developments were increasing die inequality of the income

distribution, and hence vitiating the benefits of the modernization of these countries for

the poor. Studying the evidence on which tins conclusion was based, Kuznets noted that

tile mechanical application of procedures used for the U.S. and other developed nations

were inappropriate in the Asian context, because they failed to take account of the

differences in institutions. A key point related to the nature of Asian family cultures

which were different from Western family cultures. As a consequence, the variance in

the size of the Asian family (or household) was much larger than in the United States and

Western Europe. Not only were the household arrangements of the extended family

different, but intra-family income flows were different, and these differences were not

reflected in standard measures of household income.

       When these differences were explicitly acknowledged. a member of important

statistical relationships emerged. For example, there was a negative correlation between

the number of persons per family and the per capita income of families. Consequently.

the very identify of the lower and upper income groups changed, depending on whether

the size distribution of income was measured by the total income per household, or by the

average income per person in the household. Moreover, the rate of population groth

changed the age structure of households. Countries with rapidly growing populations and

high fertility rates had a higher proportion of younger household heads and lower shares

of heads over age 65 than countries with low population growth. Such demographic

variations might increase inequality measured in cross section, even though lifetime

income distributions were relatively equal. All of these issues could be adequately




                                           17
addressed, Kuznets pointed out, if the sample surveys were designed on the basis of an

appropriate theory of the impact of demographic factors on income distributions.

                                        Measurement in Economics

        To many colleagues and students, Kuznets's most compelling contribution was his

mastery of the art of measurement. This art required not merely a thorough ground.ing in

statistical theory. A more difficult achievement was understanding how to apply

statistical methods and economic models to the incomplete and biased data with which

economists normally work and still produce reliable estimates of key economic variables

and parameters. That skill cannot be encapsulated in a simple list of rules because the

circumstances under which a given set of defects in the data is tolerable depends on the

issues that are being addressed, on the statistical and analytical procedures that are being

employed, and on the sensitivity of the results to systematic errors in the data, to the

choice of behavioral models, and to the choice of statistical procedures.

        Although Kuznets was a quintessential empiricist and a standard bearer for

empirical research, his empiricism did not imply hostility to theory. He continually

emphasized that a sound theory was needed to id.entif5i the variables that had to be

measured, and theory had to be invoked in order to determine how the raw data thrown

up by normal business or governmental activities should be combined in order to create

the desired measures. Since measurement was dependent on theory, as theory advanced,

due to either deeper insights or sounder empirical knowledge, past measures woul.d have

to be revised. Thus theoretical and empirical knowledge are at any point in time only

asymptotically valid, subject to changing knowledge in both areas as well as to changing

social goals, values, and priorities.




                                               18
        Although statistical analysis of quantitative data was a powerful tool iii addressing

issues of economic policy and in identifying both short- and long-term changes in tile

economy. it provided no magical solutions. Kuznets repeatedly emphasized that study of

quantitative data is filled with pitfalls that have entrapped the most able practitioners of

the art at one time or another. Even when the data are relatively good, the procedures

appropriate, and the results fairly unambiguous, great care had to be taken in drawing

conclusions about the domain to which the fmdings applied and. the predictions that could

be reliably based upon them. High on his list of major dangers was the superficial

acceptance of primary data without an adequate understanding of the circumstances

under which the data are produced. Adequate understanding involved detailed historical

knowledge of the changing institutions, conventions, and practices that affected the

production of the primary data but that were difficult to ascertain and to quantify.

        Another point high on Kuznets's list of major dangers was the easy assumption

that a good fit of a mathematical model to the data made it an adequate description of

significant features of the data. Because of the limitations of data, especially in time

series, many different mathematical models, varying in complexity and suucture, may

give fairly good statistical fits to a given body of data when conventional statistical

measures of goodness of fit are invoked. Nor can Occam's razor be glibly invoked to

settle such issues, since it is possible that the curve that gives the best fit incorrectly leads

to the conclusion that the data were generated. a simple process, an elegant "law" of

behavior embodied in a single equation, when they were actually generated by complex

processes that are badly distorted by the simple fimction.




                                               ]9
        Kuznets's choice of estimating procedures was deeply embedded in evaluations of

the objectives of a particular investigation. Whether a given body of data was adequate

depended not only on inherent limitations of the data set but on the types of measures that

were being constructed from it and the issues to which these measures were addressed.

Preliminary analyses of defective data were useful, because they increased the likelihood

of upgrading the available data sets or closing gaps in them by demonstrating the social

usefulness of such efforts. Indeed, he viewed the preliminary analyses of the available

data as an essential part of an asymptotic process of discovery, during which both the

underlying data sets and the analytical procedures were perfected and made more suitable

to the resolution of the substantive issues.

        Like many other statisticians, Kuznets worried about imposing so much structure

on the data that the a priori assumptions of the investigation overwhelm whatever

information there is in the data. He was skeptical about fitting simple lugh-order curves

to data sets with relatively few observations of questionable quality. Consequently he

tended to work with looser fonns of data analysis, often prefelTing frequency

distributions with one-, two-, or three-way classifications to regression analysis. Kuznets

objected to the cavalier ways in which regression analysis was often applied, especially

when highly restrictive functional forms were applied to data sets without adequate

investigation of the underlying process or institutions under investigation. Too often,

functional forms were imposed with inadequate consideration as to whether the data set

could bear the weight of the structure imposed on it. Kuzuets's evaluation of the validity

of substantive findings tended to be cast less as simply right or wrong. but niore often

focused on the reliability of the results and their domain of applicability. I-Ic was



                                               20
particularly concerned with the detection and measurement of systematic errors in the

data: systematic misreporting, sample selection biases, the impact on results of the

underlying behavioral models that circumscribed the collection and analysis of the data

and the impact of the statistical techniques that were employed in the measurement

process.

       Although he placed great emphasis on the development of data bases of the

highest quality, Kuznets was not a purist who insisted on working only with "perfect"

data. Since no data set is ever perfect, his emphasis was on how to exploit the data at

hand in order to extract from them whatever useful information they might contain. But

then the limitation on the resulting analysis had to be specified, with some results treated

as conjectural, and still others treated as illustrative computations.

       In assessing the reliability of particular estimates, Kuznets stressed the importance

of systematically investigating their relationships to other series and other kinds of

information that were logically related to them. He was, in this connection, a master of

devising algebraic identities that brought other available data to bear on the estimates at

issue in a particularly illuminating way. Such identities were also effective devices for

revealing implicit and unsupported assumptions, and thus contributed to the social

research agenda.

       The most powerful technique that Kuznets employed to evaluate attempts to

measure key aspects of economic life was sensitivity analysis. Most measurements in

economics are complex combinations of data and a priori assumptions. Much argument

about the result of quantitative analysis turns on these a priori assumptions. Moreover.

because the arguments used to champion one procedure over another are also a priori.



                                              21
these arguments often produce more heat than light. Kuznets's solution to such problems

was sensitivity analysis, by which he meant a careful examination of both the procedures

and the data in order to see if plausible ranges of systematic errors in the data, if changes

in the a priori assumptions that shaped the analysis, or if the substitution of reasonable

alternative estimation procedures make a material difference in the finding. If they do

not, the finding is robust; otherwise the data add little to the theoretical considerations

that preceded the measurement. The original hypothesis remains an untested hypothesis,

despite the gloss provided by the data. Kuznets was persistent in searching for methods

of evaluating the sensitivity of measures of economic variables and parameters and
ingenious in devising such tests.

                                        Kuznets s Legacy

       ICuznets's greatest legacy is his theory of modern economic growth. The

proposition that the high growth rate since the eighteenth century in population and per

capita income, the sharp changes in the structure of the economy, and the concomitant

changes in social institutions and culture are a unique epoch in human history is no

longer a theory. It is now a part of the confirmed knowledge of economic science. The

research of the past three decades has added important detail to Kuznets's summary of the

evidence available in the l960s and also modified or corrected some conjectures.

       The enhancement of human capital by the environmental controls made possible

by modem economic growth may have been more far-reaching than Kuznets realized.

Evidence accumulated during the last three decades indicates that the period of modern

economic growth was one of major improvements in human physiology induced by

accelerating technological change and greater mastery of the environment.              This




                                            'F,
physiological improvement has manifested itself not only in the continuing increase in

life expectancy since the I 960s, when it was widely assumed that the century-long

increase in life expectancy had come to an end. It is also evident in the steady decline in

mortality rates at ages 80 and over, an accelerating decline in the age-specific burd.en of

chronic diseases at older ages, and a fifty percent increase in body size since the

eighteenth century, indicative of improvements in the functioning of the principal organ

systems.

        Recent evidence also indicates that at least in England, modern economic growth

may have begun about half a century earlier than Kuznets specified. Rapid increases in

agricultural productivity were relatively high from the beginning of the eighteenth
century and the shift of labor from agricultural to nonagricultural occupations over the

course of the century was substantial. These new findings, mainly for England but also

for France, provide a stronger connection between rising productivity and declining

mortality rates in the nations that initiated modern economic growth. The high plateau of

mortality rates during the middle of the nineteenth century now appears to be a pause in a

downward secular trend that was more than a century old when it resumed. The pause

appears to be explained by the great difficulty in solving the problems of public sanitation

created by the remarkable spurt in urbanization during the nineteenth century.

       What is impressive about Modern Economic Growth 35 years after its publication

is not its faults but how well its major findings have held up. Indeed, some of Kuznets's

forecasts, controversial at the time they were made, such as the continuing acceleration of

technological change, now seem so obvious it is difficult for those who did not live

through the 1 950s and I 960s to recognize their path-breaking character. When Kuznets




                                            23
first made this forecast, modern information technology was still in its infancy, organ

transplantation and reproductive technology were still largely topi.cs of science fiction.

and mapping the human genome, let alone engaging in genetic engineering, was not even

encompassed in science fiction.        Equally impressive is Kuznets's prescience in.
recognizing the growing dominance of the non-market sectors of the economy. The

failure of the official national income accounts to measure the growth of leisure, the

value of the increase in life expectancy, and the decline in age-specific chronic

disabilities has obscured the continuing acceleration in the secular trend of economic

growth. Also obscured is the exceedingly high rate of capital formation due to the

remarkable expansion of human capital relative to physical capital.            Although

physiological capital and knowledge capital are admittedly difficult to measure, the

challenge has been accepted by some of the most talented empirical economists today

and constitutes one of the most impressive new frontiers of empirical economics.

       Another controversial forecast of Kuznets that has held up is the closin.g of the

economic gap between the OECD economies and many Third World economies,

particularly in Southeast Asia and Latin America. Kuznets's prediction that food supply

would expand more rapidly than population has also been confirmed. Today, the global

per capita consumption of food has increased by 15 percent since 1960, despite the
doubling of population over the past four decades.

       Kuznets's approach to the measurement of economic variables is another major

facet of his legacy.    He did not believe in either economic theory or economic
measurement for their own sake. His economic analysis was directly or indirectly shaped

by his perception of the major issues of public policy. Kuznets recognized that format



                                           24
modeling was a useful instrument in the search for theories that could guide economic

policy. However, he favored theorizing that, while it made use of hypothetico-deductive

modeling, was based on postulates consistent with historical evidence.

       The Kuznetsian approach has grown in strength in recent years, not only at the

macro level of analysis but also at the micro level. Historically (evidentially) based

analysis has been given a considerable fillip by the reinvigoration of NBER after Martin

Feldstein became its president and CEO in 1978. Although the Kuznetsian blend of

theory and historical evidence is evident in all of the NBER programs, it is particularly

marked in those dealing with secular trends in the economy, life-cycle and.
intergenerational processes in economics, health economics, labor economics, and the

economics of aging.

       Kuznets's contention that imposing too much structure on data obscures rather

than reveals their information content is widely accepted as a guiding principle in

empirical economics. In research on many of the most urgent issues of current policy,

investigators are increasingly exploiting the properties of frequency distributions and

their decomposition.    Although regression analysis remains a powerful tool, its
limitations and the virtues of less structured forms of data analysis are now widely

recognized by empirical economists.




                                           25
                                     Selected Bibliography

                                         I nfl
                                         1
                                           Y)

 Secular   Movements in Production and Prices: The Nature and their Bearing upon
    Cyclical Fluctuations. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
                                         inn,
                                         I Y)3

Seasonal   Variations in Industry and Trade. New York: National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

 National Income. In Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences. New York: Macmillan & Co.
                                         , nfl
                                         I Yj

National Income 1929-1932.       Senate Document No. 124. 73d Cong., 2d Sess.
   Washington, D.C.

                                         1941

National Income and Its Composition 1919-1938. 2 vols. New York: National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

                                         1945

(With   Milton Friedman) Income from Independent Professional Practice. New York:
   National   Bureau of Economic Research.

National Product in Wartime. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                        1946

National Income: A Summary of Findings. New York: National Bureau of Economic
   Research.

National Product since 1869. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                        1948

"On the Valuation of Social Income — Reflections on Professor Hicks' Article.'
   Econoni/ca 15. pt.l (February 1948):1-16; pt.2 (May 1948):116-3I.

                                        1952




                                         26
"Long-term Changes in the National Income of the United States of America.' In Income
   and Wealth, ser.2. International Association for Research in Income and Wealth.
   Cambridge: Bowes & Bowes.

                                        1953

Shares of Upper Income Groups in Income and Savings. New York: National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

                                        1955

"Toward a Theory of Economic Growth." In National Policy for Economic Welfare at
   Home an.d Abroad, Robert Lekachman, ed. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co.

                                        1961

Capital in the American Economy: Its Formation and Financing. For NBER. Princeton,
   N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press.

                                        1966

Modem Economic Growth: Rate, Structure, and Spread. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ.
  Press.

                                       1971

Economic Growth of Nations: Total Output and Production Structure. Cambridge. M.A.:
   Harvard Univ. Press.

                                       1972

Quantitative Economic Research: Trends and Problems. New York: National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

                                       1973

'Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections." Nobel Address, American
   Economic Review 63(1973):247-58.

Population, Capital, and Growth: Selected Essays. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.

                                       1979

Growth. Population, and Income Distribution: Selected Essays. New York: .W.W. Norton
   &Co.



                                        27
                                     1989

Economic Development, the Family, and Income Distribution. Cambridge: Cambridge
   Univ. Press.




                                     28
