                                                  




                                                 
                                                    


                                            
                                            !"


                                         # $ %&&''
                                 ())%*++,,,$-+%%+,&&''



                          . .  ./
                               01213(4)) 5$4
                                 .!- 67 1809:
                                      4"8111




               
                     
       

  !"""#$ % &'  (  ) )%      *   
% *# +       *  %   *
%    
#)%$) $) $64)" ;;$) 
  $6  !"
# $ %&&''
4"8111
9


                                            $%#%

        ( %%<! $)( $#-),$ $) $64)",6 ;;$) $64-=4$),)(
; $64)"5 -43(!%"!$)7  $6-%643) 5 )"; $6)() $64) )()
% 6( ()($5, $0'2'<% $36 $ ; 3$)",!%"!$),)($6
  ,)( $)(4-=4$)91)>1"7,( ))(!) !<% $3 $( (?)($?
5,)( $)(3% )?-) $6 $-%643) 5 )"4)())(5 6$3 -)
<% $6-"$$?3!%) ) 5!6;)( $) $64)",)43)47-)(; !$6)(
!#)%$6))(,  6 )" !% 6-")($?4$% )$3;)( $) $64)",
)43)4


                                                 !"
$$6" 3(; 5$!$)                                  %)!$);3$! 3
/56$ 5 )"                                            $ 5 )";. ;$ 7 $ 
&' ))                                                 7. '81'9
.!- 67 1809:                                           $6
$6                                                       5!"@43664
-@(5664
                                                1


I. Introduction

       The wide dispersion in wages across industries is one of the more puzzling characteristics

of labor markets. The fact that a worker with the same socioeconomic characteristics—including

education, age, sex, and race—earns 38 percent more in automobile manufacturing than in

apparel production presents a challenge to standard competitive labor market theories (Krueger

and Summers, 1988; Katz and Summers, 1989). Moreover, these industry wage differences

cannot be dismissed as temporary disequilibria. They are highly persistent over long periods of

time (Krueger and Summers, 1987), and there is no evidence of arbitrage activity in employment

movements, even among young, mobile workers (Helwege, 1992).

       The existing literature often invokes efficiency wage considerations, rent-sharing

between firms and workers, or unobserved worker characteristics to explain why comparable

workers earn different wages when they are employed in different industries. Each of these

models has some degree of empirical support in the literature.

       The efficiency wage hypothesis argues that some industries find it optimal to pay higher-

than-average wages to reduce turnover, shirking, and other forms of productivity-reducing

behavior. The observed negative correlation between quit rates and industry wage premia is

consistent with this argument. Interindustry wage differentials could also reflect rent sharing

between firms and workers (Krueger and Summers, 1987). This explanation is consistent with

the fact that the wage premia received by a particular industry extends over many occupations

within that industry. It is also consistent with the significant positive relation between

profitability and wages (Blanchflower, Oswald and Sanfey, 1996). Finally, interindustry wages

differentials may not reflect deviations from competitive behavior, but rather systematic

differences in unobserved workers’ characteristics (Murphy and Topel, 1987, 1990; Gibbons and
                                                 2


Katz, 1992; Blackburn and Neumark, 1992). However, the available evidence on the sorting

hypothesis is mixed: some studies find evidence of unobserved ability differences, but most

studies do not. The cumulative evidence leads many observers to conclude that the persistence of

interindustry wage differentials challenges the implications of competitive labor market theory.

       This paper offers new evidence showing that the market does adjust in response to

interindustry wage differentials. Although the tendency for wages to converge across industries

is extremely weak, several other economic variables exhibit strong long-run responses to the

initial interindustry wage structure. In particular, industries that paid relatively higher wages in

1959 experienced significantly slower employment growth over the subsequent thirty years. The

high-wage industries also experienced slower GDP growth and faster growth of the capital-labor

ratio and labor productivity.

       Our evidence rejects the simplest competitive model of labor markets where flows of

workers across industries provide an equilibrating mechanism for industry wages. Instead,

workers flow in a direction opposite to that predicted by the competitive model. When

considering all of the evidence presented, we conclude that noncompetitive wage theories, such

as efficiency wages or rent sharing, are more plausible explanations than unobserved ability

differences. In fact, practically any theory that generates a rigid interindustry wage structure is

consistent with the dynamic correlations documented in this paper. The “story” that explains

much of the empirical evidence is that firms in high-wage industries respond to their immutably

high wages by substituting capital for labor and by increasing labor productivity. At the same

time, the market responds by switching to goods produced by lower-cost industries.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the data and methods used to estimate

the industry wage premia. Section III specifies and estimates a simple competitive model of
                                                        3


interindustry wage differentials. This section focuses on the relation between wage and

employment dynamics and the initial interindustry wage structure. Section IV investigates the

dynamics of other key industry variables. Section V examines if the leading theories of the

interindustry wage structure are consistent with the evidence.



II. Data

        We calculate the interindustry wage differences by using data drawn from the 1950-1990

Public Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) of the decennial Census. We matched Census industry

codes (CIC) to Standard Industrial Classification Codes (SIC codes), based on descriptions of the

products included in each industry. Because of changing codes over the years, we sometimes had

to combine industries in order to maintain a consistent description of each industry.

        The Census data extracts form a one percent random sample of all working persons aged

18-64 (as of the Census year) who do not live in group quarters. The analysis is restricted to

persons employed in the wage-and-salary sector. The wage information refers to the wage in the

previous calendar year, so the 1960 Census estimates the wage premium for 1959, the 1970

Census estimates the wage premium for 1969, etc. In contrast, the information regarding the

worker’s industry of employment refers to the week prior to the Census. To avoid confusion, we

will refer to the employment data that we calculate from the Census (i.e. the number of workers

in each industry) as if it referred to employment in the previous calendar year.1

        We estimated the following regression model separately in each Census year:




         1 For example, we will refer to the industry employment data calculated from the 1960 Census as giving
industry employment in 1959. Note that there is measurement error in the estimate of the industry wage premium
because the wage variable does not necessarily indicate what the worker would earn in the industry that employed
him or her in the week prior to the Census.
                                                  4


(1)            ln whit = Xhit βt + ωit + εhit ,



where whit is the wage rate of worker h in industry i in Census year t; X is a vector of

socioeconomic characteristics; and ω is an industry fixed effect. The vector X controls for the

worker’s age (indicating if the worker is 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, or 55-64), educational

attainment (indicating if the worker has less than 9 years of schooling, 9 to 11 years, 12 years,

13-15 years, or at least 16 years), race (indicating if the worker is black), sex, region of residence

(indicating in which of the 9 Census regions the worker lives), and occupation (at the one-digit

level). We also used the Census data to estimate the number of persons employed in industry i at

time t. These employment statistics will be used in part of the empirical analysis that follows.

       We will typically estimate a generic second-stage regression model linking the change in

some variable yi (such as output per worker or the capital-labor ratio) between 1959 and 1989 to

the industry wage premium observed in 1959, ωit:



(2)            ∆yit = θ ωit + ηit.



Note that the regressor in this second-stage regression is not the true industry wage premium, but

rather the estimated premium ω̂. The fact that the regressor is a series of estimated coefficients

suggests that the error term in equation (2) will likely be heteroscedastic. In addition, the value of

the wage premium at time t could have a contemporaneous correlation with the error term in

equation (2). We weigh the regressions by some measure of the sample size in the industry cell

to address the heteroscedasticity problem, and we estimate the models using both ordinary least

squares and instrumental variables to address the potential endogeneity of the wage premium.
                                                          5


We use the previous decade’s estimated industry wage premium (e.g., the industry wage

premium in 1949) as the instrument. It turns out that the results are quite similar regardless of

which method we use to estimate the regression.



III. Wage and Employment Dynamics in a Competitive Market

         Many studies have documented the stability of the interindustry wage structure over time.

For example, Krueger and Summers (1987) report that the correlation of average wages across

one-digit industries in 1900 with average wages in 1984 is 0.6. Helwege (1992) finds a

correlation of 0.71 between the wage structures in 1940 and 1980, even after adjusting for

differences in worker characteristics across industries. Furthermore, Lewis (1963) and Krueger

and Summers (1987) analyzed the trend in the standard deviation of wages across industries.

Neither of these studies found a downward trend in this standard deviation, even over a period

stretching several decades.2

         Although there has been some discussion in the literature about how interindustry wages

should behave over time in a competitive labor market, the typical presentation of the model is

heuristic (Helwege, 1992). We believe it is useful to interpret the evidence in terms of a formal

model. In this section, we present a theoretical framework that captures the key features

discussed in the literature in a parsimonious manner. The model helps to isolate the possible

sources of interindustry wage differentials in a competitive setting. We then estimate and test the

competitive model using data drawn from the 1950-90 Censuses.




         2 However, if one uses the data reported in Krueger and Summers (1987, Table 2.2) to graph the standard
deviation of industry wages over time, there seems to be a break in the series so that the standard deviation is much
lower in the post-World War II period. There is no obvious continuing downward trend after 1950.
                                                      6


A. A Competitive Model of Labor Market Adjustment

       Consider a simple competitive model of the labor market where homogeneous workers

switch sectors gradually in response to wage differentials. The representative competitive firm in

each industry i (i = 1, 2, …, I) has the Cobb-Douglas production function:



(3)             Yit = φit Lαit K it1−α ,



with 0 < α < 1. The variable Yit represents industry i’s output in period t; φit gives the level of

technology; Lit gives employment; and Kit gives the capital stock. The representative firm

chooses employment to maximize profits, taking output prices Pit, industry wages wit, and the

rental cost of capital Rit as fixed. The demand for industry output is given by the inverse demand

function:



(4)             Pit = λ it Yit−η ,




with η > 0. The industry’s demand for labor, derived by substituting equation (4) into the

representative firm’s first-order conditions, is:



                         1          1− η          α + η(1 − α)          1 − α − η(1 − α)
                 ln Lit = ln λ it +      ln φit −              ln wit −                  ln Rit
                         η           η                 η                       η
(5)
                          1                          1− α
                        + [ln α + (1 − α)(1 − η) ln        ].
                         η                             α
                                                             7


       For simplicity, suppose that the aggregate supply of labor is fixed at L . We assume that

various market imperfections, such as mobility costs and the slow diffusion of information about

trends in the interindustry wage structure, prevent workers from moving across industries

instantaneously to equalize wages. Instead, workers flow gradually across sectors, away from

low-wage industries and towards high-wage industries. We capture this idea with the following

equation of motion for labor supply in industry i:



(6)            ln Lit = ln Lit −1 + θ (ln wit −1 − ln wt −1 ) + εit ,



                                                               − is the mean log wage in the
where θ is the labor supply elasticity and is non-negative; ln wt-1


economy, and εit is an i.i.d. error term, uncorrelated across industries. This labor supply equation

states that the percent change in the number of workers employed in a particular industry is

positively related to the relative wage of that industry in the previous period. This backward-

looking supply response is consistent with optimizing behavior on the part of workers if wage

movements are highly persistent and there are lags in information flows.

       Equations (5) and (6) yield the paths of equilibrium wage and employment in each

industry, for given sequences of demand shocks λ, technology shocks φ, and the rental cost of

capital R. Interindustry wage differentials are created by shocks to any of these variables. To

illustrate, suppose industry i experiences either a positive permanent shift of relative demand or a

positive technology shock relative to other industries. As a result of the shock, labor demand

shifts out for this industry. Because labor supply is inelastic in the short-run, wages in industry i

rise relative to wages in other industries. These higher wages attract more workers in the
                                                                8


following periods. As workers flow into industry i, wi declines relative to the wage in other

industries until wages are again equalized.

        We can manipulate equations (5) and (6) to derive the subsequent changes in

employment and wages as a function of the initial industry wage. These equations are given by:



                                 − θη
(7a)             ∆ ln wit =                (ln wit −1 − ln wt −1 ) + υit ,
                              α + η(1 − α)



(7b)             ∆ ln Lit = θ (ln wit −1 − ln wt −1 ) + εit ,



                      1
where    υit =                [∆ ln λ it + (1 − η) ∆ ln φit − (1 − α)(1 − η)∆ ln Rit − ηεit ] .   Equation   (7a)
                 α + η(1 − α)

predicts that industries with high initial wages should experience lower-than-average subsequent

wage growth. Equation (7b) predicts that industries with high initial wages should experience

higher-than-average employment growth.

        Equation (7a), which links wage growth to initial wages, is similar to the type of

convergence regressions used in the studies that examine international (or inter-regional)

differences in growth rates (Barro, 1991; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992). The typical test of

convergence in that literature estimates a cross-country regression of output growth on initial

output. A negative coefficient on initial output is interpreted as indicating some sort of

convergence—namely, that initially poorer countries are more likely to grow faster than initially

richer countries. By applying Galton’s fallacy, Quah (1993) points out that this type of “mean”

convergence does not imply that the cross-sectional dispersion diminishes over time. Galton’s

fallacy also applies to the persistence of interindustry wage differences. An empirical finding that
                                                 9


there is some mean reversion in interindustry wages is not necessarily related to trends in the

standard deviation of the cross-sectional distribution of wages over time. In other words, the

question of whether high-wage industries regress to the mean is distinct from the question of

whether the standard deviation of the cross-sectional distribution of wages is decreasing over

time.



B. Empirical Estimates of the Competitive Model

        We estimated versions of equations (7a) and (7b) across industries for 3-digit industry

groupings. Our model implies that the error term in the employment growth regression consists

of the error in the employment adjustment equations (ε), whereas the error term in the wage

growth regression consists of both ε and the growth rates of λ, φ, and R between periods t-1 and

t. Both because of the measurement error issues discussed above and because of possible

correlation between the growth rate of these variables and initial wages, we also use instrumental

variables (using the previous decade’s wage as the instrument) to estimate the models. All

regressions are weighted by the sample size of the industry cell.

        The top panel of Table 1 reports the relevant coefficients estimated from the wage growth

regressions that use data spanning the entire sample period (1959 through 1989), as well as for

each intermediate decade. Consider first the estimates for the entire period, shown in the first

row of the table. The evidence indicates that industries with higher initial wages (in 1959) have

lower wage growth for the subsequent thirty years. However, the estimated regression

coefficients, whether estimated by ordinary least squares or instrumental variable, imply

extremely sluggish adjustment, with a rate of convergence of only 0.5 percent per year. If we

take this point estimate literally, it would take 138 years to close just half of the initial gap
                                                 10


between the industry premium and the mean. These results confirm the literature’s conclusion

that the interindustry wage structure is very stable.

       A possible source of the wage sluggishness is evident from the coefficients estimated in

the employment growth regression, shown in the bottom panel of the table. The relation between

employment growth and initial wages is the opposite of that implied by the competitive model.

In other words, industries with high initial wages experience lower rather than higher

employment growth. Moreover, the estimated coefficients are statistically significant in all cases.

The point estimates imply a value of θ, the labor supply elasticity, of −.042 to −.053, which is

contrary to the basic prediction that θ should be positive. Moreover, the estimated value of θ,

combined with the convergence coefficient from the wage growth regression, implies very high

elasticities of demand. If the labor share α is 0.75, the OLS regressions imply a value of η of .09,

indicating elasticities of labor demand exceeding 10. Put simply, the basic competitive

explanation of interindustry wage and employment adjustments is clearly at odds with the data.

       Figure 1 illustrates the relation between the annual rate of growth in the industry’s

employment (measured as log differences) and the initial industry wage premium, using three-

digit SIC codes. Appendix Table A-1 describes the SIC codes used in the analysis. The size of

the circle denoting each data point in the figure is proportional to 1959 industry employment.

Figure 1 shows the unambiguous negative relation implied by the regressions. Industries with

high initial wages and low-subsequent employment growth include railroad transportation (SIC

40), coal mining (11), and steel (331). In contrast, such industries as florists (599), dressmaking

(729), and eating and drinking retail (58), had low initial wages and high subsequent

employment growth. Some of the “outlying” industries (i.e., those industries with fast

employment growth and high initial wages) include miscellaneous professional services (892),
                                                11


services for transportation (47), air transport (45), and securities and brokerage (62). It is worth

noting that several of these atypical industries were deregulated during the 1959-89 period.

       The remaining rows of Table 1 report the estimated regression coefficients when the

models are estimated separately for each of the decades between 1959 and 1989. The evidence

on wage convergence varies considerably across decades. There was some regression to the

mean between 1959 and 1969. In fact, the regression coefficient implies that half of the initial

wage gap would be eliminated in 26 years. The wage convergence coefficient, however, changes

erratically across decades. In contrast, the negative coefficient in the employment growth

regressions is fairly stable over time. In each decade, the industries that paid relatively higher

wages at the beginning of the decade experienced relatively lower employment growth during

the decade.

       In sum, the evidence contradicts a simple competitive explanation for the interindustry

wage structure. There is little mean convergence in wages. And industries that pay higher than

average initial wages experience slower employment growth in subsequent years.




IV. More Evidence on Market Responses

       We have seen that there is a strong employment response to the interindustry wage

structure: employment declines in high-wage industries. One can explain the decline in

employment in terms of a simple non-competitive story. Employers respond to persistently high

wages by shrinking their work force, and perhaps switching towards other modes of production.

To shed light on this and other explanations, we now examine whether there exist any other

dynamic responses to interindustry wage differentials. The literature already provides a large set

of stylized facts regarding the cross-section correlations between interindustry wage premia and
                                                         12


such variables as capital-labor ratios, unionization, and productivity (Krueger and Summers,

1987; Dickens and Katz, 1987). We estimate dynamic correlations between the interindustry

wage structure and several key economic variables. In the next section, we discuss possible

mechanisms leading to these correlations.

         The additional data used in this section are drawn from the National Income and Product

Accounts (NIPA), which are available only at the two-digit industry level. We construct the two-

digit interindustry wage differentials by taking employment-weighted averages of the three-digit

wage premia. Unless otherwise indicated, we now use the NIPA data for full-time equivalent

employment as our employment measure.3 Our industry groupings are dictated by NIPA data

availability. For example, all retail trade is aggregated into one category. We have a sample of 52

industries after aggregating the data. Appendix Table A-2 lists the two-digit industries used in

our study. Finally, the NIPA data are available through 1997, so we estimate the dynamic

correlations over the 1959-1997 period.



A. Basic Results from the NIPA

         Table 2 reports the coefficients from regressions that relate the change in nine different

economic outcomes to the initial wage premium in the industry. The first row of the table

reproduces the employment growth results using the NIPA employment measure (i.e., full-time

equivalent employment), rather than the Census measure of the number of workers employed in

the particular industry.4 The employment evidence from the NIPA data is quite similar to the



         3  Unlike the Census, where the employment data for, say, 1959 refers to the number of workers employed
in a particular industry in the last week of March 1960, the NIPA measure of employment for 1959 refers to
employment in that year.

         4  The employment and wage growth regressions estimated at the two-digit level yield results that are very
similar to the (Census-based) three-digit regressions reported in the previous section. In the wage growth regression,
                                                           13


evidence from the Census data. The growth in full-time equivalent employment is negatively

related to initial wages, and this negative correlation is found not only for the entire 38-year

period from 1959 to 1997, but for each decade as well. Figure 2 illustrates the relation between

(NIPA) employment growth over the entire sample period and the 1959 wage premia. The figure

shows a tight negative relationship. Examples of low-wage and high employment growth

industries are retail trade (200), hotels (70), and health care (80). Examples of high-wage and

low employment growth industries are coal mining (11), railroad transportation (40), and

primary metals (33). The outliers tend to be small industries, such as leather (31) and securities

and brokerage (62).

         The second row of the table examines the link between output and the interindustry wage

structure. The dependent variable is the growth in the industry’s nominal GDP. The coefficient

estimated for the entire sample period indicates that the industries with high initial wages had

relatively lower subsequent GDP growth. The elasticity of the GDP response to the initial wage

is only about half the size of the employment elasticity. Although the regression coefficient

relating GDP growth and initial wages is significant when we use the entire 1959-97 period, the

coefficients are less precise when we estimate the model in each of the individual decades.

Figure 3 shows the scatter diagram of industry GDP growth (over the 1959-97 period) and initial

wages. While the relationship is not as tight as the one for employment growth, the negative

pattern is evident. Many of the industries in this graph have roughly the same placement as in the

graph linking employment growth and initial wages. In fact, the across-industry correlation

between full-time equivalent employment growth and GDP growth is 0.92.



the coefficient on initial wages is -.004 in the two-digit data, which is quite close to the coefficient of -.005 obtained
in the three-digit data. Similarly, in the employment growth regression, the OLS coefficient on initial wages is -.054
in the two-digit data and -.042 in the three-digit data.
                                                14


       We next investigate the relation between worker productivity (defined as GDP per

worker) and the interindustry wage structure. The third row of Table 2 shows the results from

regressions of the growth rate of GDP per worker on the initial wage premium. The data reveal a

significant positive relationship between the initial wage premium and the growth of labor

productivity both in the 1959-1997 period, as well as in each decade. The regression that uses the

entire span of the data produces the highest R-squared of the table, indicating that 31 percent of

the variation in labor productivity growth across industries can be explained by the initial wage

premium. Figure 4 shows the scatter plot of worker productivity growth for 1959 to 1997.

Besides the obvious positive relationship, the graph shows another pattern. The scatter of points

appears to be lower triangular: while high-wage industries experience a range of rates of growth

of productivity, low-wage industries experience uniformly lower rates of growth of productivity.

       The results reported in rows 2 and 3 of the table (for industry output and worker

productivity) use the nominal GDP data because these variables are available for the entire

sample period. Beginning in 1977, the NIPA data can be used to break up GDP into its price and

output components. Prices are measured using the implicit price deflator for industry output and

output is measured in chained 1992 dollars. Rows 4 and 5 of the table relate these two

components of the growth of GDP to the initial wage in the industry.

       Although most of the regression coefficients suggest that price changes and real GDP

growth are negatively related to initial wages, the effects are often insignificantly different from

zero. There is, however, a marginally significant relation between price changes and the initial

wage premia over the entire 1959-97 period. The drop in the precision of the estimates is due to

the splitting of industry GDP into its components, rather than to the truncated time period. The

regression of nominal GDP on the initial wage premium for the sample period of 1977 to 1997
                                                15


(not shown in the table) is precisely estimated, with a coefficient of -.047 and a standard error of

.018. Hence it is the combined effect of the negative relationships between initial wages and

prices and between initial wages and output that makes the total impact on nominal GDP

significant.

        In contrast, row 6 of Table 2 shows that real GDP per worker has an even stronger

positive relationship with initial wages than nominal GDP per worker. The coefficient for the

truncated period of 1977 to 1997 is .065 for output per worker, whereas the regression of

nominal GDP per worker for the same sample period (not shown in the table) has a coefficient of

.024 and a standard error of .010. The elasticity is weaker for nominal GDP per worker because

of the negative relationship between initial wages and the subsequent changes in relative prices.

        The evidence, therefore, strongly shows that at the same time that employment was

declining in high-wage industries, worker productivity was rising. This finding suggests that the

persistent high wages in some industries encouraged firms to switch to alternative methods of

production. Rows 7 and 8 of Table 2 examine this hypothesis by estimating the relation between

changes in the capital stock and in the capital-labor ratio to the initial wage premium. In most

cases there is a negative, but insignificant, relationship between the growth in the real capital

stock and the initial wage in the industry. However, capital per worker grows significantly faster

in those industries that paid relatively higher initial wages. The growth in the capital-labor ratio

was particularly rapid for the high-wage industries during the 1970s. Figure 5 shows the scatter

diagram relating the growth of capital per worker (between 1959 and 1997) to the initial wage

premium.

        Finally, the last row of Table 2 shows that there is a negative relationship between the

growth in labor’s share of output and the initial wage in the industry. The coefficient is
                                                 16


significantly negative for the entire sample and for the 1960s. Industries that began the period

paying relatively high wages show a tendency for slower growth in labor’s share of GDP.

       Our dynamic results are related to some of the static results documented in the literature.

In particular, as noted by Krueger and Summers (1986), there is some consensus that high-wage

industries also tend to have higher capital-labor ratios and lower labor share of costs in the cross-

section. Our dynamic evidence shows that these effects grow over time: despite beginning the

period with higher-than-average capital-labor ratios, high wage industries experience even

greater growth of the capital-labor ratio over time.

       To summarize, we have found that a high initial wage premium in the industry is

associated with:

       •   Slower growth in employment

       •   Slower growth in GDP

       •   Faster growth in worker productivity

       •   Faster growth in the capital-labor ratio

       •   Slower growth in labor’s share of GDP



B. The Role of Manufacturing

       Before proceeding to discuss the firm-level and market-level adjustments that could

generate these dynamic correlations, it is worth examining if our evidence is driven by trends in

the manufacturing industry. It is well known that many industries in the manufacturing sector

paid relatively high wages in the 1950s (perhaps as a result of high unionization rates) and that

employment in these industries shrank (as a fraction of the work force) in the subsequent

decades.
                                                        17


       It turns out, however, that the correlation between the interindustry wage premia and

manufacturing is not all that high. For example, distinguishing whether an industry is a

manufacturing industry explains only twelve percent of the cross-sectional variation of the 1959

wage premium.5 To investigate whether the manufacturing distinction can explain the dynamic

correlations, we re-estimated the regressions for the 1959-97 period after adding a dummy

variable indicating if the industry is in manufacturing. The results are presented in Table 3.

       The first row of the table regresses the change in employment on the initial wage

premium. The data indicate that the manufacturing dummy variable has significant predictive

power: employment declined much faster in manufacturing industries. However, the data also

indicate that the initial wage premium remains significantly and negatively related to subsequent

employment growth. In other words, the shrinking employment in high-wage industries cannot

be attributed to a spurious correlation generated by trends in the manufacturing sector.

       The remaining rows of the table indicate that, for the most part, the sign of the dynamic

correlations is unaffected by the introduction of the manufacturing sector dummy. The point

estimates, however, are often less significant. In some cases, such as in the regression that relates

the industry’s GDP to the initial wage, the estimated coefficient is negative, but no longer

significant. Nevertheless, even after adjusting for trends in the manufacturing sector, the initial

wage premium still has a strong positive effect on the growth of GDP per worker (whether real

or nominal) and on the capital-labor ratio. In short, most of the key dynamic correlations that we

have uncovered cannot be attributed to long-run trends in the manufacturing industry.



C. Worker Productivity and the Interindustry Wage Structure


       5   This statistic reports the R-squared from a regression of the 1959 industry wage on a dummy variable
                                                             18


         Some of the most intriguing evidence to emerge from the dynamic correlations reported

in Tables 2 and 3 relates to the positive effect of initial wages on worker productivity. The link

between labor productivity and the interindustry wage structure is, of course, related to an issue

that has interested many researchers in recent years, the link between wages and the adoption of

new technologies. We now explore the relationship between productivity and the wage premium

in more depth.

         The first three columns of Table 4 report the estimated coefficients from regressions of

labor productivity growth on alternative measures of worker compensation. The first column

reproduces the “baseline” regression from Table 2 for reference. This column shows the

regression of productivity growth on the initial (Census-based) wage premium.

         Column 2 of the table estimates the same regression using a different independent

variable. In particular, column 2 uses the initial average compensation per worker, rather than the

Census-based wage premium, as the wage measure. Average compensation per worker combines

the returns to both observed and unobserved characteristics of workers. While this variable is

also positively related to subsequent productivity, the point estimate is smaller (about half the

size) and the explanatory power falls by about a third. Column 3 shows that when both variables

are entered in the regression, the Census-based wage premium is still significant, but the

compensation variable is not. In fact, the addition of the compensation variable to the regression

does not increase the explanatory power of the model. Therefore, the evidence indicates that

whatever is driving productivity growth is intimately linked to that part of wages that is

unrelated to the observable characteristics of workers.




indicating if the industry is in the manufacturing sector.
                                               19


       The remaining columns of Table 4 explore the sensitivity of this finding to the inclusion

of additional variables in the regression. Column 4 shows the effect of including the level of

capital per worker in 1959 in the regression. This variable is not significant, and adds little

explanatory power. The coefficient on the initial wage premium is unchanged.

       As we saw in Table 2, however, industries with high initial wages had higher subsequent

growth in the capital-labor ratio. To determine how much of the growth in labor productivity can

be accounted for by the contemporaneous growth in capital per worker, we added the latter

variable to the regression. Column 5 shows that the growth in the capital-labor ratio has a

significant and positive independent effect on the growth in labor productivity, increasing the R-

squared of the regression from 0.31 to 0.54.6 Note, however, that the coefficient on the initial

wage premium remains significant and its magnitude falls only slightly. In other words, while the

growth in the capital-labor ratio can explain a good part of the contemporaneous variation in the

growth of output per worker, much of the impact of the initial wage premium on labor

productivity is operating through an independent channel.

       Column 6 of Table 4 adds output per worker in 1959 to the regression specification. This

variable plays no role in explaining the interindustry dispersion in worker productivity growth.

Finally, column 7 adds the growth in output per worker in the preceding decade, 1949 to 1959, to

the regression. This variable is also not significantly related to subsequent labor productivity

growth. In sum, none of the controls added to the regression specification significantly dampen

the relationship between the initial wage premium and labor productivity growth.

       As we noted earlier, one of the leading explanations for the existence of interindustry

wage differentials is the unobserved heterogeneity of workers across industries. Workers in some
                                                             20


industries are paid more because they have unobserved abilities that lead them to be more

productive. The sorting hypothesis, in effect, assumes a positive correlation between worker

productivity and the industry wage premium. One could assess the validity of this assumption by

examining if variations in productivity across industries can explain interindustry variation in

wages. To address this question, we regressed two measures of industry compensation on GDP

per worker and compared the results for different time periods. The first wage measure is the

Census-based industry premium we have used throughout the paper. By construction, this

measure adjusts for differences in observable characteristics (such as education, occupation,

gender, and age) across workers employed in different industries. The second wage measure is

the NIPA total compensation per full-time equivalent employee. We would expect the second

measure to be more highly correlated with output per worker because it does not adjust for

differences in observable skills across industries.

           Table 5 reports the estimated R-squared from the cross-section regressions of industry

compensation on GDP per full-time equivalent employment. The real estate industry is a

significant outlier in the data, so that we show the results both including and excluding this

industry from the sample.7

           The regressions show an intriguing pattern: industry wages and labor productivity have

become increasingly correlated over time. For example, the R-squared from regressions of the

Census wage measure on worker productivity (and excluding the real estate industry) rose from

25 percent in 1959 to 70 percent in 1989. Looking at individual decades, the cross-section


           6   The R-squared of a regression that only includes the variable measuring growth in the capital-labor ratio
is 0.36.

           7
          Measured GDP per full-time equivalent worker is exceedingly high in the real estate industry because the
imputed rental value of housing is counted as part of the output in this industry. We attempted to adjust real estate
GDP to exclude the rental value of housing, but we encountered various confounding measurement issues.
                                                   21


correlation between labor productivity and wages increased the most during the 1970s and the

least during the 1960s. Figure 6a illustrates the relation between the industry wage premium and

labor productivity in 1959, while Figure 6b illustrates the same relationship in 1989. There is

obviously a much tighter link between the two variables in 1989.

       To summarize, we have found:

•   It is the part of wages not related to observable characteristics of workers that is correlated

    with labor productivity growth.

•   Higher initial capital per worker does not explain the link between the initial wage premium

    in the industry and subsequent productivity growth

•   The effect of the initial wage premium on productivity growth operates through a channel

    other than through an increase in the capital-labor ratio.

•   The cross-sectional correlation between labor productivity levels and the interindustry wage

    structure increased substantially over time.

       Overall, these findings tell an interesting story. As we have seen, the interindustry wage

structure is stable over time. The interindustry productivity structure, however, is not. The data

clearly show that the productivity structure adjusted to the existing (and rigid) interindustry wage

differentials, so that high-wage industries became increasingly more productive.




V. Implications for Leading Theories of Industry Wage Differentials

       Which of the leading theories of the interindustry wage structure can best explain the

dynamic correlations reported in the last two sections? It is beyond the scope of this paper to

write down fully specified models for each of the contending theories. We can, however, discuss
                                                22


whether the empirical evidence presented in this paper is consistent with or contradicts the broad

implications of these theories.

       First, we believe the evidence strongly points to a non-competitive theory of wage setting

as the source of the initial wage differentials. The negative association between initial wages and

subsequent employment and GDP growth suggests that high wage industries were at an initial

competitive disadvantage. This disadvantage, in turn, created a tendency for them to shrink over

time. In contrast, the industries that started the period with low wages had a competitive

advantage: they experienced faster than average employment and GDP growth over the

subsequent three or four decades.

       It is also difficult to explain many of these dynamic correlations by relying on a model

that stresses unobserved ability differentials as the initial source of the interindustry wage

structure. The sorting theory argues that the measured wage premia represent returns to skills

that are unobserved by the econometrician. If this explanation were correct, we would expect a

higher correlation between initial wages and initial labor productivity than the one we presented

in Table 5. Moreover, if the workers in the high-wage industries indeed had higher-than-average

ability, why did those industries consistently shrink in every decade since 1960? One could argue

that an increase in the return to skills—which indeed occurred in the U.S. labor market—might

hamper industries that require higher skills, and hence induce them to reduce employment and

shrink. This argument, however, ignores the fact that wage differentials across skill groups did

not begin to rise until the late 1970s, while employment in high-wage industries declined in

every decade since 1960.
                                               23


       As a result, non-competitive models of interindustry wage differentials are most

consistent with the facts. Unfortunately, our results do not help us distinguish between the two

leading non-competitive theories of the interindustry wage structure.

       Consider, for example, the long-run implications of rent sharing. Historical labor

institutions and market structures that may have led to rent sharing could account for the initial

differences in wages across industries. For example, Borjas and Ramey (1994) present a model

in which market power in the output sector translates into higher wages for workers through

bargaining outcomes. While these rent-sharing mechanisms may have arisen because these

industries initially had a high degree of market power and profitability, the high wages they

created put these industries at a competitive disadvantage in the long run. Bargaining models

along the line of Lawrence and Lawrence (1985) might explain the puzzling failure of wages to

decline. Lawrence and Lawrence suggest that when an industry declines, the elasticity of labor

demand also declines because substitution of capital for labor is hampered by the putty-clay

nature of capital. The lower elasticity of labor demand raises workers’ bargaining power, so

wages may actually increase during an industrial decline.

       Efficiency wage theories are also potentially consistent with the facts. Firms in some

industries may find it difficult to monitor workers or face particularly disruptive effects when

workers quit their jobs. Firms in these industries find it optimal to pay wages above the

competitive level to encourage workers not to shirk or leave their jobs. Over time, however, the

higher efficiency wage puts these industries at a competitive disadvantage. As market forces play

themselves out, the high-wage industries again experience lower employment and GDP growth.

       In short, practically any theory that generates a rigid interindustry wage structure is

consistent with the basic facts. Firms operating in the industries that face higher labor costs do
                                                      24


not sit idly by. Instead, they try to maximize profits subject to the constraints imposed by the

rigid wage structure. Faced with immutably high wages, these firms try to attenuate the negative

consequences in two distinct ways. First, they are more likely to substitute capital for labor. This

behavior generates the steeper decline in employment and the higher growth in the capital-labor

ratio observed in high-wage industries. Second, they are more likely to create and adopt new

technologies that significantly increase the labor productivity of their workers. This strategy was

so successful that the observed correlation between the wage premia and labor productivity

doubled or tripled in 30 years. In other words, since wages could not fall to equal productivity,

high wage firms responded by raising productivity to equal wages.

        By the end of the period, therefore, the data are consistent with the observable prediction

of the sorting hypothesis: more productive workers are working in high-wage industries. The

mechanism behind the correlation, though, may be the reverse of the one that is typically used to

motivate the sorting story. For example, Bartel and Sicherman (1999) argue that the positive

correlation between technological change and wages is primarily due to the sorting of more able

workers into industries with more rapid technological change. This argument fits neatly with the

conjecture that a more able workforce is necessary for the adoption of new technology. Bartel

and Sicherman estimate a strong positive correlation between the wages of young workers from

the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) and various contemporaneous measures of

technological change at the industry level. However, this correlation vanishes once the model

includes worker fixed effects, presumably implying that there is a strong correlation between the

interindustry wage premium and ability differentials across industries.8


          8 By construction, the impact of the technological change variable in the Bartel-Sicherman study is
identified from the evolution of wages in the subsample of workers who switch industries in the sample period, a
switch that is assumed to be exogenous. One could question whether many workers would voluntarily choose to
switch a well-paid job in a high-wage industry for a less lucrative job in a low-wage industry.
                                                25


        Our evidence indicates that rather than technology leading to higher demand for more

able workers, and hence higher wages in the technology-using industries, the more likely

mechanism appears to be that higher wages led to new technology and the selection of more able

workers. Firms responded to the existing interindustry wage structure by adjusting their hiring

and investment decisions so as to justify the high wages that they had to pay in the first place. If

the initial source of the high wages in high-wage industries had been a more able workforce, and

if this high-quality work force allowed firms to adopt new technology at a faster pace, it would

seem that these industries should have experienced faster-than-average GDP growth. Instead, our

evidence reveals that the high wages led to a shrinking of the work force and to a shrinking of

the industry itself.

        Finally, not only do the firms in high wage industries adapt to the constraints imposed by

a rigid interindustry wage structure, but the market itself also changes. Because high-wage

industries are at a competitive disadvantage, the market responds by substituting other goods for

those produced by high-wage firms. This type of market-level substitution generates both the

relative decline in prices observed in high-wage industries as well as the decline in the GDP of

these industries. In other words, labor became a less important input in the production process of

high-wage industries, and the output produced by these industries became a less important part

of the overall market.




VI. Conclusions

        We began our analysis of how the market responds to the interindustry wage structure by

specifying and estimating a simple competitive model of interindustry wage differentials. Our

empirical results contradict the basic implications of the competitive model. We found very weak
                                               26


tendencies for industry wage differentials to converge over time. And rather than workers

flowing to high wage industries (and thus helping arbitrage the wage differentials), we found that

high wage industries in 1959 experienced significantly slower-than -average employment growth

from 1959 to 1989.

       The paper also investigated the relationship between the initial industry wage premia and

the adjustment of other economic variables. The evidence suggests that industries that had

initially high wages experienced not only slower employment growth, but also slower GDP

growth. Moreover, these industries also experienced significantly greater growth of labor

productivity and capital-labor ratios. Finally, the cross-sectional correlation between the

industry’s wage premium and labor productivity grew dramatically between 1959 and 1997.

       The evidence is not consistent with either a simple competitive model or with a model

that attributes the interindustry wage structure to unobserved heterogeneity of workers across

industries. We conclude that the evidence is most consistent with a non-competitive model of the

interindustry wage structure, such as rent-sharing or efficiency wages. In fact, any model that

generates a rigid interindustry wage structure will likely generate many of the dynamic

correlations documented in this paper. The rigid wages encourage firms to substitute capital for

labor, and encourage the market to substitute cheaper goods for the relatively expensive goods

produced by the high-wage industries.
                                              27


                                          References

Barro, Robert J. “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 106 (May 1991): 407-433.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy 100
       (April 1992): 223-251.

Bartel, Ann P. and Nachum Sicherman, “Technological Change and Wages: An Interindustry
        Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 107 (1999): 285-325.

Blackburn, McKinley and David Neumark, “Unobserved Ability, Efficiency Wages, and
      Interindustry Wage Differentials,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (1992): 1421-36.

Blanchflower, David G., Andrew J. Oswald and Peter Sanfey, “Wages, Profits and Rent-
      Sharing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (February 1996): 227-252.

Borjas, George J. and Valerie A. Ramey, “Foreign Competition, Market Power, and Wage
        Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (November 1995): 1075-1110.

Gibbons, Robert, and Lawrence Katz, “Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Interindustry Wage
      Differentials?” Review of Economic Studies 59 (1992): 515-535.

Helwege, Jean, “Sectoral Shifts and Interindustry Wage Differentials.” Journal of Labor
      Economics, 10 ( January 1992): 55-84.

Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers, “Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard, editors. Unemployment and the
      Structure of Labor Markets. New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987, pp. 17-47.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers. “Industry Rents: Evidence and Implications,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1989): 209-75.

Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers, “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
      Structure.” Econometrica, 56 (March 1988): 259-293.

Lawrence, Colin and Robert Z. Lawrence, “Manufacturing Wage Dispersion: An End Game
      Interpretation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1985:1, 47-106.

Lewis, H. Gregg, Unionism and Relative Wages in the US. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, 1963.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel, “Efficiency Wages Reconsidered: Theory and
      Evidence.” in Yoram Weiss and Gideon Fishelson, eds. Advances in the Theory and
      Measurement of Unemployment. London: Macmillan, 1990.
                                            28


________, “Unemployment, Risk, and Earnings: Testing for Equalizing Wage Differences in the
      Labor Market,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard, editors. Unemployment and the
      Structure of Labor Markets. New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987, pp. 103-140.

Quah, Danny, “Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the Convergence Hypothesis.” Scandinavian
      Journal of Economics, 95 (December 1993): 427-443.
                                                         29



                         Table 1. Estimates of Wage and Employment Convergence
                                (3-digit Industries, 129 observations)


                                                        OLS Regression                      IV Regression
Regression specification                          Coefficient        R-Squared        Coefficient      R-Squared
A. Regression of average annual wage
   growth on the initial wage premia

   1. 1959 to 1989                                   -.005              .064            -.005              .064
                                                     (.002)                             (.002)

   2. 1959 to 1969                                   -.026              .555            -.027              .555
                                                     (.002)                             (.003)

   3. 1969 to 1979                                    .015              .066             .020              .057
                                                     (.005)                             (.005)

   4. 1979 to 1989                                   -.005              .025            -.006              .025
                                                     (.003)                             (.003)

B. Regression of average annual
   employment growth on the initial
   wage premia

   1. 1959 to 1989                                   -.042              .096            -.053              .089
                                                     (.011)                             (.015)

   2. 1959 to 1969                                   -.034              .040            -.048              .033
                                                     (.015)                             (.019)

   3. 1969 to 1979                                   -.043              .043            -.063              .034
                                                     (.018)                             (.019)

   4. 1979 to 1989                                   -.052              .078            -.041              .074
                                                     (.015)                             (.017)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. The IV estimates use the
previous decade’s wage premium as an instrument. The regressions are weighted by the industry’s employment in
the initial year (as measured by the decennial Census).
                                                         30


                            Table 2. Regressions on Initial Wage Premium
                                 (Two-digit industries, IV estimates)

Dependent variable is the
                                     1959- 1997          1960s           1970s            1980s           1990s
1959-97 growth in:
1. Full-time  Coefficient               -.061            -.037           -.074            -.077           -.043
equivalent                              (.016)           (.018)          (.026)           (.024)          (.021)
employment R-squared                     .206             .056            .076             .271            .089

2. Nominal        Coefficient           -.032            -.024           -.011            -.048           -.018
GDP                                     (.016)           (.016)          (.026)           (.026)          (.021)
                  R-squared              .070             .035            .000             .136            .000

3. Nominal        Coefficient            .029             .014            .062             .029            .025
GDP per                                 (.006)           (.007)          (.015)           (.013)          (.014)
worker            R-squared              .307             .019            .181             .102            .120

4. Relative       Coefficient           -.038                 ---            ---          -.015           -.035
prices                                  (.022)                                            (.027)          (.029)
(1977-97)         R-squared              .015                                              .024            .003

5. Real GDP       Coefficient           -.006                 ---            ---          -.032            .016
(1977-97)                               (.022)                                            (.021)          (.033)
                  R-squared              .006                                              .060            .002

6. Real GDP       Coefficient            .065                 ---            ---           .044            .059
per worker                              (.025)                                            (.026)          (.032)
(1977-97)         R-squared              .086                                              .108            .063

7. Real           Coefficient           -.028            -.015            .005            -.041           -.059
Capital                                 (.021)           (.022)          (.025)           (.033)          (.022)
Stock             R-squared              .037             .008            .002             .026            .080

8. Capital        Coefficient            .034             .022            .078             .036           -.016
per worker                              (.016)           (.016)          (.026)           (.032)          (.021)
                  R-squared              .065             .019            .110             .069            .000

9. Labor’s        Coefficient           -.013            -.014           -.019            -.010           -.008
share of                                (.005)           (.007)          (.016)           (.010)          (.011)
GDP               R-squared              .069             .022            .000             .039            .026


Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term and have 52 observations.
The IV regressions use the wage premium at the beginning of the previous decade as an instrument. The regressions
are weighted by the industry’s employment in the initial year.
                                                         31


                     Table 3. Sensitivity of Results to the Manufacturing Sector
                                (Two-digit industries, IV estimates)

Dependent variable is the 1959-            Coefficient on the           Coefficient on the
97 growth in:                             1959 wage premium            manufacturing dummy              R-squared
1. Full-time equivalent                           -0.042                       -0.017                      0.380
 employment                                        (.016)                       (.005)

2. Nominal GDP                                    -0.014                       -0.015                      0.256
                                                   (.015)                       (.004)

3. Nominal GDP per worker                          0.028                        0.001                      0.317
                                                   (.007)                       (.002)

4. Relative prices (1977-97)                      -0.028                       -0.010                      0.067
                                                   (.023)                       (.007)

5. Real GDP (1977-97)                             -0.003                       -0.003                      0.008
                                                   (.023)                       (.007)

6. Real GDP per worker (1977-                      0.046                        0.017                      0.191
97)
                                                   (.025)                        (.007)

7. Real Capital Stock                             -0.015                       -0.012                      0.105
                                                   (.022)                       (.006)

8. Capital per worker                              0.027                        0.004                      0.082
                                                   (.017)                       (.005)

9. Labor’s share of GDP                           -0.010                       -0.003                      0.128
                                                   (.006)                       (.002)


Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term and have 52 observations.
The regressions use the wage premium at the beginning of the previous decade as an instrument. The regressions are
weighted by the industry’s employment in the initial year.
                                                           32


                   Table 4. Labor Productivity Growth Regressions
    Dependent Variable: Annualized growth of GDP per worker between 1959 and 1997
                          (Two-digit industries, IV estimates)


                                                                          Regression
Variables                                (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)
1959 Wage premium,                     0.029      ---           0.043       0.028      0.022     0.030       0.031
  from the 1960 Census                 (.006)                   (.016)      (.007)     (.005)    (.007)      (.007)

NIPA average                          ---         0.014          -.010     ---         ---      ---         ---
  compensation per worker                         (.004)         (.010)

Capital per worker in 1959            ---         ---           ---         0.001      ---      ---         ---
                                                                            (.001)

Growth in capital per                 ---         ---           ---        ---         0.214    ---         ---
  worker, 1959-97                                                                      (.044)

Nominal GDP per worker in             ---         ---           ---        ---         ---       -.001      ---
1959
                                                                                                 (.002)

Growth in nominal GDP per             ---         ---           ---        ---         ---      ---          -.032
  worker, 1949-59                                                                                            (.075)

R-squared                              0.307      0.208         0.316       0.323      0.536     0.308      0.309

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term and have 52 observations.
The regressions use the 1949 wage premium as an instrument for the 1959 wage premium. The regressions are
weighted by the industry’s employment in 1959.
                                              33


       Table 5. Cross-Section Regressions of Industry Wages on Labor Productivity

                 Wage Premia from Census                Compensation per FTE from NIPA
Year
             R-squared,            R-squared,            R-squared,            R-squared,
          all 52 industries   excluding real estate   all 52 industries   excluding real estate
1959            0.098               0.256                   0.165               0.401
1969            0.133               0.323                   0.208               0.484
1979            0.299               0.577                   0.353               0.664
1989            0.412               0.698                   0.451               0.712
1997           ---                 ---                      0.486               0.724
                                               34


                                          Appendix
                           Table A-1. Three-Digit Industry Codes
10 Metal mining                   326 Pottery                          521 Lumber retail
11 Coal mining                    328 Misc stone                       525 Hardware & firm retail
13 Oil & gas extraction           331 Primary steel                    533 Variety stores
14 Nonmetal mining                333 Primary aluminum                 53 General merchandise
15 Construction                   342 Cutlery, handtools               545 Dairy product retail
201 Meat products                 344 Fabric. Struct. metal            54 Food stores
202 Dairy products                341 Misc Fabric structural           55 MV retailing
203 Canning                       35 Misc machinery                    554 Gas stations
204 Grain Mill products           352 Farm equip                       56 Apparel retail
205 Bakery products               357 Office & computer                566 Shoe retail
206 Confectionery                 36 Electrical equipment              571 Furniture retail
208 Beverage                      371 Motor vehicles                   572 Appliance, TV
209 Misc food prep                372 Aircraft                         58 Eating & drinking
21 Tobacco manuf                  373 Ships & boats                    591 Drug stores
225 Knitting Mills                374 Misc transport equip             592 Liquor stores
226 Dyeing & finishing            38 Instrument                        597 Jewelry stores
227 Floor coverings               386 Photo                            598 Fuel & ice
221 Yarn, thread                  387 Watches & clocks                 599 Florists
229 Misc textile mill             39 Misc manufacturing                593 Misc retail
231 Apparel                       40 RR transportation                 60 Banking & credit
239 Misc textile                  41 Bus & urban                       62 Security, brokerage
261 Pulp & paper                  412 Taxis                            63 Insurance
267 Misc paper                    421 Trucking                         65 Real estate
265 Boxes                         422 Warehousing                      731 Advertise
271 Newspaper                     44 Water transport                   73 Business services
272 Printing, publishing          45 Air transport                     75 Automobile services
281 Many chemicals                46 Pipe lines                        76 Misc repair services
283 Drugs                         47 Services for transportation       70 Hotels
285 Paints                        483 Radio & TV                       721 Laundering
291 Petroleum refining            481 Telephone                        723 Beauty shops
295 Misc petroleum                482 Telegraph & misc                 725 Shoe repair
301 Rubber products               491 Electric power                   729 Dressmaking
307 Misc plastic                  493 Electric & gas                   722 Misc. personal services
311 Leather finishing             492 Gas & steam supply               78 Theatres
313 Footwear                      494 Water & misc                     793 Bowling, pool
315 Leather products              495 Sanitary                         791 Misc. entertain
241 Logging                       501 Motor vehicles wholesale         80 Medical except hospitals
242 Sawmills                      512 Drugs, chemicals wholesale       806 Hospitals
244 Misc wood                     506 Electrical, hardware, plumbing   81 Legal services
25 Furniture                      505 Raw farm products                82 Education Services
321 Glass                         508 Machinery equipment              891 Engineering & archit.
324 Cement                        509 Petroleum products               893 Accounting
325 Structural. Clay              510 Rest of wholesale                892 Misc profess
                                               35



                               Table A2. Two-Digit Industry Codes

10 Metal mining                              45 Air transportation
11 Coal Mining                               46 Pipelines
13 Oil & gas extraction                      47 Services for transportation
14 Nonmetal mining                           48 Communications
15 Construction                              49 Utilities
20 Food manufacturing                        50 Wholesale
21 Tobacco                                   52 Lumber retail
22 Textiles                                  53 General merchandise retail
23 Apparel                                   54 Food retail
26 Paper                                     55 Motor vehicle & gas retail
27 Printing and publishing                   56 Apparel & shoe retail
28 Chemicals                                 57 Furniture & appliance retail
29 Petroleum manufacturing                   58 Eating & drinking retail
30 Rubber & plastics                         59 Misc. retail
31 Leather                                   60 Banking & credit
24 Logging                                   62 Security & brokerage
25 Furniture                                 63 Insurance
32 Stone, clay & glass                       65 Real Estate
33 Primary metals                            73 Business services
34 Fabricated metals                         75 Automobile services
35 Nonelectrical machinery                   76 Misc. repair services
36 Electrical equipment                      70 Hotels
100 Motor vehicles                           72 Personal services
37 Other transportation equipment            78 Theatres
38 Instruments                               79 Misc. entertainment
39 Misc. manufacturing                       80 Health Care
40 Railroad transportation                   81 Legal services
41 Urban transportation                      82 Education services
42 Trucking and warehousing                  89 Professional services
44 Water transportation                      200 All Retail
36
37
38
39
40
41
