                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                FISCAL POLICIES iN OPEN CITIES
                                WITH FIRMS AND HOUSEHOLDS


                                          Andrew Haughwout
                                           Robert P. Jnman


                                          Working Paper 7823
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w7823



                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2000




The authors wish to thank the National Science Foundation for funding and Joim Quigley, Konrad Stahl, and
participants at the ZEW Conference on Fiscal Federalism (University of Mamiheim, June, 1999) for
comments on an earlier version of this work. The results and conclusions summarized in this paper are solely
those of the authors and do not reflect the official opinion of any affiliated organization.

  2000 by Andrew Haughwout and Robert P. Tnman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Policies in Open Cities with Firms and Households
Andrew Haughwout and Robert P. himan
NBER Working Paper No. 7823
August 2000
JEL No. H3, H7, R5
                                           ABSTRACT

       With the renewed interest in cities as economic centers comes a need to understand how local
public services and local taxes are likely to affect city economic performance. This paper provides
an equilibrium model of an open city economy with mobile firms and resident workers. Given
household preferences and firm technologies and an exogenous configuration of city tax rates and
national grants and fiscal mandates, the model calculates equilibrium values for firm production and
input use, household consumption and housing choices, city wages, rents, and population, and
finally, local tax bases, revenues, and public goods provision. The model is calibrated to the
Philadelphia economy for FY 1998; model predictions are compared to recent econometric estimates
of the effects of city fiscal policy on the Philadelphia private economy. We then explore two
important questions for the city's fiscal future: What are the economic and fiscal consequences of
raising city tax rates? Can the city shoulder a rising burden of local welfare payments and remain
a viable economic center in the long-run? We fmd the city to be near the top of its total revenue hill
and incapable of bearing significant increases in local responsibility for welfare transfers.




Andrew Haughwout                                      Robert P. Jnman
Domestic Research Department                          Department of Finance
Federal Reserve Bank, New York                        Wharton School
33 Liberty Street                                     University of Pennsylvania
New York, NY 10045-00 1                               Philadelphia, PA 19104
andrew.haughwout@ny.frb.org                           and NBER
                                                      inman@wharton.upenn.edu
                   Fiscal Policy in Open Cities with Firms and Households

                                               by

                            Andrew Haughwout and Robert Inman



I. Introduction

       With the renewed societal interest in cities as centers of business activity and residential

life has come a renewed academic interest in how cities function as economic locations (Glaeser,

2000). Understanding why firms and households choose to locate within one city or another,

or perhaps in no city at all, becomes essential information for those wishing to design an

economic geography which promotes efficiency and long-run economic growth (Ciccone and

Hall, 1996). Local public services and local taxes are sure to play an essential role in shaping

this geography. This paper develops a general equilibrium model of an open city economy with

fully mobile firms and households to examine the consequences of alternative city and national

fiscal policies on the equilibrium economic prospects of the city. City firms must earn the

competitive after-tax rate of return on capital, city workers must earn their competitive after-tax

wage, and city residents living and working within the city must receive an overall level of

utility comparable to what they might obtain residing outside the city.

       Our city is not a Tiebout "bedroom" city; it contains firms as well as households. Firms

within the city hire workers, invest in capital, and buy land. Residents living within the city

consume, work, and buy housing and land. City taxes include taxes on resident and firm land,

on housing and firm capital, on resident and commuter wages, and on resident consumption and

firm production. City tax revenues, joined with exogenous grants-in-aid, are used to purchase


                                                1
a single pure public good ('infrastructure") which benefits households and firms within the city.

The city contains unemployed poor and retired elderly households who receive a nationally

funded income or social security grant from which they purchase consumption, housing, and

land services within the city. The poor and the elderly pay taxes and consume public goods;

they do not move from our city.

       Our analysis extends the earlier work of Polinsky and Rubinfeld (1978) and Sullivan

(1985) who also use an open city model to study the equilibrium effects of property taxation on

firms and households.' Like Polinsky-Rubinfeld we include public goods in our analysis; like

Sullivan our property tax can tax land and structures at differential rates. We extend these two

papers by including, in addition to property taxation, taxation of resident and non-resident labor

income, resident consumption, and firm sales. The specification of the private economy follows

that in Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982). As in their model we assume an exogenous city

geography; resident wages and city land rents are endogenous. We solve the model numerically,

calibrating household preferences and firm technologies to match best current evidence for

household demands and for firm input choices in a spatial economy with public goods. The


        The literature on local government fiscal policy uses three alternative settings for
analysis. The first is the usual Tiebout framework with small open communities with mobile
households but without firms; see Wildasin (1986) for a review. These communities are best
thought of as bedroom suburbs. A second specification studies local fiscal policies with
mobile households but now with mobile firms as well. This is our framework and seems a
reasonable approach for studying fiscal policies of a single, large city with fixed land areas.
In addition to Polinsky and Rubinfeld (1978) and Sullivan (1985), other important early
contributions using this approach include Wilson (1986) and Zodrow and Mieszkowski
(1986); again see Wilda$n (1986) or now Wilson (1999) for reviews. The third approach
specifies city economies with firms, but the city economies are closed in that households
cannot exit, but land area of the '1city'1 is allowed to vary; see, for example, Arnott and
MacKinnon (1977) or more recently Pasha and Uhaus (1995). This third approach seems
best suited for studying fiscal policies in a single metropolitan region.
                                                2
exogenous demographic (poverty and elderly populations), spatial (land area) and policy (grants-

in-aid; inherited infrastructure) parameters of our model are chosen to match the demographic,

spatial, and policy environment of Philadelphia, PA for the fiscal year (FY) 1998. Calibrating

our model to the Philadelphia city economy has th advantage of allowing us to validate the

model's performance, first with respect to its predictions for Philadelphia's private and public

economies, and second, with respect to how the Philadelphia economy might react to exogenous

changes in city tax rates. The calibrated model's predictions are qualitatively similar to, and

with one important exception (property taxation) a1so quantitatively close to, the actual

econometrically estimated effects of city tax policy on the Philadelphia private economy.

       Section II describes the model. Section III calibrates the model to the city of Philadelphia

for FY 1998 and compares the model's predicted equilibrium outcomes and market responses

to tax policy changes to the actual performance of the Philadelphia economy in FY 1998. Using

the calibrated model we then explore two important questions for the city's fiscal future: Vv72at

are the economic and fiscal consequences of raising city tax rates, and, Can the city shoulder

a rising burden of local welfare payments and remain a viable economic center in the long-run?

Section IV summarizes our analysis and suggests directions for further research.



II. Fiscal Policy in a Large Open City

       In today's increasingly open economies, individual large cities offer only one of many

competitive locations for residents and firms. Capital, labor, and households are mobile, both

across locations in a given economic region and between regions. Capital located in a city must

earn the competitive rate of return, goods produced within the city must sell at competitive


                                                3
world prices, labor working in the city but living in the suburbs must earn their competitive

after-tax wage, and residents living and working within the city must receive an overall level of

utility comparable to that available outside the city. Our analysis extends the original general

equilibrium model of Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) for large open cities with fixed land areas

to include the effects of fiscal policy on the private economy. Firms, resident city workers, and

commuter managers are the active players in the local economy in that they can move into, or

out of, the city. Our model also introduces into the city a resident dependent population of poor

and elderly households who do not work. The dependent population is exogenous; these

residents do not move from our city. They receive an income grant, perhaps funded in part by

the working residents and firms within the city, from which they consume goods and services

and buy city land and housing. A local public sector completes the model. The budget of the

local government is required to be balanced. For each exogenously chosen combination of local

tax rates, the model computes equilibrium local tax revenues. Local tax revenues together with

exogenous, centrally-funded grants-in-aid less exogenous transfers to poor/elderly households

are used to finance a single pure public good, which we think of as local public infrastructure.2




    2
        There is much discussion in the local public finance literature as to the correct
specification for the degree of congestion in local public services; see Inman (1979). For
services such as education, trash pick-up, and police and fire protection the best available
evidence suggests these goods are fully congestible once community population exceeds
20,000 residents. Assuming significant externalities from these congestible services would
allow us to still treat them, on the margin at least, as pure public goods. Matters are less
controversial for those public services with large infrastructure needs such as roadways,
ports, public transit, and water treatment; these services are well described by a non-
congestible, pure public goods technology; see Haughwout (2000).
                                                 4
       A. Firms, Working Residents, and Commuters

       Firms within the city buy capital (K), land (Lf), resident worker (to, and non-resident

commuter managers (Al) to produce a common consumption good (X) to be sold at constant

world price P,, normalized to 1; X may be consumed within the city by city residents or

exported. All endogenous variables of the model are denoted in italics. The production

technology for city firms is assumed to be constant returns to scale (linear homogeneous) over

these four private market inputs. Firms also use the endogenously provided all-purpose public

good (G) as a production input; (9 is assumed to influence firm production as a beneficial Hicks-

neutral shift in the marginal productivities of the private inputs. Firms buy capital at its

exogenous market price (     1)   and pay an annual cost of capital equal to the competitive rate

of return (r) plus any local property tax (r) levied on the value of that capital stock (=   1   K).

Firms use land within the city and pay the annual rental rate (R) plus the property tax (rn) on

the value of that land (= (R/r) L1). The model includes two kinds of labor: resident workers and

commuter managers. While this specification conveniently describes labor's location in the

United States, the model itself is sufficiently general to allow managers to live within the city

and workers to be commuters, perhaps a more appropriate specification for European and South

American cities. Firms hire resident labor (/) at the endogenously determined resident wage

(14'). Finally, firms hire non-resident managers (Al) and pay these managers their competitive

(exogenous) non-resident wage (5) inclusive of any compensation for city disamenities plus a

compensating differential for commuter labor taxes imposed by the city at the rate Tm• The

gross-of-tax wage paid by city firms to commuter managers equals (1 + rm) . 5.

       For production efficiency, finns within the city maximize output defined by their


                                                 5
common constant returns production technology needed to produce one unit of X, given 0 --        1



= X(k, n, ,n, S; 0), where k = KIX, n = NIX, m = MIX, t = L/X -- subject to an exogenous

vector of local tax rates (r1 = {r, m})' the resulting level of the pure public good ((7), and a

constant average cost constraint inclusive of local tax payments: c = [r +           k + Wn +
[1 +rJ . S. m + [r+r] . (R/r). £•. The resulting firm demands for factor inputs, specified here
as demand per unit output, are:

       (1)                             k=k(R,W;r1,G;r,S);
       (2)                             n=n(R,W;r1,G;r,S);
       (3)                     m=m(R,W;r,,G;r,S);and
       (4)                              = £(R, W; r, G; r, 5).
The long-run equilibrium does not allow city firms to make excess profits or losses solely

because of city location. City firms' long-run average costs must therefore equal the competitive

price of the produced good (      1)   less any city taxes imposed on the value of the firms' gross

output (r). Based upon the factor demand curves above, the finns' zero excess profit constraint

will be defined as average revenue ($1) minus per unit taxes (r) minus average cost:3

       (5)    1-rx-c(R,Wr1,G;r,S)=Ho(R,W;rx,ur,G;r,S,1)=O.


       Implicit in this specification of the firm's after-tax profits are four assumptions which
define the initial incidence of local taxation on firms. First, the supply of capital equipment
is perfectly elastic; firms therefore bear the initial burden of the portion of the local property
tax which falls on firm capital. Second, there is a perfectly elastic supply of suburban
workers to city firms; firms therefore bear the initial burden of a non-resident wage tax.
Third, all firms own land in the city; firms therefore bear the burden of the portion of the
local property tax which falls on firm owned land. Fourth, there is an elastic demand for
city firm output in the world market; city firms therefore bear the initial burden of any tax
imposed by the city on firm output. Given the assumptions of our model, the final burden of
these local taxes will be shifted back onto land values.

                                                   6
         Working residents living in the city consume three private goods -- an all-purpose

consumption good (x,), housing structures (Ii,.), and residential land (er) -- and the all-purpose

pure public good (Ca. Work effort by working residents is exogenous; there is no labor-leisure

choice in our model. The residents are assumed to purchase the three private goods (Xr, Ii,, 2,).

Consumption goods (xr) are purchased at an exogenous world price ( 1) plus any local sales

tax levied on consumption (;)•4 Housing structures are constructed at the competitive price (e

1)   and paid for through an annual rental cost sufficient to return a competitive rate of return (r).

Households purchase land within the city at an endogenously determined annual rental price (R)

and pay the local property tax (r) levied on the value of land (= (RIr) £,) and structures (

I    h,.). Total household expenditures on goods, housing, and land inclusive of tax payments may

not exceed annual resident wage (TV) earned by working at city jobs net of city wage taxes paid

at rate rw: [1+;] -x, + [r+rI hr + [r+r] (R/r) = [1-r] W.5 Residents maximize a
common, well-behaved utility function U(Xr, hr, 2,; G) subject to this budget constraint, a vector




       Requiring residents to consume x within the city removes the effect of local sales taxes
on cross-border shopping; see, for example, Walsh and Jones (1988) and most recently
Goolsbee (1999) for evidence. Alternatively, in our model residents are free to (costlessly)
leave the city when the sales tax is increased.

       Implicit in this specification of the household budget constraint are four assumptions
which define the initial incidence of local taxation. First, the supply of consumption goods
(x) is perfectly elastic to city residents; residents therefore bear the initial burden of the local
sales tax. Second, there is a perfectly elastic supply of housing structures to city residents;
residents therefore bear the initial burden of the portion of the property tax which falls on
structures. Third, all residents own land in the city; residents therefore bear the burden of
the portion of the local property tax which falls on resident owned land. Fourth, given the
full mobility of both firms and workers, worker supply and demand are elastic; we assume
that residents therefore bear the initial burden of the resident wage tax. These initial
incidence assumptions do not affect the equilibrium incidence of local taxation, which is the
focus of our analysis.

                                                   7
        •                     •...        ..... •. •..', ,..        .. ..• .     ..            •(...1d.,




                                                               r,
of exogenous local resident tax rates (ri, = (;,r,,}), and the exogenous level of the local

public good (G). Resulting resident demand curves for Xr, h,, and f are specified as:

        (6)                               = ,ç(R, W; Ti,, G; r, 1);

        (7)                          hr = hi,(R, W; Tr, G; r, 1); and,

        (8)                               = Li,(R, W; 7,,, G; r, 1).

The long-mn equilibrium requires that residents or households planning to live within the city

achieve the same level of utility as available to them outside the city. Given the household's

demands for x,, Ii,, and r' the indirect utility function for a typical resident can be specified and

set equal to the exogenous utility (V0) available outside the city:

        (9)                            V(R, W; Ti,, G; r, 1) = V0.

        Commuting managers consume private goods, housing, and land at their suburban

residential location outside the city. We assume that commuters are able to buy private goods

and housing at constant world prices. Commuters have the option of working at a suburban

location. As noted, to attract these workers into city jobs requires city firms to pay a wage

equal to the commuters' suburban wage inclusive of compensation for all (assumed exogenous)

disamenities of working within the city -- e.g., the city's taxation of commuters' labor income.

This compensating wage is equal to (1 +rm) .5, where Tm is the commuter wage tax rate;

(1 +Tm) S is sufficient to give suburban commuters the model's equilibrium level of residential

utility, V0.6


    6
      While we allow city firms to distinguish between city and suburban workers, we
assume city firms cannot distinguish among suburban workers by their residential location in
the suburbs. Thus a single wage will be paid to all suburban workers in our model and the
suburban economy can then be specified as a standard "bid-rent" economy. Suburban land
values will then reflect the differential costs of commuting into the central city. City
                                                          8
 •            ...•.     • . .. -•' ..                                                 ..:w' •..,. .1•




       B. Dependent Households

       The city is assumed to contain a fixed, immobile population of (D) dependent poor and

elderly households who each receive an exogenous income transfer of Y dollars paid for by the

central government and perhaps in part, through local taxation, by the city government as well.

Dependent households consume the composite private good (xà, housing (ha, and land (à and

pay taxes on their consumption. They do not pay taxes on their exogenous income transfer (Y).

Dependent households also consume the pure public good (G) provided by the city government.

We assume dependent households do not move from the city.7 Dependent households maximize

their household utility function, U(x, h, r; U) subject to the vector of exogenous local resident

tax rates (d = {r, r}), the exogenous level of the local public good (G), and a dependent

household budget constraint: [1 + rJ     X + [r+ rj . h + [r + rj . (R/r)•   =   Y. The resulting

dependent resident demand curves for;, h,        and   L are specified as:

       (10)                        ; = &(R; Y, Td' G; r, 1);
       (11)                      ha = h(R; Y, Td, G; r, 1); and,

       (12)                        td = L(R; Y,       r, G; r, 1).
Given their demands for;, h,       and    t the indirect utility function for a typical dependent

household can be specified as:

       (13)                        V(R; Y, Td' U; r, 1) =




commuters will outbid suburban workers for land closer to the central city.

       For evidence that the average welfare household is not very sensitive to fiscal
incentives in its location decisions, see Meyer (1999). Epple and Romer (1991) allow for
mobile rich and poor households in their model of an open city in a metropolitan economy,
but in their model all household incomes are exogenous.

                                                  9
•   .•..   y...•..,•                . .. .   .•..•.   ,•• •.




           Since            dependent households cannot escape the city, their equilibrium level of utility (1's,) is

           endogenous.

                             C. City Government

                             In each fiscal year the city government uses its flow of city net revenues to purchase

           access to a new stock of public infrastructure (iXG). The city's net revenues per capita are

           defined as the sum of the endogenous annual flow of local tax revenues per resident (SR) plus

           additional city resources obtained from an exogenous level of intergovernmental grants per

           resident (Z) plus income earned from the exogenous "inherited" net financial wealth per resident

           (A) less required city spending per resident to support the city's dependent population (=

           '- Y         -
                            5,   where ' is the required rate of city support and S = D/(N + D) is the share of total
           city population who are dependent). Income earned from the net financial wealth of the city (A)

           equals interest, dividends, and capital appreciation on city financial assets less interest paid on

           city financial liabilities. In the United States, the most important financial liability of cities are

           their unfunded public employee pensions; interest costs associated with public infrastructure are

           treated separately below. Given net revenues, the city can purchase and maintain new

           infrastructure at an annual cost of (r + a) - G, where r is the annual cost to the city of

           borrowed funds to purchase AG and a is the depreciation rate for the new stock of public capital

           just purchased.8 The stock of new infrastructure which can be supported by the equilibrium

           annual flow of net city revenues per capita is therefore: AG = {9? + Z + A -                 Y . 5}- [N +


                       8
                  The annual interet rate paid by the city is set here at the private rate of r. In the
           United States, tax-exempt status for state and local government debt creates a subsidy for
           individual city borrowing such that the U.S. city borrowing rate is rm = (1 - t) r, where t is
           the federal income tax rate of the marginal investor in city debt; see Poterba (1989). Our
           simulation analysis for Philadelphia will allow for this extension. See Section III.A below.

                                                                    10
D]/(r + a), where [N + D] is total city population. Since public infrastructure is a pure public

good, the equilibrium level of per capita net city revenues must be multiplied by the equilibrium

population, and then divided by (r ÷ a) to define the aggregate stock of new infrastructure (AG)

available to residents and firms.

       In addition to the purchase of new infrastructure, cities may "inherit" an aggregate stock

of public infrastructure (G0) accumulated in prior years but which still provides benefits to

current residents. This inherited stock is not totally free, however. There may be annual

interest costs still due on the inherited stock (= r°     and there   will be an annual replacement

costs of a• G3 for that portion of G which depreciates each year. These expenses cost the city

(r° + a) G annually to maintain the inherited stock G0. Paying (r° + a) G each year will
reduce city residents' access to new infrastructure by (r° + a) G01(r + a). The net gain from

inherited infrastructure will be: G0 - (r°   + a) Gj(r + a) = [(r - r°)/(r +     a)]   Go. The only
portion of inherited city infrastructure that will be valuable to city residents, and thus affect the

current city equilibrium, will be that portion which has been fully purchased by prior residents.

This portion equals [(r - r°)/(r + a)] . G0.

       Infrastructure purchased from the equilibrium flow of net city revenues together with the

unencumbered portion of the inherited infrastructure define the equilibrium level of the city's

public infrastructure available for household and finn consumption in equilibrium. The

equilibrium level of U is therefore:

                              G = AG ÷ [(r-r°)I(r + a)]G0,

or, alternatively:

(14)      G=    {Yt   + Z + A '•YS} •[N + D]/(r +           a)   + [(r - r°)/(r + a)] U0.


                                                 11
                             -             ....-.,          L.                                        --

Equation (14) is an implicit function of G since equilibrium values of 9t, N, and 6 each depend

onG.
          City tax revenues per capita are determined as the product of an exogenously chosen city

tax rates (r1,    i   =   p, s, w, m, and X) multiplied by the corresponding endogenously specified

equilibrium tax base per capita (B,, I = p. s, w, m, and X), then summed over all taxes:

          (15)                                     =

Noting that 3 (= D/(N + D)) is the equilibrium share of city population who are dependent and

(1 - 3)   (= N/(N + D)) is the equilibrium share of the city population who work, we can define
each equilibrium tax base per capita as:

          (iSa) B = (1 - 3)4k/n + (R/r){f. + (t/n)} + ii,] + 6•[(R/r)td + hJ,
for city property taxation;

          (15b)                           B,   = (1-6)-; + &Xd,
for city sales taxation;

          (15c)

for resident wage taxation;

          (15d)                           Bm=U-6)-S•m/n,
for non-resident commuter taxation; and

          (15e)                                 B = (1 - 3)/n,
and for gross receipts taxation (remembering that n is resident-worker per unit of local output).

          D. Aggregate Economic Output and City Demographics

          Aggregate output produced within the city (X) is determined by equating the aggregate

land requirements of city finns to the exogenous aggregate supply of land within the city


                                                       12
available for production. The aggregate land requirements needed by city firms to produce

aggregate output X equals the sum of firm land needed directly in production (21X) plus all the

land needed to house the firms' resident workers (2,n -fl that is,   1, = 21X +         •X. The

aggregate supply of land available to accommodate firms and resident workers — and thus permit

the production of aggregate output X -- will equal the exogenous supply of land in the city (Z)

less the   amount of land consumed by dependent residents (fdD). Setting the supply of available

land equal to the amount of land required for the production of X specifies aggregate city output

as:

           (16)                    X=   [.E, -   fd-D]/[Zf + £,n1.
In equilibrium, our city may be either an export or an import city of the consumption good.

When aggregate output exceeds (is less than) aggregate residential consumption (X> (<)x, N

+ Xd• D) the city is a net exporter (importer) of the consumption good.

           City demographics follow city economics. Knowing the level of aggregate city output

(X), the total population of resident workers must be:

           (17)                              N=n-X.
With population of city resident workers now specified, total city population is N + D, where

D is the exogenously specified dependent population. The dependent population's share of total

city population is specified as:

           (18)                          3 = D/[N + D].

      E. Specifying the Open City Equilibrium
           An open city equilibrium exists within our model when no mobile firm, resident

household, or commuter has an incentive to change their location, residence, or job. This means


                                                    13
satisfying eqs. (5) and (9) and ensuring commuters get their after-tax wage of S. An equilibrium

specifies the model's 18 endogenous variables: the two local market prices (R, W); firm input

purchases per unit output (k, ii, m, ti); working residents' consumption (x,, /i,, 1 r); dependent

residents' consumption (xd, lid, Là and utility (Va; city government revenues (R) and public

goods (G); the economic (X) and demographic (IY) size of the city, and, finally, the demographic

composition of the city (&). The 18 equations of the model specified above are sufficient to

solve for each of the 18 endogenous variables, conditional on values for each of the model's

exogenous parameters: city tax rates (rn, r,, r,,,,,   Tm'   the world interest rate (r), the world

price of the locally produced and consumed consumption good (1), a commuter's compensating

wage (S), a dependent resident's annual transfer income (Y), the share of dependent's transfer

income supported by local taxes (u'), the city's intergovernmental aid (Z), the city's income from

inherited financial assets (A), the rate of depreciation of public infrastructure (a), the city's

inherited stock of public infrastructure (G0), and the rate of interest payments still due on that

inherited stock (r°).

         The model is solved iteratively. First, given preferences and technologies, world prices

(r, 1, S) and the firms' and resident-workers' outside options (IL, V0), local tax rates (rn, ;, rw,

Tm,   r) and an assumed starting value for G (= G°), eqs. (5) and (9) specify two equations in

the two unknown endogenous city prices, Wand R; see Figure 1. The firm profit constraint (eq.

(5)) is shown as one of a family of the declining profit curves, He(S) = 0, in the {R, W} space.

The household utility constraint (eq. (9)) is represented by one of a family of rising indifference

curves, V(•) =    V0, which define the (increasing) willingness of households to pay for land as

the local wage increases. Citizens will be better off if they can move to an indifference curve


                                                  14
below V0 (earning higher wages and/or paying lower rents) and finns will be more profitable

by moving to a profit curve below ll() = 0 (paying lower wages and rents). The equilibrium

wage (14) and rent (R) defmed by the intersection of V0() and fl0() in Figure 1 are consistent

with each resident receiving V0 and each city firm receiving no excess profits or losses.

Initially, the equilibrium values of wages and rents will be W = W° and R =                     both

conditional upon the assumed starting value of G = G°.

       Given W° and         eqs. (1)-(4), (6)-(8), and (10)-( 12) can then be solved for firms' input

demands, resident workers' demands, and dependent residents' demands, respectively, again

conditional upon G =          Eq. (13) defines dependent resident's utility (Vj°). Firms' and
residents' demands for land (f3S°', g(0) £,°) and firms' demand for workers (n1°) allow us to

compute aggregate city output (X'°') from eq. (16), aggregate resident employment (Pr) from

eq. (17), and the dependent population's share of total city population (o°) from eq. (18).
Given conditional firms' and residents' demands, rents and wages, and now the dependent

residents' share of city population, city own tax revenues (9t°) can be calculated from eq. (15),

using eqs. (15a)-(15e). Finally, having specified 9?°, M°, and (°),     eq.   (14) can be now solved

for a new starting value of G = G", and the solution process repeated.

       An equilibrium is obtained when G' = G't =          G;   that is, when a starting value of C

creates a private economy and subsequent public goods resources as specified by eq. (14) just
sufficient to pay for the original starting level of C. Sufficient for an equilibrium level of C to

be a locally stable equilibrium is for a small increase (decrease) in C from equilibrium to cost

(save) more than any endogenous public goods resources generated (lost), at given tax rates,

after the private economy's adjustments to that change in C. Simply put, for given tax rates


                                                15
                          Figure 1

      Rent-Wage Equffibrium in an Open City
               Philadelphia, 1998

R
50-

40


30


20


10
                                                 fl(•)=O
                                                            r
           10     20       '30       40     50     60
                                                           1W (000's)
                          w*

      R* = $15,223/acre              W" = $29,703/worker
                                                                                                    -2




increasing G cannot, in equilibrium, be a source of new wealth (i.e., a "money machine") for

the city's current residents.9 All simulations reported in Sections III and IV for one plausible

city economy (Philadelphia) produced stable and unique equilibria.



III. Fiscal Policy in One Open City: Philadelphia, FY 1998

         A. Model Calibration: Philadelphia, FY 1998

         Solution of our open city fiscal model requires specifications for household preferences

and the firm production technology and then selection of each of the model's exogenous

parameters. Table 1 summarizes the model's specification for the city of Philadelphia, PA for

the Fiscal Year (FY), 1998.

         The city's firms' technology is represented by a Cobb-Douglas specification between land

(L) and a composite joint labor-capital input produced by a CES combination of resident workers

(A, commuter managers (Al), and firm capital (K). Managers and laborers may be either

substitutes or complements. Our parameter specification for the degree of complementarity

between M and K and substitutability between N and the M-K composite are from Krusell,

Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante (1998))0 Consistent with their evidence, firm capital (K) is



       Specifying eq. (14) generally as the implicit function 0 = g(G; [.1)' where [-] is a
vector of all exogenous variables of the model including city tax rates, then at any stable
equilibrium must meet two conditions: 1) G = g(G; []) and 2) dg/dG < 1. This stability
condition is likely to be violated only when small increases in public goods lead to large
upward shifts in the V3 and      curves in Figure 1, thereby generating very large increases in
city rents and/or city wages. This can occur only when U has a large marginal product in
firm production and/or a large marginal benefit (= -(OU/ÔG)/OU/Ox)) in household
preferences.
    10
         The general specification for the production technology is:


                                                16
              Table 1: Model Calibration for Philadelphia, FY 1998


                                 Firm Production

                                                        40/(— 50) .95/.48
        X = L7 [sNo + .5[.5c5° .5M5°J
                                                                 ]

                                 Household Utility

                                     .75 .20 .05     .05
                             Ur,d = Xrd hrd trd G



                       Fiscal Policy, Philadelphia, FY 1998

  = .0249            Z = $3,753/household                         Go = $16.92 billion
  = .007             A   = —$232/household                        r0 = .0052
  = .0479            Y = $13,500/dependent household               ci = .03
Tm = .04165                                                           = .04
  = .002875


                         City Geography and Demographics

           4=        86,400 acres             D = 176,739 households



                                  World Economy


                  1?31.00                                  V0a1.0O
                  r=O5                                     f100.0
                  S=   $45.000
specified as a complement to managerial labor (Al), while city labor (]V) and the composite input

of capital and managers are specified as substitutes. The relative weights on K and M within

the capital/manager composite input and then the relative weight between N and the

capital/manager composite are selected to approximate national income shares among these three

inputs; see Table 2 below. The Cobb-Douglas exponent on land is set equal to .05, following

Mieszkowski (1972), Amott and MacKinnon (1977), and Sullivan (1985). In their work

estimating the production relationship used here from U.S. time series data, Krusell, et. al.

(1998) use an inclusive input composed of land and structures in place of land alone and estimate

the corresponding output elasticity as .11. Our choice of .05 for the land input alone seems

reasonable. To ensure our technology is linear homogenous in the four market inputs, the

exponent on the overall labor-capital composite is then set equal to .95. The final elasticity

measuring the marginal contribution of public infrastructure ((7) to firm output is set equal to

.04 using estimates from Haughwout (2000) for a sample of 33 U.S. cities, including

Philadelphia. Since G is a pure public good funded in part through taxes on firm inputs, adding

productive inputs lowers the tax cost per input of paying for G without reducing the production

benefits that G provides; the effect on city attractiveness to firms is similar to that of introducing




                      X = Lp[N6 + (1 - p)JCP + (1 —

where ji and X are the parameters which determine factor income shares, e and p determine
the elasticity of substitution between N, K, and M, and a and 0 determine the marginal
productivities of land, the labor-capital composite input, and public infrastructure. Within
the labor-capital compojte input, the elasticity of substitution between capital (K) or
managers (M) and labor (N) is 11(1 - e), while the elasticity of substitution between capital
and managers is specified by 11(1 - p). Complementarity between capital and managers
requires that a > p; see Fallon and Layard (1975). The specification in Table 1 meets this
requirement as a = .40 > -.50 = p.
                                                 17
agglomeration economies directly into the firm technology.

         Households' preferences are represented by a Cobb-Douglas utility function, implying

unitary price and income elasticities of demand for the all-purpose consumption good (x,à, for

housing structures (hrd), and for residential land (Ira; see Rosen (1979) and more recently

Gyourko and Voith (2000) for evidence consistent with unitary price and income elasticities of

demand for residential housing and land. Work effort by resident workers is exogenous and

suppressed in the specification of TJ(); dependent residents do not work. Resident workers and

dependent residents are assumed to have the identical preferences for G, x, h, and I but, of

course, not identical utilities in equilibrium.1'    Preferences are specified so that households

allocate .75 of their annual after-wage-tax income to the all-purpose consumption good (.çà, .20

to housing structures (ha, and .05 to land (I,). These after-tax budget shares are chosen to

approximate actual share allocations for typical U.S. homeowners. Local public goods (G) are

also included in resident-worker and dependent-resident utility, with the budget share set equal

to .05, again based upon the recent empirical work in Haughwout (2000).12 City residents in

our model take city G as exogenous.

         To replicate the actual Philadelphia economy for FY 1998, all exogenous fiscal

parameters are set equal either to Philadelphia's actual values for FY 1998 as reported in the




        In equilibrium workers are expected to have higher incomes than dependents, and in
all our simulations, they do. We cannot compare utilities of workers and dependents because
we have not included leisure directly in the household utility function.
    12
         Thebudget share of .05 is also very close to the average share of income allocated to
local public goods by Philadelphia suburban area households under the assumption that
suburban households can choose -- ala Tiebout -- their preferred level of local public goods;
see Inman and Ritter (1999).

                                                18
City of Philadelphia, Five Year Financial Plan, January 26, 1999 or to our best estimates

calculated from published city fiscal data.     City tax rates (re, r,, T, Tm, r), exogenous
intergovernmental grants from federal and state governments to the city and its school district

exclusive of welfare assistance (Z), and net income earned from the net financial wealth of the

city less city contributions towards unfunded public employee pensions (A) are all reported in

the city's Five Year Financial Plan, 1999J Transfer income of $13,500 per dependent

household (Y) reflects current average annual payments to three person households on public

welfare or to two person households receiving social security. The share of transfer income paid

for by city tax revenues (i4') is from Summers and Jakubowski (1997) and reflects city

contributions to meet state mandates for foster care for abandoned or abused children. Inherited

public infrastructure stock (G0, billions of 1994 dollars) is estimated in Haughwout and Inman

(1996, updated). The weighted average annual rate of interest still due on this inherited stock

(r°) is estimated as the ratio of FY 1998 interest and principal repayments to G (Five Year

Financial Plan, 1999, Appendix II, p. 1). The rate of depreciation of public infrastructure (a)

is set at .03, the same rate used for the Haughwout-Inman (1996) estimates of U0. The city's

current borrowing rate (rm) for new infrastructure is chosen to reflect the real municipal bond

interest rate for the city's FY 1998 BAA investment grade bond rating; see Economic Report of

the President, 1999, Table B-73.


        See Five Year Financial Plan, 1999 for the property tax rate on market value of
property (rn, adjusted for the city assessment rate) at p. 9; for the city's differential rate on
local sales (;, adjusted for the exemption of food consumption) at p. 15; for the wage tax
rate on residents (r) and non-resident commuters (re.) at p. 7; for the gross receipts tax rate
on city firm output () at p. 13; for intergovernmental grants (Z) at Appendix III, p. 1; and
for interest income earnings net of contributions for pension underfunding (A) at pp. 20 and
402, respectively.
                                               19
         City land area (Z) is measured in acres and includes all land within the city minus land

used by the city's parks; see Statistical Abstract, 1994 (Table 4.6) adjusted by the U.S. Boundary

and Annexation Survey, 1994 with park land area as reported in Five Year Financial Plan, 1999,

p. 164. The city's dependent population (D) is the sum of all households with one member over

the age of 65 and all households earning less than the U.S. federal poverty level. Our estimate

of the number of dependent households in 1998 is computed by multiplying the share of city

population 65 and older and the share of city residents living in poverty as reported in the 1990

U.S. Census of Population by the estimated 1998 city population, then dividing by the city's

average household size of 2.6 residents per household.'4

         Finally, world prices for the all-purpose private good are normalized to $1, worldinterest

rates are set at r =   .05, and the Philadelphia commuter wage (S) is set equal to the median

household income of $45,000 for a Philadelphia suburban household as estimated in the 1990

Census of Population. The level of utility available to mobile resident-workers is normalized

to V0      1 and excess profits earned by city firms at ll     0.

         B. Model Simulation and Validation: Philadelphia, FY 1998

         Table 2 reports the equilibrium values for all endogenous variables of the Philadelphia

city economy as simulated for FY 1998. Figure 1 illustrates the equilibrium wage (TVt) and

rental price of an acre of land (R*); the curvatures of V0 and IL in Figure 1 reflect the



    14
       Separate estimates of the average household size for elderly dependent households and
for households living unJer poverty are not available for Philadelphia. Elderly dependent
households are likely to have fewer than 2.6 members and poverty households more than 2.6
members. The overall city average of 2.6 members per household seems a reasonable
approximation to the true weighted average household size for the cohort of elderly and poor
dependent households.
                                                20
         Table 2: Model Solution for Philadelphia, VI 1998


                                  Prices

       W = $29,703/worker                       R* = $15,223/acre




                         Firm Production

= $L787/output                             in = .688 x io— managers/output
= 1.655 x 10 workers/output                   = .219 x io5 acres/output


                      Household Consumption

    = $21,060                      = $10,053
    = $75,515                      = $36,048                    = .477
    = .062 acres                   = .030 acres


                         City Government


  r.     = $4,466/household                          = $ 529/household
                                             r. B = $ 118/household
  r5• a; = $ 125/household
                              -
 ru,. B = $ 967/household                            = $6,205/household

                            = $8 1.838 billion


                   City Economy and Demographics

 r = $21663 billion                  N' = 375.332                   = .32
specifications in Table 1 for household preferences and firm technologies.'5        Each unit of

output (X*; evaluated at a price of $1) produced by city firms uses $1.787 units of firm capital

(k*); the aggregate value of the city's firms' capital stock is therefore $40.50 billion (= X.k*).

On average, city firms require one worker for every 60,423 units of output (n*), one manager

for every 145,349 units of output (m*), and one acre of land for every 456,621 units of output

(27). Resident workers earn a W* of $29,703 and city land rents equal $15,223/acre. With an

income of $29,703 resident workers spend $21,060 on the all-purpose consumption good (Xr*),

buy a housing stock valued at $75,515 (h,*), and place that stock on about 1/16th of an acre of

land (4*); 1/16th of an acre is approximately the land used by a typical Philadelphia

"rowhouse." The total value of a resident-worker's home (= h, + (R*/r). 4*) is $94,406;

mortgage payments equal $4720/year (= .05 $94,406) while local property taxes on the home

are $2351/year (= .0249• $94,406). Dependent residents receive a government transfer of

$13,500 and from their transfer income they consume $10,350 (xd*), buy a housing stock worth

$36,045 (hd*), and place that stock on about 1/32th of an acre of land (4*), theequivalent of

a city "walk-up" apartment. The total value of a dependent resident's home (hr* + (R*Ir).


         The underlying preference and production relationships determine the shape and slope
of these curves. For Cobb-Douglas preferences, a typical indifference curve (V0) will rise
more steeply as the share of income spent on land (the exponent on r) falls. When land is a
small share of spending, an additional dollar of wage income must be offset by a large
increase in land rents if utility is to remain unchanged. As wages and land costs rise, this
effect is even stronger, since households are consuming smaller plots land. Thus V0 is rising
at an increasing rate. A similar logic helps us to understand the shape of the firm's zero
profit curve (He,). Along IT an additional dollar in wages must be offset by large reductions
in land prices when land costs are a relatively small share of total costs (or when land's
marginal productivity is low). This effect diminishes as wages rise and finns substitute land
for resident labor; at high wages and low land rents finns' optimal land/labor ratio is high
and smaller land price reductions are needed to offset wage increases. Thus 1T flattens as
wages rise and rents decline.

                                               21
is $45,186, and the household pays $3384/year (= (.05 + .0249). $45,186) in mortgage and

property taxes. Total city taxes collected from households and firms is $6205/household (=

fl*), with most of the revenues coming from the property tax and the two wage taxes. The total
stock of public infrastructure has a replacement cost of $8 1.838 billion (G*). Approximately

60 percent of this infrastructure stock ($48.9 billion) is supported by annual tax revenues, 30

percent of the stock ($24.5 billion) is funded by intergovernmental grants and net interest income

less local welfare contributions, and about 10 percent ($8.4 billion) of the stock is inherited from

previous taxpayers. The equilibrium aggregate level of production in the city economy is

$22.663 billion (X*), while the aggregate city size is 552,071 households, composed of 375,332

resident worker households (N*) and 176,739 dependent resident households (D, Table 1).

Aggregate consumption by city residents (Xr* .N* + xdD) is $9.733 billion. Philadelphia is

therefore a net exporter of the locally produced consumption good; that is, X > x4 .J,T* +

xdD.
       Table 3 provides a comparison of the simulated Philadelphia economy for FY 1998 to

the actual economy in that year. The flow of production and consumption benefits accruing to

firms and households from the stock of the pure public good was benchmarked to ensure that

in equilibrium our simulated city had the same city population as Philadelphia in FY 1998. We

chose to benchmark the analysis to city population as the most accurately measured city scalar

in FY 1998. Thus N* + D and & equal, by requirement, the actual values for the city. All

other variables in the model are conditional on this selected city size. We find that our

simulated city is somewhat smaller economically than the actual city, as estimated (using eq.

15e) from the city's actual gross receipts tax base (X) in PY 1998. Simulated city employment


                                                22
                     Table 3: Model Validation for Philadelphia, FY 1998k



                                     Variable               Predicted           Actua1
City Demographics:
                             N + D:                         552,071             552,071
                                                       :
                             8:                                .32                .32

Firm Production:

                             K:                        $22,663 Billion      $28.545 Billion

                             N + M:                         530,637             559,200
                 .
                             W:                        $29,703/worker        $36,871/worker

                             K/(N + M):                     $75,515            ($79,08S)

                             (1+rm)Sm:                        .322               (.292)

                             Wit:                             .492               (.457)

                             (r + r)(R/r)e1:                  .050               (.032)

Household Consumption:

                             (1     8)(hr   (R/r)4)
                              + 8(hd + (R/r)td):      $78,655/household     $49,400/household

                             (1 —   3)x + 3xd:        $17,538/household     $18,859/household

City Finances:

                             rB:                      $4,466/household      $1,226/household

                             r,B5:                         $125/household     $171/household

                             rB + rmBm:               $1,496/household      $1,841/household

                              rxBg:                        $118/household     $149/household

                              it;                     $6,205/household      $3,3 87/household

                                                                                    (continued)
                                                            Notes for Table   3

                      tAll dollar figures are reported in real (1994) dollars.
                     Sources for actual Philadelphia or national (reported within (-)) values ofeach variable.
                        N +0: City Population (Households): Census Bureau, Web Page: URL:
                                      http: /   /wt-w. census. gov/population/www/estimates/popest . html.
                                .3: Percent Population Who Are Dependent 8 = D/(N             ÷ D) from the 1990 Census of
                                   Population and Housing. Summary Tape File: STF3K
                               X: Aggregate City Ouspur Estimated from the reported Gross Receipts Tax Base forPhila-
                                   delphia.FY 1998. Department of Revenue.
                        N + M: Tosa4 Non-governmental City &'nploymertr Bureau of Labor Statistics, State and Area
                                      Eniployment,WebPage: URLhttp://stats.b1s.gov: 8C/sahomehtml.
                              W:      Wage of Cit-y Workers: 1990 Census of Population and Housing. Summary Tape File:
                                      STF3k
                K/(N -4- M): Capital to Labor Ratio: Estimated as the national ratio of 1997 non-residential. non-
                               agricultural equipment and structure capital (Survey of Current Business. September.
                               1998, p. 36; adjusted to 1994 dollars) to non-governmental, non-agricultural employment
                               (Economic Repon of the President, 2000, Table 3-44)
                (1 + r,,jSm: Manager Compensation as a Share of Output: The share of 1998 national non-farm.
                               non-governmental income earned by "Managers and Professional Specialists" estimated
                               as the ratio of manager compensation (Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1999,
                               "Earnings of Full-Time Wage and Salary Workers" and "Employee Civilians by Occupa-
                               tion") to National Income earned in non-farm, non-governmental production (Economic
                               Reponof the President, 1999, Table 3-29).
                         Wit: Worker Compensation as a Share of Output: The share of 1998 national non-farm, non-
                               governmental income earned by workers other than managers estimated as the ratio
                               of non-manager worker compensation (Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1999,
                               "Earnings of Full-Time Wage and Salary Workers" and "Employee Civilians by Occupa-
                                      tion") to National Income earned in non-farm, non-governmental production (Economic
                                      Repo it of the President, 1999, Table 3-29).
        (r   + rp)(R/r)tf: Rental Income as a Share of Output: The share               of 1998 national non-farm. non-govern-
                                      mental income earned as rental income estimated as the ratio of rental income to Na-
                                      tional Income earned in non-farm, non-governmental production (Economic Report of
                                      the President, 1999, Table B-29).
(1   — &)(hr -I- (R/r)4)
     -I- 8(hj   -4- (R/r)41): Median Home Value: 1990 Census of Population. Summary Tape File: STF1A.
         (1     — &)Xr + Sxj: Consumption per Household: Estimated as median household income in Philadelphia
                               (1990 Census of Population. Summary Tape File: STF1A) minUs actual tax revenues per
                               household minus .05 - Median home value = $24,716 —$3,387— $2,470 = $18,859.
                        rB: Property Tax Revenues per Household: City and school district property tax revenues
                               (FY 1998. Department of Revenues, Philadelphia. PA) divided by number of households
                               (see N   D, above).
                        r8,: Sales Tax Revenues per Household: Cit sales lax revenues (FY 1998. Department of
                               Revenues. Philadelphia. PA) divided by number of households (see N ÷ D, above).

             D,u   B., + r,,, B.,,:   Wage Tax Revenues per Household: City wage tax revenues (FY 1998. Department of
                                      Revenues. Philadelphia. PA) divided by number of households (see N 0. above).
                          rx B'ç: Gross ReL'thipts Tax Revenues per Household: City gross receipts tax revenues (FY 1998.
                                      Deparimentof Revenues. Philadelphia. PA dividedby numberof households (see N±D.
                                      above).

                               7Z:    Total Ta-c Revenues per Household: Total city   and school district tax   revenues (FY   1998.
                                      Department of Revenues. Philadelphia. PA divided by number of households (see N+           0.
                                      above).
(N* + M*) is also less than actual city employment (N ÷ M), either because the simulated city

hires fewer commuter-manngers than does the actual city or because some of the city's actual

resident-worker households provide more than one worker per household as we assume in the

model. The simulated production sector uses approximately the same capital to labor ratio and

yields very similar pre-tax factor shares for private goods inputs as does the U.S. national

economy; Philadelphia data for these variables are not available. The model's simulated wage

for resident workers (W) is somewhat lower than the actual avenge wage for city residents who

work. Predicted avenge consumption by residents (x - * = (1 - 6*) Xr* + 6* .x) is also

somewhat lower than the consumption for an Philadelphia family with the city's median (and

therefore avenge) income. Average home values for residents (h . * = (1 - 6*)[h,* + (R/r)fr*]

+ b*[hd* + (R/r)Edi) in our simulated economy are approximately 1.5 times as high as the
1990 median city home value, however.'6 This result plus the fact that our simulations make

no allowances for the tax-exempt status of the city's non-profit employers (e.g., universities and

hospitals) and for tax abatements for business property also mean that simulated property taxes




    t6   There are three possible reasons for our overestimate. First, the 1990 median home
value may significantly underestimate true average city home value because of positive
skewness in the distribution of housing values. Second, Philadelphia housing values today
may exceed values in the 1990 Census because homes have appreciated in value over the
intervening years. Philadelphia Magazine's annually comparison of Philadelphia
metropolitan housing values based on area housing sales estimates the average value of
Philadelphia city homes jias risen by about 20% since 1990; Philadelphia Magazine, April,
2000, p. 89. Third, our model makes no allowances for neighborhood amenities unrelated to
public goods or market job opportunities. To the extent Philadelphia's neighborhoods are
differentially less attractive than elsewhere, actual values will be lower than our simulated
values.

                                               23
per household are significantly higher than the city's actual property tax revenues per
household.'7 Our model's estimates of the other tax revenues per household are smaller than

actual values because of the smaller size of our simulated economy, falling short by about 20%,

approximately equal to our underestimate of the size of the city's true aggregate economy.

       We offer three further comparisons as tests for the plausibility of our simulation model

of the Philadelphia public economy. First, in previous work (Haughwout, Inman, Craig, and

Luce, 2000) we estimated the elasticity of Philadelphia tax bases to changes in city tax rates for

the three taxes for which sufficient time series data (FY 1970-1998) were available: property

taxation, combined resident and non-resident wage taxation, and gross receipts taxation.'8 The

econometrically estimated tax base elasticities evaluated at FY 1998 rates are reported in Table

4 along with the simulated tax base elasticities for the same three taxes calculated from the FY

1998 parameterization of the Philadelphia economy. With the exception of the own elasticity

for the gross receipts tax base         = -.39 (estimated) vs. -   .03   (simulated)), all of the

simulated elasticities are more negative (base more responsive) than their econometrically



        If differences between simulated and actual property tax bases only reflected
differences in average home values (see Table 3), then we would expect simulated property
tax revenues to be approximately twice actual revenues. In fact, simulated revenues are four
times larger than actual revenues. This can only mean that the other components of the
property tax base -- taxable commercial-industrial property -- is much less in the real
Philadelphia economy than in our simulated economy, most likely because of significant tax
relief for the city's commercial-industrial sector. Also likely to be important is the fact that
Philadelphia has large non-profit and government sectors which are excluded from the city's
actual property tax base, but which are included as part of our simulation model's "private
economy".
    18 Philadelphia resident and non-resident wage tax rates moved together for most of the
sample period so separate resident and non-resident base elasticities could not be identified;
see Haughwout, et. al. (2000). Further, the city sales tax had only one rate change over the
sample period, so again, no base elasticity could be estimated for this tax.

                                               24
                     Table 4: Tax Base Elasticities: Estimated vs. Simulated



                 Elasticities of Tax Base with Respect to Tax Rates: Estixnatedt


                                            ____             Bx

                                            —.57              .17          —.06
                                             (.11)           (.13)           (.06)

                                               .06          —.39              .01
                                              (.05)          (.06)           (.03)

                             tw+m              .38            .14           04
                                              (.21)          (.25)           (.12)



                 Elasticities of Tax Base with Respect to Tax Rates: Simulated


                                            ____              Bx            Bw±m

                              Vp
                                               .82          m73             m74

                                             —.02           —.03            —.03

                 -            tw+m           —.26           33              m34



 tFrom Haughwout. Inman, Craig, and Luce (2000). Table 3. Estimates are based on small changes in tax rates
  from FY 998 actual values. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Tax base elasticities for the simulated economy were estimated for small changes in tax rates from the F'? 1998
  actual values, holding all other rates fixed at FY 1998 values.
estimated counterparts, most of which are not statistically significantly different from zero. This

is due in part to the fact that the simulated elasticities are equilibrium responses, while the

estimated elasticities -- for reasons of data limitations -- only measure the one-year impact effect

of rate changes on base. Haughwout, et. al., were able to estimate a longer-nm (four year)

elasticity for property tax base with respect to its own rate only, and this estimated elasticity

equaled - .76 (s.e. = .24), close to the simulated long-run elasticity. Also contributing to the

lower estimated elasticities, particularly for the effect of r on B and Bw+m, is the apparent

under-taxation of commercial-industrial property in the real Philadelphia economy because of

exemptions and abatements.19

       As a second point of comparisOn, Figure 2 illustrates Philadelphia's estimated revenue

hills for FY 1998 from Haughwout, et. al. (2000), shown as dashed lines over the range of tax

rates for the FY 1970-1998 sample period, as well as our model's simulated revenue hills for

the same tax bases, shown as solid lines., At least over the relevant sample ranges, our

simulated and estimated revenue hills are similar in shape and, with the exception of the city's

property tax for reasons noted above (footnote 17), raise approximately the same levels of city

revenues.

       Third, we can compare the simulated effects of Philadelphia taxes on city jobs with the

econometrically estimated elasticities obtained in Haughwout, et. al. (2000) computed at FY

1998 rates; see Table 5 (simulated population elasticities are also reported). The estimated



    '9Empirical mis-specification could also drive a wedge between the econometrically
estimated and simulated elasticities, though Haughwout, et. al. (2000) did conduct several
sensitivity tests to explore this possibility. The results reported in Table 4 were generally
robust to these specification changes.

                                                25
                                                      Figure 2
                           Simulated and Estimated Revenue Hills
                                            Philadelphia, 1998*
                                                    Property Tax
                            Revenue
                            5,000

                            4,000

                            3,000

                            2,000
                                                        V           —
                                                                     'S
                            1,000

                                  0
                                      0       .01      .02 .028            .04    .05
                                                         Tax Rate
           Resident Plus Non-Resident                                        Gross Receipts        Tax
                    Wage Tax**
Revenue                                                     Revenue
2000                                                        1000

                                                              800

                                                              600

 800                                                          400

 400                                                          200

      00                                                         00       .01 .02 .03 .04                   .06
           .02 .04 .06 .08            .10                                                           .05
                          Tax Rate                                                      Tax Rate
  * All simulated revenue hills are represented by solid lines, while estimated hills are represented by dashed lines
  betweenthe sample range of actual city tax rates. Simulated and estimatedrevenue hills are forFY 1998, holding all
  other local tax rates fixed at FY 1998 values. Revenues are in 1994 dollars per household.
  **simulated and actual hills forjoint changes in resident and non-resident tax rates are for equal percentage
  changes in both tax rates from their FY 1998 values. The weighted average of residential and non-residential
  rates is shown in Figure 1
N.




                  Table 5: Job and Population Tax Elasticities: Simulated Economyt



                                                               Elasticity with Respect to:
                                           VP           Vu,         Vy,            tw+m            Vs           VX


      Jobs (N+M)                        —2.69         —.66        —.80              —.70          —.23         —.11
                                           (-06)       (.03)       (.07)             (.04)         (.04)         (.02)

      Population (N±D)                   —1.49        —.51        —.62              —.54          —.17         —.07
                                           (.01)       (.02)       (.05)             (.02)         (.02)         (.01)


     All estimated elasticities are average (log-log) elasticities of jobs or population with respect to changes in local
      tax rates, holding all other city tax rates at their Fl 1998 values (see Table 1). Standard errors from the log-log
                                                        -
      regression are reported within parentheses.
elasticity of Philadelphia jobs (N 4- M) to changes in the city's weighted average of resident and

non-resident wage tax rates            evaluated at FY 1998 rates, equaled - .54 (s.e. = .12) for

all jobs and - .78 (s.e. = .25) for manufacturing jobs only, both plausibly close to the simulated

job elasticity of - .70. The econometrically estimated elasticity of city jobs with respect to the

city property tax was - .20 (s.e. = .14); in contrast, in the simulated economy the elasticity of

jobs with respect to r is -2.69 (Table 5). Again we suspect the large differences here can be
explained by the fact that the econometric estimates are impact elasticities while the simulated

elasticities measure equilibrium responses and the fact that the firms in our simulated economy

are assumed to bear their full share of city property taxation while in the actual Philadelphia

economy firm capital apparently receives extensive tax exemptions and abatements. Haughwout

et. al. 's estimate for the elasticity of jobs with respect to the city's gross receipts tax rate is also

low, -.063 (s.e. = .048), and not statistically different from zero; here, however, the estimated

elasticity compares favorably with the relatively low elasticity from the simulated economy.20

        C. Fiscal Policy in an Open City Economy: Philadelphia, FY 1998

       Figure 3 illustrates the revenue potential inherent in the five taxes available to the city

of Philadelphia, calibrated to FY 1998. The city has direct control over only two of these local

taxes, the property tax and the gross receipts tax; the equilibrium revenue hill for these two

locally-controlled taxes is shown in the top panel of Figure 3. The bottom three panels of



     20 Finally, the results presented here for the simulated Philadelphia economy are
consistent with the existjng theoretical literature on the general equilibrium effects of local
taxes on the local private economy in small open cities. As in Polinksy and Rubinfeld
(1978), Arnott and McKinnon(1977), Brueckner (1982), and Sullivan (1985) land values
fall, wages rise, housing consumption falls, city production falls, and immobile residents'
utility declines as the property tax rate is increased.

                                                   26
                                                                                                              -   - --




                                               Figure 3

                                Projected Philadelphia Revenues
                                               FY 1998*

                                 Property Tax I Gross Receipts Tax
                        Revenue
                        7000 -
                        6222

                        5000 -

                        4000 -

                        3000-
                                  -
                                        .01      .02 N.. .03                   .oi.            .qs
                        2164
                                                                                           Property Tax



                                                                    Gross Receipts Tax


             Resident                                Non-Resident                              Sales Tax
             Wage Tax                                 Wage Tax                             (Food Exemption)
Revenues                                Revenues                                      Revenues
7000                                    7000                                          7000
6205                                    6286                                          6283

                                        5000                                          5000
                                                                                                  R*I
4000                                    4000                                          4000
             F.

3000         F                          3000                                          .3

2000                                    7                                             2000
                            ———


1000                                    1                    ———
                                                                   —_—
                                                                                      1000
                                                      ———


                                                                                             0
       .02        .06     .10     .14          .02     .06     .10       .14                     .02    .06       .10    .14

  Simulated revenue hills are for FY 1998. Revenues are in 1994 dollars per household.
Figure 3 illustrate the revenue that can be raised from each of the three state regulated tax rates

for resident, non-resident, and general sales taxation, respectively. Because a change in any one

city tax rate has effects on all city tax bases (see Table 4), the revenue potential of each tax must

be measured through total city revenues, not just own tax revenues. Figure 3 therefore shows

total city revenues resulting from each tax rate or combination of rates, holding all other tax

rates fixed at their FY 1998 values. When rates equal their FY 1998 values, total city revenues

equal $6205/household, the level of equilibrium total revenues (9?*; Table 2) from our status quo

simulation.

         Holding the three regulated city tax rates at their current FY 1998 values, the top panel

of Figure 3 shows how much additional revenues Philadelphia might be able to raise by adjusting

its two discretionary local tax rates from their FY 1998 status quo values of r = .0249 and Tx

= .002875. The peak of the revenue hill for discretionary taxes occurs at              =   .0245 and

      =   .00 and earns the city a maximum revenue of $6222/household, an increase of only

$17/household above actual FY 1998 revenues (?* = $6205/household).                   Interestingly,

discontinuing the use of the gross receipts tax actually improves city revenues per household.

As r falls towards zero, economic activity within the city, all other tax bases, and thus all other

tax revenues increase by more than enough to compensate for the loss in gross receipts

revenues 21 The lower three panels of Figure 3 illustrate the revenue potential of raising each

of the regulated city tax rates, one at a time. Again the simulations hold all other local tax rates

fixed at theft current FY 1998 levels. In each of the lower panels we show two hills: one for


    21
       As the city "walks up the hill" along the ray at = .0245 by lowering r,, X' rises;
for example, at Tx = .045,     = $6.0 billion; at TX = .0125, X* = $17.386 billion; and at
    = .00, Xt = $25.700 billion.
                                                 27
total city revenues per household (solid line) and another for own revenues per household

(dashed line). The difference between the two revenue paths represents the effects on the other

tax bases of increasing each regulated tax rate!2 At the peak of each of the total (solid line)

city revenue hills, the increase in own revenues just equals the fall in other revenues; beyond

the peak, the fall in other revenues dominates the rise in own revenues and total city revenues

per household decline. Again, Philadelphia appears very near the peak of each of the per

household total revenue hill for its three regulated taxes. Small ceteris paribus changes in the

resident wage tax rate will raise no additional monies. Lowering the non-resident wage tax rate

will increase total city revenues per household by $81/household (= $6286/household -

$6205/household), again because the aggregate economy expands as tax rates declines. Finally,

raising the sales tax rate from r = .007 to      ;=    .042 increases total revenues $78/household

(=   $6283/household - $6205/household). No matter in which direction the city moves from its

FY 1998 status quo equilibrium, the simulated Philadelphia economy appears to be able to

generate no more than 1.3% ($80/household) in new revenues. To the extent our simulated

economy is a valid representation of the actual city economy, we conclude that Philadelphia is

at, or very close to, the peak of its long-run revenue hill.

          The results in the lower panel of Figure 3 for the three regulated taxes are instructive for

a second issue of importance for Philadelphia fiscal policy: Why does the state of Pennsylvania



     22       an increase in any one city tax rate tends to lower all other tax bases (see Table
          Since
4), revenues per household from other taxes declines. This need not always happen; if
population falls faster than the fall in investment, consumption, or employment, then
revenues per household could rise. Because of the significant number of immobile,
dependent households within Philadelphia, however, base per household always falls as rates
increase in our simulated economy.

                                                  28
regulate city wage and sales tax rates? A comparison of each regulated tax's own revenue hill

(dashed lines) with the tax's effect on total revenues (solid lines) shows that while own

revenues/household are nearly always rising, total revenues/household peak at relatively low tax

rates. The reason, as noted, are the important general equilibrium effects of each tax rate on

the city's other tax bases; see Table 4. If these general equilibrium effects which reduce total

city revenues/household unfold only slowly, however, rising own revenues may dominate total

revenues for the first years after the increase in local rates. If the equilibrium adjustment

process takes long enough, local revenue policies may fall prey to the problem of time

inconsistent preferences. Current city politicians may raise rates and own revenues during their

term in office, but leave future politicians with absolutely lower total city revenues after all

equilibrium adjustments have taken place. If so, the city can be in a political equilibrium

permanently beyond the peak of their equilibrium total revenue hill, an unambiguously inefficient

allocation; see Inman (1989). One solution is to regulate local tax rates, as the state of

Pennsylvania has in fact done.

         Time inconsistency aside, there are two additional reasons why Pennsylvania might wish

to regulate Philadelphia wage and sales taxes.23 Table 6 shows what happens to the city's

private (X*, N*, M*, 5*, W*, R*) and public (G*) economies as well as to the welfare of the

city's poor and elderly dependent households (V*) as each of the three regulated tax rates are

increased. As these tax rates rise, both the private and public economies get smaller. Output


    23
        Haughwout, et. qI. (2000) present tentative evidence for four large U.S. cities
including Philadelphia that the response of local taxes bases, at least with respect to changes
in own tax rates, occurs reasonably quickly, typically within 2 to 3 fiscal years. This
suggests that the time inconsistency problem may not be the whole story behind state
regulation.
                                               29
                                      'fable 6: Wage Taxes, Sales Taxes, and the City Econousy*

                                                                Resident Wage Tax
                                                                                                                             Compensation
                                                                                                                                from
             (Billions)          N'            41,        S'       ($/worker)   ($/acre)      (Billions)    (V0   n     1)     Status Quo

.02           $33153         563586          226,081      .24       $29,102     $21,377       $97,134            .473            $113.94
.0479         $22,663        375,332         155,305      .32       $29,703     $15,223       $81.838            .477              $0.00
.06           $19040         311,310         131,180      .36       $29,974     $13,120       $75,971        .479               —$50.10
.08           $14067         225,402          97,422      .44       $30,434     $10,253       $67,293            .482          —$134.04
.10           $10153          159,368         70,690      .53      $30,911          $8,020    $59,841        .485              —$219.49
I2             $7,076         1b8,753         49,532      .62      $31,405          $6,283    $53,475        .488              —$306.58



                                                           Non Resident Wage Tax
                                                                                                                             Compensation
                                                                                                                                 from
  t,,       (Billions)          N'             M'         &       ($/worker)    ($/acre)     (Billions)    (V0        1)      Status Quo

.02          $27.59!         451,971         194,366      .28      $29,821      $17,982       $89,290        .475                $53.68
.04165       $22663          375,332         155,305      .32      $29,703      $15,223       $81838         .477
.06          $19199          320,329         129,094      .36      $29,605      $13,280       $76246         .479               —$44.34
.08          $16.03!         269,846         105,370      .39      $29,501      $11,500       $70,833        .481               —$91.57
.10          $13,387         227,317          86,053      .43      $29,399      $10,012       $66.069        .482              —$137.71
.12          $11,175         191,364          70,269      .48      $29,300       $8,764       $61,878        .484              —$182.81



                                                       Sales Tax (with Food Exemption)
                                                                                                                             Compensation
                                                                     W'                                      V4                 from
   r        (Billions)         N'            ______       8'      ($/worker)    ($/acre)     (Billions)    (V0      1)        Status Quo

 .007        $22.663        375,332          155,305     .32       $29,703      $15,223      $Sl.838         .477                $0.00
 .014        $21,172        348,616          145,592     .34       $29,813      $14,375      $79,732         .476               $50.01
 .028        $18492         301.570          127,485     .37       $30,031      $12,851      $75,807         .472              $149.23
 .042        $16,160        261,058          111,683     .40       $30,247      $11,526      $72,232         .469              $247.22
 .064        $14,126        226,079          97.855      .44       $30,460      $10,371      $68,981         .466              $412.33
 .078        $12.352         195,903         85,772      .47       $30,670       $9,365      $66044          .462              $507.18
 .09!        $10,801         169,770         75,172      .51       $30,878       $8,485       $63,387        .459              $600.92

   FY   1998 allocations shown in italics.
declines, employment and total population fall, and the stock of the pure public good declines!'

The fall in the number of resident households means the percent of residents who are dependent

(8) rises, and indeed, when rates are high enough, the dependent population becomes a local

majority (or nearly so). Note too that for both wage taxes, the utility of the typical dependent

household rises. This makes sense as dependent households do not pay these taxes. While

dependent households bear a burden through the fall in the valued public good (G*), they are

more than compensated by a lower cost of housing because of the equilibrium fall in city rents,

R*. Thus Vd* rises. What the Table 6 results imply is that dependent households have an

incentive to capture the local political process, raise wage tax rates, and drive out the middle

class. In the process, their political coalition becomes more important and their utility rises.

One measure of this incentive to capture politics is shown in Table 6 as "Compensation from

the Status Quo' measuring the amount of money which must be paid to (+), or would be paid

by (-), a single dependent household for a move from the status quo tax rate (shown in italics)

to each of the new tax rates. Viewed as political contributions, these payments by dependent

households (= (-) "Compensation" in Table 6) may be enough to elect a sympathetic city mayor.

The end result will be an economically emaciated center city. State regulation may then be

needed to check this politically chosen, but possibly inefficient, outcome!5


    24
         The fall in G occurs even though revenues per household rise over a range of rate
increases. The reason is that while revenues per household rise, the number of households
declines at a faster rate, and thus total revenues decline. With the fall in total revenues, total
expenditures on the pure public good must fall as well. Thus Q* falls.
    23
         The analysis here is at best suggestive. For this argument to offer a compelling case
for state regulation we will need at least three additional assumptions, none of which is
formally included in our model. First, the need for regulation assumes having a smaller city
imposes real economic costs on the larger society. This could occur if the larger city

                                               30
       The results in Table 6 raise the possibility of exactly the opposite incentives when setting

the local sales tax rate. Here politics seems likely to drive the city sales tax rate to zero. First,

dependent household welfare declines as city sales tax rates increase. As r5 rises, R* again

declines. While this helps dependent households, the fall in G* and now the rise in the price

of private good consumption (1 +       both reduce dependent household welfare; on balance, Vd*

falls as r rises. The resident middle class also loses with the rise in ; from the status quo.

While their annual utility position is protected by their option to exit the city (V0    1), current

resident-workers suffer capital losses on the value of their city home since city rents fall as ;

rises. Thus no one in the city wishes to use the sales tax. Yet a broad-based sales or
consumption tax may be useful source of public revenues, provided all cities raise rates



provides valued private sector agglomeration economies. Note that having a pure public
good in cities is not enough to make the case for regulation. Even though the exit of
residents raises the average costs of providing public services in our central city, those
residents exit to other cities lowering the average costs of public services elsewhere. Second,
in making our argument we implicitly ignored the effect of changes in rents on the value of
assets owned by dependent households. In our model, dependent households do own land.
When we recognize fact that dependent household assets have lost value and then balance the
resulting income loss of this decline (AR* a against the income equivalent welfare gains
reported in Table 6, the two just about cancel. Our argument only really holds for renters,
or elderly who plan for no bequests. These households are not formally in our model.
Third, if assume dependent households are politically active (make campaign contributions),
then we must allow the current middle class households to be active too. How much will
they contribute to lower tax rates from the status quo? Since their utility is guaranteed by
their "exit option (V0 e 1), they are only affected by capital gains or losses. In fact as
wage tax rates rise, these capital losses (ARt 1) experienced by a typical middle class
resident household exceed the compensation value of the welfare gains of each (renter)
dependent household; further, at the current status quo there are more middle-class
households than dependçnt households. Thus from the status quo, if a poor/elderly coalition
seeks to "buy' the favor of local politicians, a coalition of middle class households can offer
more. One needs a clear theory of why the poor are well-organized and middle class
residents are not, before we can use the results in Table 6 as evidence of a political "market
failure" in need of regulation.

                                                 31
simultaneously. If so, state or national regulation (i.e., policy coordination) of local sales

taxation, or perhaps a nationally-imposed tax with the proceeds distributed to localities, will be

needed.26

         Our analysis here provides insight into a third issue of importance for the financing of

local governments, particularly so for U.S. cities in the current climate favoring policy

decentralization. The U.S. Welfare Reform Act of 1996 shifts financial responsibility for

redistribution policy for low income households from the federal to the state and local level of

government. Because in many states, politics favor rural and suburban residents -- Pennsylvania

is arguably such a state -- cities may be required to shoulder a growing share of the costs of low

income assistance. Table 7 helps us to understand what might happen to the city's private and

public economies with such a mandate. The first column in Table 7 defines a "mandated" city

share (u') for funding the federally established transfer per dependent household of Y = $13,500;

currently, Philadelphia is estimated to pay a .095 share of this required transfer. Increasing this

mandated share, holding all city tax rates fixed at theft FY 1998 levels, means a fall in the stock

of public goods which can be frnanced by the city.27 The fall in the stock of public goods



    26
       Again, the argument here turns on an analysis beyond our current model. To make
the case for a broad-based consumption tax one needs a dynamic model with savings and
economic growth; see for example, Suimners (1981) and Judd (1999). The case for
coordinated fiscal policy requires a model with other, competitive governments; see for
example, Mintz and Tulkens (1986).
    27
         The Welfare Reform Act of 1996 did include a comfortable fmancial "cushion" for
state and local governments in the form of federal Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF) grants. These grants are given to the U.S. states to replace previous federal
matching assistance. To the extent the monies are shared with local governments through an
increase in Z aid, the adverse consequences on (3* of an increase in the mandated local share
(t,&) will be softened; see equation 14.


                                                32
                                       Table 7; Local Welfare Responsibilityand the   City Economy'


   Welfare                                                                                                              Compensation
                                                                                                G'                         from
Responsibility
                      (Billions)                               8     ($/worker)   ($Iacre)   (Billions)   (V0 =    1)    Status Quo
      (4')                                 ______

     .00               $24806          410,770       170,326   .30    $29,686     $16,437    $89.414       .478            —$8.01

     .095              $22663          374,992       155,645   .32    $29,703     $15,223    $81.837       .477             50.00

      .25              $19023              314,300   130,699   .36    $29,736     $13,162    $69.185        .476           $15.15

      .50               $12626             207,913    86,819   .46    $29,811      $9,540    $47.704        .475           $48.91


      .75                $4942             80,874     34,037   .69    $29,952      $5,191    $23.631        .473          $112.70

      .85                  $826             13,441     5,700   .93    $30,090      $2,864    $lI.892        .471          $175.85


+I;y 1998 altucations shown iii italics.
means the city is less attractive for middle class households and firms. They exit, lowering X*,

N*, Mt, and R*; V.t rises slightly as compensation for resident-workers who do stay in the city.

The shrinking city economy means a much smaller tax base, both per household and in the

aggregate. Thus G* must fall. The results in Table 7 show just how sensitive the city's

economy is to fiscal policies, such as a rising ', which raise taxes and do not provide

compensating public services. For example, increasing the city's responsibility for dependent

household transfers from its current share (u') of .095 to .25 -- certainly a possible outcome

under the new structure for fmancing U.S. welfare -- will shrink both the city's private economy

(X*, N* + M*, R*) and public economy (Q*) by about 15 percent. Once the local share of the

mandated redistribution (v') exceeds .85, the city is no longer a viable economic center. As '

rises, the dependent households left behind see their welfare (V*) fall, even though their level

of transfer income remains protected at $13,500.

       Dependent households might take a more active stance as ' rises, and offer some of their

transfer income to help pay for the new mandate; they could do so by accepting a lower value

of Y. An approximation to the maximal reduction in Y that each dependent household might

offer is the value of the compensation needed to make them whole after each increase in '; see

Table 7, 'Compensation from Status Quo."2 Unfortunately, these available offers from the

dependent poor are much too small to cover the added costs to the city from increasing '; for


        Strictly speaking we should calculate the dependent household's willingness to pay to
move from a new value of ' (say,    z4' = .25) back to the original value of ' = .095. In fact,
the welfare estimates in Table 7 measure how much we must compensate the dependent
household to accept the move from !E2 = .095 to the new '. Because of income effects, the
typical dependent household's willingness to pay will not be equal to its required
compensation. The differences in this case will be trivial, however, and will make no
difference for our conclusions above.

                                              33
example, for it' = .25 the city must spend $2092 more per poor household (= $2092         =   [.25 -

.095]$13,500) while a typical poor household will contribute at most $15.15. Rising federal or

state mandates for city financing of low income households will necessarily impose a tax burden

on middle class households and firms and a welfare loss on the city's poor. Suburban and rural

residents gain through lower federal and state taxes.29



IV. Conclusion

         The move towards increasing fiscal decentralization, both in the United States and

internationally, has given new urgency to the need to understand the economic consequences of

fiscal policies in open city and regional economies. This paper has offered a general equilibrium

model of an open city with both mobile firms and resident-workers to examine the consequences

of alternative local and national fiscal policies on the equilibrium prospects of the city's private

and public economies. Given household preferences and firm technologies and an exogenous

configuration of city tax rates and national grants and fiscal mandates, the model calculates

equilibrium values for firm production and input use, household consumption and housing

choices, city wages, rents, and population, and finally, local tax bases, revenues, and public

goods provision.

         The analytic approach outlined here is useful for at least two methodological reasons.

First, for given firm technologies and household preferences, the model itself helps us to

understand the equilibrium consequences of changes in initial demographics, and exogenous


    29
           Baicker (1999) for.a careful analysis of the incidence of federal mandates on state
         See
and local governments. Her econometric results are consistent with the results obtained here
from our simulation model.

                                                34
fiscal institutions and policies on private economic performance, changes not easily understood

without a fully specified market model with mobile finns and households. Second, the model

offers an important complementary tool to the usual econometric approach to studying how local

fiscal policies impact on the private sector in open economies; see Bartik (1991) for a review

of the empirical evidence. When calibrated to a real city economy -- here, Philadelphia -- our

model provides an important benchmark against which to judge the plausibility of econometric

estimates of the effects of fiscal policy, estimates often plagued by bias from the likely

simultaneity of private choices and government policies. Alternatively, econometric estimates

which successfully control for the endogeneity of fiscal policy permit a finer calibration of the

simulation model. Both approaches, simulation and estimation, are valid tools for understanding

how a city's private economy responds to fiscal policy.

        Once calibrated and validated, our model allows us to examine the economic
consequences of alternative policy regimes. Three issues of current concern to our sample city,

Philadelphia, were examined here. First, can the city raise additional revenues through

adjustments in its local tax rates? To the extent that Figure 3 accurately represents the city's

revenue potential, the answer appears to be No. Philadelphia's current rate structure has moved

the city very close to the top of its total revenue hill -- in fact, it is slightly over the top of the

hill for its discretionary taxes. The city can raise at most 1.3 percent additional revenues

through adjustments in local tax rates -- by lowering property, gross receipts, and non-resident

wage tax rates, and/or by raising the local sales tax rate; see Figure 3,30 Second, Philadelphia


    30 There is an important caveat to this conclusion and that is the apparent significant tax
exemptions and abatements now available to firm capital in Philadelphia's actual tax
structure; see footnote 17 above. These exemptions for firm capital are not inôluded in our

                                                 35
wage and sales tax rates are regulated by the state; Is this valid? The analysis here cannot

answer this question definitively, but our results are suggestive of three reasons for concern that

the city might mismanage these two taxes: time inconsistency (both wage and sales taxes), local

politics favoring redistribution towards the city's immobile households (wage taxation), and a

race-to-the-bottom competition with other communities (sales taxation); see Figure 3 and Table

6. Third, in this new era of fiscal decentralization, can Philadelphia shoulder a rising burden

of local welfare payments and remain a viable economic center? Table 7 illustrates just how

fragile Philadelphia's private economy is to any policy which increases taxes without
compensating mobile firms and households with better public services; decentralization of

welfare spending is such a policy. Increasing the city's responsibility for dependent household

transfers from its current share () of .095 to .25 will shrink both the city's private and public

economies by about 15 percent. If ever asked to assume primary ('          .85) responsibility for

its poor, Philadelphia will not survive as an economic city.

       Two extensions of our model seem particularly valuable. First, the new economic

geography is finding increasing evidence for the importance of agglomeration economies, both

in the production (Ciccone and Hall, 1996) and household sectors (Glaeser, 2000). Our model

can accommodate such extensions in a relatively straightforward manner by allowing aggregate

firm capital or total employment to influence individual firm efficiency and by allowing total

residents or city demographics to affect individual household utility. How agglomeration


simulations of city revenues. The equilibrium revenue effects of introducing such subsidies
are not obvious, however. Allowing a subsidy for firm capital will lower property tax
revenues from firms, but to the extent it attracts jobs and residents to the city there will be
offsetting effects through higher residential property taxes and higher wage, sales, and gross
receipts tax revenues.

                                               36
•     ...•..• ••. ••. ..•..•. PfQ'•..d..•,•••:   •.........4•...    ,•...   ...•,....•..                •••,.•   .••




    economies affect the size and responsiveness of the private economy to changes in fiscal policies

    remains an open question. Second, the analysis here is static, yet perhaps the most interesting

    question today, particularly for developing economies, is how cities influence economic growth.

    There is strong evidence that cities serve as important centers for production efficiency and

    knowledge spilovers, both crucial to national growth; see Black and Henderson (1999). Yet as

    we have seen here, local fiscal policies have important effects on city size and on the
    composition of the city's labor force. Adding local fiscal policy to models of city size and city

    growth seems to us the important next steps in our understanding of fiscal policies in open

    economies.




                                                           37
                                      REFERENCES

Arnott, R. and I. MacKinnon (1977), "The Effects of the Property Tax: A General Equilibrium
       Simulation," Journal of Urban Economics, 4, pp. 389-407.

Baicker, K. (1999), "Government Decision-Making and the Incidence of Federal Mandates,"
      mimeo. Dartmouth College.

Bartik, T. (1991), Who Bene'fttsfrom State and Local Economic Development Policies?, Upjohn
        Institute, Kalamazoo, MT.

Black, D. and V. Henderson (1999), "A Theory of Urban Growth," Journal of Political
       Economy, 107, pp. 252-284.

Brueckner, J. (1981), "Labor Mobility and the Incidence of the Residential Property Tax,"
      Journal of Urban Economics, 10, pp. 173-182.

Ciccone, A. and R. Hall (1996), "Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity," American
      Economic Review, 86, pp. 54-70.

Epple, D. and T. Romer (1991), "Mobility and Redistribution," Journal of Political Economy,
       99, pp. 828-858.

Fallon, P. R. and P. R. 0. Layard (1975), "Capital-Skill Complementarity, Income Distribution,
       and Output Accounting," Journal of Political Economy, 83, pp. 279-301.

Glaeser, E. (2000), "The Future of Urban Research: Non-Market Interactions," Brookings
      Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 1, (forthcoming).

Goolsbee, A. (1999), "In a World Without Borders: The Impact of Taxes on Internet
       Commerce," NBER WP. No. 6863, Cambridge, MA: pp. 1-29.

Gyourko, J. and R. Voith (2000), "The Price Elasticity of Demand for Residential Land,"
       mimeo, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Haughwout, A. (1998), "Aggregate Production Functions, Interregional Equilibrium, and the
     Measurement of Infrastructure Productivity," Journal of Urban Economics, 44, pp. 216-
       227.

Haughwout, A. (2000), "Public Infrastructure Investments, Productivity, and Welfare in Fixed
     Geographic Areas," mimeo., Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Haughwout A., R. P. Innian. S. Craig, and T. Luce (2000), "Local Revenue Hills: A General
     Equilibrium Specification with Evidence from Four U.S. Cities," NBER WP 7603.
Ininn, R. P. (1979), "The Fiscal Performance of Local Governments: An Interpretative
       Review," in P. Mieszkowski and M. Straszheim (eds.), Current Issues in Urban
         Economics, The Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 270-321.

lnmRrl, R. P. (1989), "The Local Decision to Tax: Evidence from Large U.S. Cities," Regional
     -   Science and   Urban Economics, 19, pp. 455-491.

Inman, R. P. and G. Ritter (1999), "Local Taxes and the Economic Future of Philadelphia,"
      Greater Philadelphia Regional Review, Winter, pp. 5-8.

Judd, K. (1999), "Optimal Taxation and Spending in General Competitive Growth Models,"
       Journal of Public Economics, 71, pp. 1-26.

Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J. V. Rios-Rull, U. L. Violante (1998), "Capital-Skill
         Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," mimeo., University of
         Pennsylvania.

Meyer, B. D. (1999), "Do the Poor Move to Receive Higher Welfare Benefits?" minieo.,
         Northwestern University.

Mieszkowski, P. (1972), "The Property Tax: An Excise or Profits Tax?" Journal of Public
      Economics, 1, pp. 73-96.

Mimi, J. and H. Tulkens (1986), "Commodity Tax Competition Between Member States of a
      Federation: Equilibrium and Efficiency," Journal of Public Economics, 29, pp. 133-172.

Pasha, H. A. and A. F. A. Ghaus (1995), "General Equilibrium Effects of Local Taxes,"
         Journal of Urban Economics, 38, pp. 253-271.

Polinslcy, M. and D. Rubinfeld (1978), "The Long-mn Effects of a Residential Property Tax and
       Local Public Services," Journal of Urban Economics, 5, pp. 241-262.

-Poterba, J. (1989), "Tax Reform and the Market for Tax-Exempt Debt," Regional Science and
       Urban Economics, 19, pp. 537-562.

Roback, J. (1982), "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life," Journal of Political Economy, 90,
      pp. 1257-1278.

Rosen, S. (1979), "Wage-based Indexes and the Quality of Life," in P. Mieszkowski and M.
      Straszheim (eds.), Current Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
      University Press,pp. 74-104.
Sullivan, A. (1985), "The General Equilibrium Effects of the Residential Property Tax:
         Incidence and Excess Burden," Journal of Urban Economics, 18, pp. 235-250.

                                               2
Summers, A. and L. Iakubowski (1997),"The Fiscal Burden of Unreimbursed Poverty
      Expenditures," Greater Philadelphia Regional Review, SpringiSummer, pp. 10-12.

Summers, L. (1981), "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model,"
    American Economic Review, 71, pp. 533-544.

Walsh, M. and I. Jones (1988), "More Evidence on the "Border Tax" Effect: The Case of West
      Virginia, 1979-1984," National Tax Journal, 41, pp. 261-266.

Wildasin, D. (1986), Urban Public Finance, Harwood.

Wilson, J. D. (1986), "A Theory of Interregional Tax Competition," Journal of Urban
      EconomicE, 19, pp. 296-315.

Wilson, J. 1). (1999), "Theories of Tax Competition," National Tax Journal, 52, 269-304.

Zodrow, G. and P. Mieszkowski (1986), "Pigon, Tiebout, Property Taxation and the
      TJnderprovision of Local Public Goods," Journal of Urban Economics, 19, pp. 356-370.




                                            3
