NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE BENEFITS OF DOLLARIZATION WHEN
STABILIZATION POLICY IS NOT CREDIBLE AND
FINANCIAL MARKETS ARE IMPERFECT

Enrique G. Mendoza

Working Paper 7824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7824

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2000

This paper was prepared for the conference on "Global Monetary Integration" sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank

of Cleveland and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking. An earlier version was prepared for the project on
"Optimal Monetary Institutions for Mexico" organized by ITAM. FTelpfW comments and suggestions by Guillermo
Calvo, Marco del Negro, Alfonso Guerra, Bernardo Paasche, Fabrizio Perri, Katherine Smith, Diego Valderrama, and
Vincenzo Quadrini are gratefully acknowledged, as well at those by seminar participants at CIDE and NYU. I am
particularly indebted to the discussants of the paper, Fernando Alvarez, Moisés Schwartz and Martin Uribe. Part of this

work was done while the author was a visiting scholar at the Economic Studies Division of the Bank of Mexico.
Comments and suggestions by its staff members are also gratefully acknowledged. This paper reflects only the author's
views, and not those of the Bank of Mexico or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

2000 by Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

On the Benefits of Dollarization when Stabilization Policy is not Credible and
Financial Markets are Imperfect
Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 7824
August 2000
JEL No. F32, F33, F34, F42

ABSTRACT
This paper examines two potential benefits that emerging economies may derive from
dollarization. First, dollarization may eliminate distortions induced by the lack of credibility of
monetary policy. Second, dollarization may weaken financial frictions that result in endogenous

credit constraints. The analysis is based on numerical simulations of a two-sector dynamic,
stochastic general equilibrium model calibrated to Mexican data. The results indicate that policy
uncertainty and credit constraints are very costly distortions. The mean welfare gains of eliminating
policy uncertainty range between 6.4 and 9 percent of the trend level of consumption per capita. The

mean welfare gain of weakening credit frictions is about 4.6 percent.

Enrique G. Mendoza
Duke University
Department of Economics, Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
mendozae@econ.duke.edu

—1—

"Especially in emerging markets, exchange-rate regimes are the hemlines of
macroeconomics— ideas about what looks best change all the time, at the whim of
fashion." (The Economist, January 29, 2000, p. 88)
1.

Introduction
The second half of the 1990s was a period of intense turbulence in international financial

markets. This period witnessed the collapse of several managed exchange-rate regimes in
"emerging" economies across the globe (including those of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,

Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Russia, and Thailand). There were also severe speculative
attacks on currencies that escaped devaluation (such as those of Argentina, Hong Kong and
Taiwan), and periods of systemic contagion in which even the financial markets of industrial

nations suffered. This epidemic of financial crises, and the depth of the recessions that followed
them, re-opened the protracted debate on exchange-rate regimes with a new sense of urgency.

For the most part, this renewed debate has been dominated by revisions of Mundell's
(1960, 1961) classic arguments establishing conditions under which a fixed exchange rate, a
flexible exchange rate or a currency union constitute the optimal regime in terms of its ability to

smooth macroeconomic adjustment. While this approach has provided key insights in the past,
there are two aspects central to the current situation that it does not address. First, the
Mundellian approach abstracts from the financial frictions that played a key role in recent crises,
and hence it does not provide policymakers with an understanding of how, or even whether,
alternative exchange-rate regimes can address those frictions and thus prevent future crises.
Second, the Mundellian approach conceives the choice of exchange-rate regime as if it were

made in a vacuum. Any regime can be put in place instantaneously and maintained indefinitely.
The Mundell-Fleming apparatus is used to study macroeconomic performance under alternative
regimes, and the "winner" is the regime that yields smaller income fluctuations for a given
environment of trade integration, factor mobility, and exogenous shocks.

-2The main issues confronting monetary authorities of emerging economies differ sharply
from those emphasized in the Mundellian analysis in that they relate to the transition from one
particular exchange-rate regime to another, the sustainability of a chosen regime, the adverse
effects of severe financial volatility, and the distortions that result from the serious credibility

problems they face.1 The aim of this paper is to contribute to the debate on exchange-rate
regimes by examining the implications of a macroeconomic model that incorporates some of
these issues. In particular, the paper studies how dollarization (i.e., the policy by which
domestic money is replaced with foreign money) can be beneficial because of its potential ability
to deal with credibility distortions and weaken credit frictions.

The key role played by financial frictions and credibility problems in the emergingmarkets crises of the 1990s is well-established and is a central theme of the large recent literature
on the subject.2 The emphasis that this literature places on the financial sector contrasts sharply
with traditional theories that attribute currency crises to the trade implications of overvalued real

exchange rates (driven by price rigidities) or to the monetization of fiscal deficits. This paper
adds to the literature by exploring the quantitative implications of a financial transmission
mechanism in which uncertain policy duration (i.e., lack of credibility) interacts with a financial
friction represented by an endogenous borrowing constraint. This is done within the context of a
dynamic, stochastic general-equilibrium setting suitable for the application of recursive
numerical simulation methods.

The model shares basic features of models proposed in the literature on credibility and
exchange-rate management initiated by Calvo (1986), Helpman and Razin (1987), and Drazen
11t is paradoxical that Mundeli's work recognized that these issues were critical for the optimal choice of exchangerate regime (see, for example, his analysis of business cycles driven by currency speculation in Mundell (1960)),but
most of the literature that followed his work generally abstracted from them.
2See the November 1996 and June 2000 symposium issues of the Journal of International Economics or the NBER
volume edited by Edwards (2000) for a short sample of this literature

-3-

and llelpman (1987). This literature showed that "lack of policy credibility" induces prices and
wealth distortions that may contribute to explain some of the business-cycle facts typical of

stabilization plans anchored on managed exchange rates. Similarly, the model's emphasis on
credit constraints is shared by a growing recent literature studying the role of these constraints in
emerging-markets crises.3 These two literatures provide important background for the analysis
conducted here, but until now the study of the connection between non-credible policy, creditmarket imperfections, and economic fluctuations was largely unchartered territory (some
insights on this issue are provided in Calvo and Mendoza (2000)).

The issues examined in this paper are also related to those studied in the ongoing
research program on financial frictions in Macroeconomics, particularly the branch studying
endogenous credit constraints driven by collateral or margin requirements.4 Most studies in this
literature consider borrowing constraints that are either always binding (as in Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997) or Bernanke, Gertler and Girlchrist (1998)) or occasionally binding in the short
run but never binding at steady state (as in Aiyagari and Gertler (1999)). The model of this
paper differs in that it considers the dynamics of a small open economy in which borrowing
constraints can be binding or non-binding (in the short run and in the long run) depending on the

state of nature, and yet the competitive equilibrium can still be represented by a social planner's

problem. These features of the model result from the adoption of Epstein's (1983) specification
of expected utility with an endogenous rate of time preference.

The policy-credibility problem considered in this paper is that of a non-credible managed

3Most studies on this subject follow the influential closed-economy framework of credit cycles by Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997). See, for example, Paasche (1999) and Caballero and Krishnamurty (1999).
4Another major branch of this literature (see Kehoe and Levine (1993), Kocherlakota (1996) and Alvarez and
Jermann (2000)) studies models that incorporate explicitly participation constraints representing the risk of default
implicit in postulating collateral constraints. Alvarez and Jermann showed that an exact decentralized credit-market
representation of an efficient outcome in which participation constraints rule out default in equilibrium requires
state-contingent solvency constraints.

-4-

exchange-rate regime. The government announces a currency peg as the anchor of a disinflation
plan (as was done in several countries in Latin America during the late 1980s and early 1990s).

However, agents expect with some probability a switch to a regime with a high rate of
depreciation of the currency and the corresponding high inflation. The lack of credibility of the
peg is measured by this probability. Thus, the credibility-enhancement that dollarization entails
alters both the mean and variance of inflation and the distortions associated with each.
The credit friction present in the model is a liquidity requirement by which lenders
require borrowers to meet a fraction of their current expenditures and tax and debt obligations

out of current income and holdings of liquid financial assets. This sets an upper bound for the
ratio of foreign debt to current income plus liquid-asset holdings which resembles common
lending guidelines used in credit markets.5 Whether the constraint binds or not in a particular
state of nature is an endogenous outcome of the dynamics of income, money demand and relative

prices. Moreover, this credit friction incorporates some of the adverse features resulting from
the "liability dollarization" already present in the financial systems of emerging economies (see
Calvo (2000)). In particular, the model considers traded and nontraded goods, but debt and the
liquidity requirement are denominated in units of traded goods. Hence, a collapse in the relative
price of nontradables (i.e., the real exchange rate) tightens credit severely and forces large
adjustments in the current account and economic activity.

The interaction of the liquidity requirement and the non-credible currency peg can be
surmnarized as follows. The stylized facts of exchange-rate-based stabilizations include a sharp
real appreciation, large booms in output and absorption, a marked widening of external deficits,

and a surge in money demand. Mendoza and Uribe (2000a) showed that the risk of devaluation
51n the United States the two institutions that anchor the mortgage market, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, set
guidelines for lenders in terms of ratios of debt payments to income (net and gross of mortgage loans) of
prospective borrowers which vary with interest rates and downpayments.

-5-

in a stochastic setting with incomplete markets produces large price and wealth distortions that

can account for a fraction of these empirical regularities. In their model, however, credit markets
are perfect and agents can borrow subject only to the standard no-Ponzi-game restriction.

The situation is very different with a binding liquidity requirement. As the country enters
the exchange-rate-based stabilization plan, the associated economic expansion, real appreciation
and surge in money demand may induce an endogenous relaxation of the borrowing limit (if the
limit was binding initially), hence providing a channel for magnifying the real effects of the
stabilization plan. Similarly, an exchange-rate collapse may tighten the borrowing limit to the
point of making it binding, thus providing a mechanism for magnifying the recessive effects of
the currency crash. Uncertainty plays a key role in this analysis because the shift in exchangerate regime is a source of non-insurable risk that, in the presence of binding borrowing

constraints, leads agents to engage in precautionary saving. General-equilibrium feedback
effects are also critical. The collapse in the relative price of nontradables caused by a
devaluation reduces the value of the marginal product of labor (and thus labor demand and
output) in that sector. Falling output and prices in turn tighten further the borrowing constraint.
The borrowing constraint also introduces distortions that are likely to magnify those

induced by lack of credibility. This occurs because the effective intertemporal relative price of
consumption and the atemporal relative price of leisure rise in states of nature in which the

constraint binds. Moreover, since money holdings influence the ability to borrow, the
opportunity cost of holding money is also likely to rise in those states, leading to an increase in
money velocity and in the monetary distortions that result from higher velocity. The model also
features two endogenous persistence channels that result from distortions driven by the liquidity

requirement. One operates through money demand dynamics: an increase in the date-t
opportunity cost of holding money reduces money demand, which in turn induces a fall in initial

-6holdings of liquid assets at H-I, thus making it more likely that the constraint will continue to

bind. The second channel works through real-exchange-rate dynamics because the model's
effective consumption-based real interest rate depends on the rate of change of the relativeprice
of aggregate consumption in terms of tradables. The latter is a monotonic function of the relative
price of nontradables and thus its dynamics depend on the evolution of the supply and demand of
nontradable goods.

-

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 documents aspects of the recent Mexican

experience that illustrate the role of credit frictions and their interaction with a managed

exchange-rate regime. Section 3 develops the model. Section 4 uses a variant of the model to
conduct quantitative experiments. Section 5 concludes and draws policy lessons.

2.

Financial Frictions and the Mexican Economy
Several macroeconomic developments observed in Mexico during the period 1987-1994

provide suggestive evidence of the role of credit frictions in driving economic fluctuations.
During this period, Mexico embarked on an exchange-rate-based stabilization plan and a far-

reaching program of economic reforms (which included financial liberalization and the
privatization of commercial banks).
One of the main features of this episode that highlights the role of financial frictions is

the evolution of the real exchange rate. The sharp real appreciation of the Mexican peso was
widely viewed as a leading indicator that signaled the country's external vulnerability. The real
exchange rate, as measured by the exchange-rate-adjusted ratio of consumer price indexes (CPIs)
of Mexico and the United States, rose by nearly 46 percent between February of 1988 (the month
at the end of which exchange-rate management began) and November of 1994 (the month just

before the devaluation). Given the nearly-fixed nominal exchange rate and the low U.S.
inflation rate during this period, it is clear that the these two variables made a trivial contribution

-7-

to the large real appreciation of the peso.6 Changes in the prices of tradable goods in Mexico
(proxied by the CPI for durables) also played a small role, as inflation in this category fell
sharply after the stabilization plan began (in fact there were a few months of deflation in durable
goods prices in 1989). Thus, by the definition of the real exchange rate, it follows that the real
appreciation resulted from a sharp increase in the relative price of nontradables within Mexico.
Further examination of Mexican prices shows that by far the highest inflation rate in the
nontradables sector corresponded to the cost of use of housing, and that this reflected large

booms in real estate and land prices. Between Ferbuary, 1988 and November, 1999 the prices of
tradables such as furniture and appliances rose by 88 percent, those of conventional nontradables

had increases ranging from 171 percent for personal hygiene and health services to 289 percent
for education and entertainment. In contrast, the cost of use of housing rose by 632 percent.
This item also has the largest weight in the CPT at 15.7 percent.

The severe "housing-cost bias" of the real appreciation casts doubt on conventional
accounts of the Mexican crisis. In particular, it is hard to associate this bias (and the associated
asset-price boom) with either conventional arguments of price or wage stickiness or with a
generalized rise in nontradables prices. In contrast, there is evidence connecting the real
appreciation, the dynamics of the housing market, and financial frictions. Guerra de Luna (1997)
describes in detail the fight connection between the rising housing costs and the sharp increase in

the price of urban land in the Mexico City area. He documents how the rapid rise in real state
prices was associated both with a boom in the mortgage market and with large inflows of foreign
capital, and how commercial banks relaxed borrowing limits by lowering down-payments and by
introducing high-risk mortgage loans known as "Mexican mortgages."7
6See Mendoza (2000a) for details on variance decompositions of the peso-dollar real exchange rate.
7Mexican mortgages were similar to credit card contracts. They allowed payments with no amortization of principal
and partial interest payments, capitalizing unpaid interest into the principal and extending their maturity if needed.

-8-

Real estate prices peaked in 1992 and then began to fall slowly, compromising the
willingness of borrowers to service mortgages as loan values grew beyond that of home equity.
Mexico also entered in recession in 1993, a year before the currency crash, and this combined
with the rise in U.S. interest rates may have tigthened borrowing limits and contributed to
precipitate both the banking crisis and the collapse of the currency. The international evidence
reported by Guerra de Luna suggests that similar phenomena might have occurred in Chile
before the 1982 crash, in Korea in the early 1990s, and in Uruguay in 1979-1980.

Additional evidence of the expansion of credit via relaxation of borrowing constraints in
Mexico and in other emerging markets is provided by Copelman and Werner (1996). They show
that credit from banks expanded rapidly in Mexico irmnediately after the introduction of the

stabilization plan in1987, and also in Chile in 1978 and in Israel in 1985. They argue that these
credit booms reduced the proportion of liquidity-constrained households and thus contributed to
the economic expansions. In addition, they found that in Mexico the credit expansion was
associated with the remonetization of the economy, the fall in the ratio of public debt to GDP
held by banks, and the increase in foreign liabilities of commercial banks. A similar picture
emerges from the analysis of Mexico's manufacturing firms by Gelos and Werner (1996).
Further analysis of the connection between real activity and financial indicators at the
business cycle frequency is conducted by measuring the stylized facts of Mexican business

cycles using standard detrending procedures. This is done using annual data on National
Accounts and financial aggregates from the World Bank's World Development'Indicators, price
and exchange-rate data from the Bank of Mexico's Indicadores Económicos, and the index of the
price of urban land in the Mexico City area used in Guerra de Luna (1997) --which is also
calculated by the Bank of Mexico. The sample is restricted to annual data for the period 19701995 because of the limited availability of the land price index.

-9Table 1 reports statistics summarizing the features of variability, co-movement and

persistence of Mexico's business cycle. These stylized facts are qualitatively consistent withthe
typical stylized facts of business cycles observed in other countries. One striking feature of the
table is the large cyclical variation of land prices, which is more than 6 times larger than that of

GDP. Fluctuations in land prices are also more persistent than those of other variables, although
their correlation with output is weaker. Table 2 is a matrix of correlation coefficients between
real variables (GDP, private consumption, fixed investment, and the real exchange rate) and
financial indicators (domestic bank credit to the private sector, private capital inflows, the price

of land, the current account, and M2 money balances). With a few exceptions, the correlations
are larger than 0.6 (smaller than -0.6 for the current account), indicating a strong tendency for
financial indicators and real variables to move together over the business cycle.
The statistics in Tables 1 and 2 leave two important questions unanswered: (a) what is the
pattern of statistical causality among the variables? and (b) how significant are financial shocks

for business cycles and bank lending? To provide a rough approximation to the answers, a
subset of the data were used to estimate a basic vector-autoregression model. The model was
estimated with the ordering: private capital inflows, real exchange rate, fixed investment, and
domestic bank credit (valued in dollars), with one lag of each variable and no intercept.
Variance decompositions justified this ordering, with capital inflows as the most exogenous

variable of the system. Impulse response functions for one-standard-deviation shocks to capital
inflows and the real exchange rate (plotted in Figure 1) show strong and significant responses of

investment and bank credit. The impact effect on fixed investment of a shock to either capital
inflows or the exchange rate is equivalent to a 5-percent deviation from trend.
3.

Liquidity Requirements, Credibility and Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy
The model proposed in this section has several features typical of two-sector models

-10studied in the literature on non-credible exchange-rate-based stabilizations.8 One important
difference is in that preferences are represented by Epstein's (1983) Stationary Cardinal Utility,
which is a Lime-recursive expected utility function with an endogenous rate of time preference.

This utility function allows the model to support stationary states in which the liquidity
requirement may or may not bind, and stochastic dynamics in which it may bind or not
depending on the state of nature.9

3.1 Structure of the Model

The small open economy includes two competitive industries with a large number of
identical firms. Firms in the tradables (T) and nontradables (N) sectors operate neoclassical

technologies to produce output Y = F(K ',L, 5, given a fixed capital stock K' and a variable
demand for labor L/ for i=T,N. Following Mendoza and Uribe (2000a), these technologies
feature sector-specific factors of production. This increases the curvature of the sectoral
production possibilities frontier, thereby enabling the model to yield large variations in the
relative price of nontradables, p N• In particular, labor supplied by households, L,, is employed
across sectors according to a linearly-homogeneous factor-transformation curve: D(L,T,LtJ\t).
Firms choose sectoral output and labor allocations so as to maximize profits, ;, in units

of tradable goods (which are the model's numeraire) subject to the production technologies and
the factor transformation curve. That is, firms choose (LT,LIN) so as to maximize:

n

CTF(KT,LT)+PNENF(KN,LN)_WL

(1)

subject to L,=Q(LT,Lh). In equation (1), e/, for i=T,N, are Markovian productivity shocks with

8The model is very similar to the one in Mendoza and Uribe (2000a), except that capital accumulation is ruled out
for simplicity and money enters in utility instead of as a means to economize transactions costs.
9preferences of this kind have been used to address the problems of steady-state dependency on initial conditions
and state-contingent wealth typical of models of the small open economy (see Obstfeld (1981) and Mendoza
(1991a)). Epstein's utility function also tackles these problems in the model examined here.

—11—
a

known transition distribution function and w, is the wage rate.1°

Labor demand in each sector satisfies the following first-order conditions:

Since the

£TF(KTLT)=WQ(LITLN)

(2)

PN&NF(KNLNY_ w1L2(LT,Li'T)

(3)

production functions and the factor transformation curve are homogeneous of degree

one, profits equal the rents on capital and factor payments exhaust output: w,L,+; = Y,T+p,NlcN.
The utility function of the representative household is:

U=

Eo[exP{_Zv[H(C(CrT, C )mr)iI}u[H(C(CtTC7) )i]J

(4)

Uis lifetime utility, C is a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) aggregator of consumption

of tradables (C1T) and nontradables (C7) , m are real balances in units of C, H is a CES function

of aggregate consumption and real balances, us labor supply, u(.) is a CES period utility
function, and v(.) is the time preference function. The functions u(.) and v(.) must satisfy a set of
conditions in order to ensure that U displays standard properties of concavity and timerecursiveness with a declining intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (see Epstein (1983)).
Note that money enters the model as an argument of utility via the H function. As shown below,

this specification implies that uncertain duration of a currency peg distorts saving and labor
supply. The implications of the model are similar if money enters instead as a means to
economize transactions costs (see Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)).
Households maximize lifetime utility subject to the following period budget constraint:

çT+ p7Cf

= + iI -

+ b,Re,R +

-

- PNTN

and to the standard normalized time constraint:
10The tradables industry can be interpreted as producing exportable goods sold in world markets at a worlddetermined relative price. In this case, shocks to the terms of trade (i.e., the relative price of exports in terms of
imports) are similar to productivity shocks.

(5)

-12-

L,÷e,=1

(6)

In the budget constraint (5), b are holdings of non-state-contingent, one-period
international bonds that pay the gross real interest rate RER, in units of tradable goods, tnT are

real balances in units of tradable goods, e is the government-determined rate of depreciation of
the currency (which is equal to the domestic tradables inflation rate since Purchasing Power
Parity is assumed to hold and world inflation is assumed to be zero), and TT and T" are lumpsum taxes levied by the government. cl?1 and e, follow Markov processes with known transition

functions. The process describing e, is specified in more detail later.
The literature on the real effects of exchange rate management typically assumes that

money is a nominal asset denominated in units of domestic tradable goods. Instead, money in
this model is valued in terms of its purchasing power over the entire consumption basket (i.e.,

the composite good C). This makes the model consistent with standard definitions of velocity
and money in the data and in empirical studies of money demand. In particular, the expenditures

velocity of circulation of money is V (P,TC,T+P7CP)/M where M represents nominal money
balances and pT and

are prices of tradables and nontradables in units of domestic currency.

Velocity can then be expressed as = (C,T+pfCf ) un/i Moreover, given that C is a CES
composite good, standard duality results apply and hence the relative price of C in terms of

tradables, p', is given by a CES price index (which is increasing in p")." Thus, velocity can also

be expressed as = 1 C11,n,T. This result is used later to interpret the equilibrium of the model.
In addition to the constraints in (5) and (6), households face the liquidity requirement that
constraints their ability to borrow. They are required to pay for a fraction q, for Oço

si , of their

current expenses and obligations (i.e., consumption, taxes, debt repayment and accumulation of
ttNote that since money balances entering in utility can be rewritten as m=rnT/p, monetary distortions induced by
fluctuations in the purchasing power of money are not only driven by changes in the prices of tradable goods, as in
standard models of exchange-rate-management, but also by changes in nontradables prices.

-13money balances) out of current income and current money holdings:

w,L,

+ + m,1T
+p7c7)—brRsf +mT +TT + p7Tf]
1+ e >4(cT

(7)

Given the budget constraint (5), this liquidity requirement is equivalent to a constraint that limits
debt as a share of current income plus current money holdings not to exceed (l-49)/Q:
T

(8)

Note that =1 implies a no-borrowing constraint (i.e., b,1aO for all t) and as converges toO the
economy approaches the case in which the liquidity constraint never binds (given standard nonnegativity constraints on the variables in the left-hand-side of (7)).

The above borrowing constraint is not formally derived as a feature of an optima' credit
contract, but, as noted in the introduction, it resembles lending criteria commonly used in

mortgage and consumer loans. This borrowing constraint can also capture some of the
potentially crippling effects of "liability dollarization" because debt is denominated in units of
tradables but part of the income on which debt is "leveraged" originates in the nontradables
sector. Hence, a sharp fall in the nontradables relative price, as induced by a devaluation, can
trigger a "sudden stop" to capital inflows by making the constraint in (8) suddenly binding.
Given the CES forms of u and C and the structure of the utility function, it is easy,
though lengthy, to show that the first-order conditions for the households' optimization problem
reduce to the following expressions:

U(t+
pt-I-I
Uc(t)(1- &] = exP(_v(t))E[t'

C(t) =
C7(t)

(9)

(10)

-14—
h(V) —

E

7-

(1+ e,+1)Re — 1—
(1+ e,1)

u,@)

u(t)

p exp(—v(t))U0(t + 1)

1
—

1+ hcV)?71 p1C

p1U(t)
1+

+

p,

A

(11)

(12)

In these expressions, h(V) denotes the marginal rate of substitution between C and m in the

period-utility function u. Using the assumptions that u and H are CES functions, it can be

shown that his nonnegative and increasing in V. The terms in U in equations (9) and (11) are
derivatives of lifetime utility with respect to C. These include "impatience effects" by which
changes in consumption at any date t alter the rate at which all period utilities after z' are
discounted. A. and ji are the nonnegative multipliers of the budget constraint and the liquidity

requirement respectively.

The optimality conditions have a straightforward interpretation. Equation (9) is the
consumption Euler equation that equates the marginal utility cost of sacrificing a unit of Cat date

t with the marginal benefit that the extra saving yields at t+1. The effective return on saving is
evaluated at the "consumer-based" real interest rate, (ReR+1)pcL'/pc,+1 , which incorporates the

rate of change of the real exchange rate implicit in the ratio p', fpC11 Equation (10) equates the

marginal rate of substitution in consumption of tradable and nontradable goods with the

conesponding relative price. Equation (11) is the optimality condition for money demand that
equates the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and money balances with the
opportunity cost of holding money. Equation (12) is the labor supply condition that equates the
marginal rate of substitution between aggregate consumption and leisure with the real wage.
The relevant real wage for labor supply (i.e., w,/pf) is in units of C.
The conditions in (9)-(12) capture the distortions emphasized in the credibility literature

on exchange-rate management. In particular, fi=O, the following standard results follow:

-15-

(a) At equilibrium, V and h(V) are increasing functions of the opportunity cost of holding

money (i.e., the ratio i,/(I+ij, where 4 is the nominal interest rate). This follows from equation
(11) taking into account the CES form of H and noting that the opportunity cost of holding

money is given by the expression in the right-hand-side of the equation. This expression
measures the rate of return on a one-period nominal bond (see Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)).

(b)

The domestic nominal interest rate carries a state-contingent currency risk premium

relative to the world's nominal interest rate (the latter is given by ReR,+1 since world inflation is

zero). This risk premium exists because insurance markets are incomplete and households are
risk averse. Its magnitude is determined by the properties of the equilibrium stochastic process
of the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in aggregate consumption that enters in the
determination of the opportunity cost of holding money, which is influenced by the equilibrium
dynamics of the real exchange rate.
(c)

Fluctuations in velocity induce a stochastic tax-like distortion on saving. This can be seen

by manipulating equation (9) to show that the effective rate of return on saving in the right-hand
side of the expression equals the consumer-based real interest rate multiplied by a term that
depends on the wedge [1+h( V,) Vf1] /[J+h(V,÷1)V,÷;'].
(d)

Velocity induces also a monetary distortion on labor supply because the effective real

wage faced by households is reduced by the wedge 1/[1+h(V,)V;'], as shown in equation (12).
These credibility distortions on prices are the central element of the transmission
mechanism by which devaluation risk affects the competitive equilibrium. These distortions
affect stochastic dynamics as well as the stationary equilibrium. For instance, if the government
fixes the exchange rate permanently, it reduces permanently the nominal interest rate and hence

the implicit labor tax identified in (d). This increases steady-state labor, output and
consumption. If the currency peg is expected to be temporary, the cut in the nominal interest

-16rate is also expected to be temporary. This triggers a stochastic distortion on the consumptionlabor margin similar to the permanent cut, and it also distorts the consumption-saving margin as

indicated in (c). These distortions operate regardless of whether ex post the currency is devalued
or not. Thus, they reflect primarily the lack of credibility of the policy.
A binding liquidity requirement adds to and modifies the price distortions driven by

devaluation risk. Consider first labor supply. A binding liquidity requirement distorts labor
supply by increasing the effective wage on the marginal unit of labor (since extra labor income

enhances the households' ability to borrow). This distortion is larger the smaller is and the
larger is the ratio /1,/Ar Everything else constant, this distortion would yield smaller booms

(recessions) if the introduction (abandonment) of an exchange-rate-based stabilization plan leads

to a situation in which the liquidity requirement becomes nonbinding (binding).'2 However, the
net response of labor supply to a switch in exchange rate regime depends also on the magnitude
of the credibility distortion, on the response of the real exchange rate (since the relevant real
wage is deflated by pC) and on a fiscal-induced wealth effect to be described later.

A binding liquidity requirement also has an indirect distortion on labor supply working in

the opposite direction from the one identified above. This indirect distortion results from the fact
that, as explained below, a binding liquidity requirement is likely to increase the opportunity cost
of holding money, thereby increasing the labor tax imposed by the credibility distortion.

The liquidity constraint distorts saving by altering the intertemporal relative price of

consumption. When the constraint binds, it tilts consumption toward the futurtby preventing
households to borrow as much they like. Taking as given the consumption-based real interest
rate, the expected intertemporal price of C, in terms of C,1 increases from

to

'2Notice, however, that the effect of this distortion is nonmonotonic: the distortion is zero for both a value of q so
low that it=O or for =1. In both cases changes to current income have no effect on the ability to borrow.

-17-

Thus, a binding liquidity requirement can be interpreted as
imposing an endogenous interest rate premium in the households' use of foreign debt over

income and domestic liquid assets to finance consumption. This is analogous to the "external
financing premium" faced by firms in closed-economy studies on the financial accelerator (as in

Bernanke eta!. (1998)).
The above rise in the effective real interest rate implies that a binding liquidity constraint

increases the effective opportunity cost of holding money. Since the real interest rate is higher
for given expectations of devaluation, risk-adjusted interest parity implies a higher nomina!

interest rate. However, a binding liquidity constraint (if expected to bind in the future) a!so
features an effect that reduces the opportunity cost of holding money. This is because the date-t
choice of real balances affects the date-t+1 initial liquid-asset position, and hence the future

ability to borrow. The net effect of these opposing effects of the liquidity constraint on the real
interest rate feeds back into the credibi!ity distortions identified in (a)-(d) depending on how they

alter the nominal interest rate, and hence V and h(V). lithe net effect is to magnify the early fall
and late increase of the nominal interest rate associated with an exchange-rate-based
stabilization, the liquidity requirement will magnify the credibility distortions.

The two opposing effects of the liquidity requirement on the opportunity cost of holding
money are captured by the terms in the numerator of the right-hand-side of (11) that include the
Lagrange multipliers. The ratio iz,/A, represents the increase in the opportunity cost of ho!ding
money driven by the effect of the binding liquidity requirement on the effective real interest rate

facing the economy between dates t and t+1. lithe constraint were not expected to bind in the
future (or if the liquidity requirement set by lenders did not include money holdings), this wou!d
131n equilibrium, the rate of change off is endogenous and is detennined together with jr,IA,. Hence, a binding
credit constraint is necessary but not sufficient to ensure that the consumption-based real interest rate of the creditconstrained economy is higher than that of an unconstrained economy for the same state variables.

-18-

be the only effect at work and the liquidity constraint would always increase the nominal interest

rate. However, if the constraint is expected to bind in the future, the term
lowers the opportunity cost of holding money. The expression for this second effect is similar to

the one for the wage distortion, but dated at t+J.'4 Note that the rise in the real interest rate due
to a date-t binding liquidity constraint reduces the discounted value of the marginal benefit of

holding extra real balances to meet the date-t+J liquidity requirement. Hence, a higher iz,/k
strengthens the effect that rises the nominal interest rate and weakens the effect that lowers it.

The model is completed with the specification of the government sector and the nature of
the lack of credibility of government policy. The government implements a managed exchangerate regime by setting the rate of depreciation of the currency to a publicly-announced value.

For simplicity, this regime implies a constant, low rate of depreciation of the currency e,=e'. The
aim of this policy is to bring inflation down from the higher level that prevailed before the

regime was introduced, which is given by e'. The policy lacks credibility in the sense that
agents assign an exogenous, time-invariant conditional probability z=Pr[e+1 =elle,=e,U] to the
collapse of the regime. The stochastic process describing the evolution of e is a Markovian

regime-switching process, instead of the symmetric processes typical of real-business-cycle
models. The post-collapse value of e is identical to its pre-stabilization value, in line with the
standard assumption of credibility models of exchange-rate-based stabilization (in which "at
collapse" the rate of depreciation of the currency return to its pre-stabilization value).15
'4As with the wage distortion, the effect of this distortion is non-monotonic: the marginal benefit of holding extra
real balances in helping agents meet the t+1 liquidity requirement is zero for both the case in which q is so low that
the constraint is not binding or for ço=l.
'5These assumptions are not innocuous. As explained in Mendoza and Uribe (2000b), a model in which the
devaluation date and the post-collapse rate of depreciation of the currency are endogenous yields post-collapse
values of the nominal interest rate that vary with the timing of the collapse. Moreover, Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)
show that time-varying transition probabilities induce different time paths of distortions and hence different
equilibrium outcomes than time-invariant transition probabilities. However, their setup considers a once-and-for-all
stochastic transition in between deterministic long-run equilibria, and thus is not suitable for an analysis of the
ergodic distributions followed by macroeconomic variables in a regime-switching environment.

-19For simplicity, the probabilistic process driving the rate of depreciation of the currency
follows a basic regime-switching specification for discrete-valued random variables with time-

invariant transition probabilities governed by an irreducible, ergodic Markov chain. This
process is assumed to be independent of the Markov processes driving the other shocks in the
model. The transition matrix H and the corresponding Vector Autoregression representation are:
-

,

c

z

L'c

1—zj

(13)

where ç=Pr[e÷3 =e" e=e7], is a 2x1 random vector such that C=(l,O)' when e,=e7 and

(=(O,1)' when e,=e, and i1

-

). The limiting probabilities of the two states

of e are P(e,=e7) = z/(l+z-c) and P(e,=e,') = J-[z/(J+z-c)] and the AR(1) representation of the

process is: 4 = z + (c-z)5, + i1,44 for j=l,2. The average duration of the "high depreciation"
regime is 11(1-c) and that of the "low depreciation" regime is liz.

In addition to managing the exchange rate, the government makes unproductive
purchases of goods. The pre-stabilization levels of government purchases of tradables and
nontradables (GT and GN) are paid for using lump-sum taxes (or transfers) levied in tradable and
nontradable goods (TT and JW) and seigniorage revenue. When the managed exchange-rate

regime is in place, government purchases of nontradables and all lump-sum taxes are kept

constant, and any fluctuations in seigniorage are used to purchase tradable goods. The
government's budget constraint can thus be written as follows:
G,T+ p7GW = m,T_

+T +pfff with & = TN

(14)

Hence, the risk of a surge in government absorption that accompanies the switch to e is the
source of an adverse, non-insurable wealth effect (given that insurance markets are incomplete).

This is the same assumption used by Calvo and Drazen (1998) and Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)
to introduce fiscal-induced wealth effects under incomplete markets in their studies of policy

-20uncertainty. They showed that these wealth effects are necessary for models of uncertain policy

duration to account for key features of emerging-markets business cycles. The magnitude of
these effects is limited here to fluctuations in government purchases financed by short-run
changes in seigniorage around a fixed level of expenditures paid for by constant lump-sum taxes.

3.2 Competitive Equilibrium
Given the probabilistic processes for (eT, N 41? e,) and the initial conditions (b0 m1), a
competitive equilibrium for the model is defined by sequences of state-contingent allocations
[CIT, C7, L,T, L7, L,, 4 b,41,m,, V,, G/] and prices [w,, p7, Pr''

i,] for t=O

such that (a) firms

maximize profits subject to production technologies and the labor transformation curve, (b)
households maximize expected lifetime utility subject to the budget constraint, the time
constraint, and the liquidity constraint, (c) the government budget constraint holds and (d) the
following market-clearing conditions hold:

CT +G[ =e,TF(KT,L)—b,1 +b,Re$

(15)

+ u'' = ENF(KNLN)

(16)

Q(LTJ')= 1—t,

(17)

Despite the distortions present in the model, it is possible to characterize the competitive

equilibrium as the solution of a planning problem in which [CT,C7, L,T, L7,

in,,

are

chosen so as to maximize the stationary cardinal utility function in (1) subject to the market
clearing constraints and the equilibrium representation of the liquidity requirement:

•,

TF(KTLT)+PNF(KNLN)+

(18)

Since the planning problem is time-recursive, it can also be characterized as a stochastic
dynamic programing problem (an Appendix available from the author provides more details).

-21-

A quick look at the model's deterministic stationary equilibrium sheds light on the role of
the Stationary Cardinal Utility function in supporting steady states in which the liquidity
requirement is binding. Prom this perspective, the key steady-state condition is the one that
represents the consumption Euler equation (eq. (9)). At steady state this condition becomes:
A

=

exp(—v(C,,n,1))R

(19)

where variables without time subscripts are steady-state levels. The exponential term in the
right-hand-side of this expression represents the endogenous subjective discount rate.

If the utility function featured the conventional exogenous discount factor/I, the
corresponding version of the above condition, I-ji,O =131?, would imply that the model could

either feature a steady state in which the liquidity requirement always binds (when Oc/JRcl and
thus !zhb.O) or a steady state in which the liquidity requirement cannot be binding (when 13R=l,

which implies bt/A=O). Hence, with standard preferences, whether the liquidity requirement
binds or not in the long-mn is an assumption that depends on the exogenous values of /3 and R.

In contrast, with the endogenous discount factor, whether the constraint is binding or not in the

long run is determined within the model. Given preference, technology, and policy parameters,

there are values of low enough so that the liquidity requirement does not bind at steady state.
In these cases the stationary equilibrium is the same for all such qfs, as can be inferred from

(19). There is also a critical ç above which the constraint binds and for which the steady state
varies with ç. In these cases, the rate of time preference increases to support the steady state
equilibrium with a binding borrowing limit.
4.

Quantitative Insights and the Case for Dollarization in Mexico
This section of the paper conducts a series of numerical simulations based on a

calibration to Mexican data. The simulations assess the effects of the two aspects of
dollarization noted in the Introduction: (a) the enhanced credibility of stabilization policy,

-22reflected in a fall in z, and (b) the potential improvements in the functioning of credit markets,
approximated by a fall in ç9.16 A detailed analysis of the macroeconomics effects of the credit

friction is left for further research (see Mendoza (2000b)).

4.1 Functional Forms and Calibration
The following functions are used to characterize preferences and technology:

(1-

-1

y)rn010e]

(20)

1-c

v(C

,r) = 4Ln[1+[c0 +(1-

(21)

ç =[w()+u_w)(cNy]
di

vaT

= ET(KT)

N

(23)

(itT)
1-cA'

a's'

y _?(KN) (L7)
Q(Lf, L7) =

22

+ (t

]

(24)

(25)

The parameters 0 and y characterize velocity and money demand. The optimality
condition for money holdings (eq. (11)) implies that velocity follows a log-linear equation ln(V)

=[i/(i +6)]ln(y /(1-y)) + [11(1 +0)]ln(i,/(1 i-i)). Thus, the model predicts a unitary expenditures
elasticity of money demand and a constant interest elasticity given by -[11(1 +0)]. This equation
was estimated by Ordinary Least Squares (correcting for serial autocorrelation) using cyclical
6The intuition is that dollarization would weaken financial frictions attributed to imperfect and costly information
about exchange-rate and monetary policy regimes, to asset-liability mismatches in the financial system, and to
moral-hazard and adverse-selection incentives pervasive in other exchange-rate regimes.

-23components of quadratic time trends applied to quarterly Mexican data for the period 1987:1-

1994:4. Velocity was measured as the ratio of private consumption over M2 money balances
and the opportunity cost of holding money (i/U i-i)) was measured using the nominal interest rate

on 28-day Treasury Certificates (Cetes). The implied estimates of 0 and y were 0=6.77 and
y=O.85. The regression coefficients were statistically significant at the 5 percent level, and the
adjusted R2 indicated that the regression explains 76 percent of the fluctuations in velocity.'7
The elasticity of substitution between CT and CN, ]41+q), is set to the value estimated by

Ostry and Reirihart (1992). Their estimate of , for developing countries is ij=O.316. Lacking
precise econometric evidence on the rest of the model's parameters, their values were set to yield
a baseline scenario in which the model's deterministic steady state with a nonbinding liquidity
requirement mimics the following features of Mexican data:'8

(a)

The average labor shares in sectoral GDP over the period 1988-1996 were aT=O.284 and
aN=O.364. These values follow from defining the tradables (nontradables) sector as the
set of industries for which the average ratio of exports plus imports was more (less) than
5 percent of gross production (see Mendoza and Uribe (2000a) for further details).

(b)

The average 1988-1998 ratio of traded to nontraded GDP at current prices was 0.648.

(c)

The average ratio of paid employees in the nontradables sector relative to the tradables
sector over the period 1988-1996 was 0.715.

(d)

The average trade deficit-GDP ratio over the period 1970-1995 was -0.1 percent.

(e)

The average annual interest rate on 28-day Cetes was 0.248 in the sample used to
estimate the money-demand equation (1987:1-1994:4). Thus, i/U +i) equals 0.2.

(f)

The average share of total government purchases allocated to the nontradables sector
during 1988-1996 was 0.928.
The calibration is normalized by setting KT=] and by setting the ratio KT/K1' to a value

such that the steady-state relative price of nontradables equals 1. This implies KT/KI=2.142.
'7These estimates are virtually the same as those reported by Calvo and Mendoza (1996) and Kamin and Rogers
(1996). These authors also found evidence in support of an unitary elasticity of money demand with respect to the
scale of transactions, including a co-integration relationship between M2 and GDP.
'8Sample periods over which various averages were computed differ due to limitations on the availability of a
detailed consistent sectoral database in the National Income Accounts (see Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)).

-24The model is also calibrated to match the average GDP shares of private consumption,

investment, and government purchases over the 1970-1995 period (68.4, 21.7 and 9.2 percent
respectively) by introducing "autonomous" levels of investment and government expenditures

that are kept constant throughout the simulations. These autonomous expenditures are allocated
across sectors according to the observed average shares of total investment and total government
purchases allocated to the nontradables sector during 1.988-1996 (42.4 and 92.8 percent

respectively). The calibration is completed by setting R=I.065 per year, Q=O.2, and c=2, which
are standard values in real-business-cycle theory.

The calibrated values of the parameters

cv, p. and ft and the values of V, CT, C", LT, L]',

,n and bin the baseline scenario are jointly determined by solving the steady-state equilibrium
conditions imposing the calibration criteria described in the previous paragraphs. The solution
reduces to a system of twelve recursive linear equations. In general, however, the model's
stationary equilibrium for a fixed set of preference and technology parameters is the solution of a
nonlinear simultaneous equation system.
4.2.

Detenninistic Steady States for Alternative Policy Regimes

Table 3 compares deterministic long-mn equilibria for alternative policy regimes. The
Table reports percent changes in the allocations of consumption, labor, GDP (valued in
tradables), the trade balance-GDP ratio (TBY), real money balances, and sectoral output relative

to the corresponding values in the baseline scenario. Also listed are the relative price of
nontradables and the domestic real interest rate. Results are reported for economies with and
without binding liquidity requirements, and in each instance the Table lists four inflation

scenarios. The first scenario corresponds to a fully-credible, permanent peg of the Mexican peso
to the dollar, which in the model is equivalent to the replacement of the domestic currency by the

foreign currency implied by dollarization. In this scenario, Mexico's tradables inflation rate falls

-25-

permanently to zero, as a proxy for the U.S. inflation rate, and the nominal interest rate falls to

the world's level of 6.5 percent per year. The other three inflation scenarios correspond to policy
regimes that settle into long-run tradables inflation rates (or rates of currency depreciation) of
12.5, 46.4 and 406.3 percent per year -- quarterly rates of 3, 10 and 50 percent respectively.

These cases can be thought of as long-mn outcomes of managed exchange-rate regimes or
inflation-targeting regimes under a floating exchange rate. Treating these alternative regimes as
deterministic helps theft case by limiting the analysis to steady-state efficiency gains of
permanent changes in inflation-tax distortions.
Two important caveats apply to the comparison of deterministic steady states. First, the
results are likely to differ sharply in a stochastic setting because credit frictions and incomplete
markets imply that equilibrium allocations are influenced by effects absent from the perfect-

foresight setup. In particular, agents engage in precautionary saving in the stochastic case
seeking self-insurance against non-diversifiable risks (mainly those resulting from sudden surges
in government absorption when seigniorage increases and from the fluctuating nature of the

borrowing constraint). Second, comparisons of steady-state utility levels are not useful for
assessing the welfare implications of alternative policies because (a) when the credit friction is
non-binding, steady-state utility is the same regardless of the inflation rate (as explained below),
and (b) when the credit constraint binds, steady state-utility is always higher than when the

constraint is not binding. The latter occurs because a binding credit friction reduces steady-state
debt and the net exports-output ratio, which in turn imply higher steady-state consumption and
money demand (recall that a binding borrowing constraint tilts consumption toward the future).
Yet, for common initial conditions, lifetime utility for a credit-constrained economy cannot
exceed that of an unconstrained economy.

Consider the steady-state effects of policies that deliver different inflation rates when the

-26-

liquidity requirement never binds (the top panel of Table 3). Ensuring that this is the case in the

zero-inflation scenario requires setting ç 0.406. Thus, the economy can borrow up to 146

percent of its income plus liquid asset holdings (since (]-)4=1.46). Note that steady-state debt
increases as inflation falls because the increase in wealth resulting from efficiency gains of
reduced inflation-tax distortions leads households to increase their borrowing.'9 Thus, 0.406

represents the maximum such that the borrowing constraint does not bind with any
nonnegative steady-state inflation rate.
Compared to the baseline scenario, which featured 5.7-percent quarterly inflation, a
permanent peg with non-binding credit frictions increases C, L, in, yT, 1W and TBY, and causes a

slight decline in pfl With sectoral output levels increasing but the real exchange rate falling,

output valued at tradables-goods prices remains nearly unchanged. Despite these real effects,
which reflect the fact that money is not superneutral in the model, the permanent peg cannot
alter steady-state utility. This is because, as long as the credit friction is not binding, the steadystate value of the mix of C, m and F that enters as the argument of the utility and time-preference
functions must remain unaltered, so that the endogenous rate of time preference equals the

unchanged value of R (see eq. (19)). This does not imply, however, that welfare (i.e., lifetime
utility) is invariant to inflation. Higher inflation increases inflation-tax distortions and reduces
welfare. What it implies is that welfare effects accrue only during the transitional dynamics.
The long-mn effects of reducing inflation differ markedly when credit frictions bind.
The middle panel of Table 3 considers the case in which ço=O.75. In this case, foreign debt

cannot exceed 33 percent of the value of income plus holdings of liquid assets. This value of ç
was set so that the credit constraint is marginally binding in the baseline scenario. Therefore, if
'9The smaller distortion on labor increases long-run tradables production by more than consumption, resulting in a
larger lung-mn trade surplus, which reflects larger steady-state foreign debt (i.e.,a perpetual trade surplus pays for
perpetual foreign interest outlays).

-27-

dollarization cuts inflation permanently and improves credit-market efficiency by lowering to
0.406, the steady-state effects would be identical to those shown in the top panel of the Table.

However, if dollarization cuts inflation but leaves unchanged, the dollarized regime mns into
the borrowing constraint. The same occurs with the regime that lowers inflation to 3 percent. In
these two cases, the domestic real interest rate becomes endogenous and rises as inflation falls.
In the currency-peg scenario, the real interest rate increases by 41 basis points relative to the

baseline level. The net exports-output ratio increases by 1.1 percentage points, instead of 4.6
percentage points when the constraint was not binding, because a smaller steady-state trade

surplus services a smaller stock of foreign debt. Consumption increases nearly 6 times as much,
labor changes only marginally, the demand for money increases more, and output at tradables

prices increases nearly 11 percent instead of remaining almost constant. The larger output
increase reflects the fact that the relative price of nontradables rises by nearly 18 percent instead

of falling 2.7 percent. Thus, the model predicts that sharp real appreciations are consistent with
the long-mn equilibria that stabilizing economies attain if credit frictions are binding.

4.3 Dynamic Implications: Welfare Gains of Dollarization and "Sudden Stops"
To facilitate the numerical simulations in the presence of the "occasionally- binding"
credit constraint, the number of endogenous state variables is reduced by examining the case of a

non-monetary economy. Labor is supplied inelastically to the tradable goods industry and period
utility adopts the form proposed by Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman (1988), in which the

argument of utility is C-L'°/w. The price distortions in this non-monetary economy are made
comparable to those of the monetary economy by introducing an ad-valorem consumption tax r

uniform across tradable and nontradable goods. It is straightforward to show that for a given

nominal interest rate, a tax set at ; = [(J-y)/y]V(ij° captures identical price distortions on labor
supply and very similar price distortions on saving as those resulting from credibility-induced

-28-

changes in the nominal interest rate.2° Hence, the exchange-rate-management experiment is
approximated by a cut in r, that follows a regime-switching Markov process.

In the non-monetary model the liquidity requirement reduces to a borrowing constraint of
the form: b,.,.7 2[(1co)/epJ[YT4p7flLjJ. With ço=1, this setup becomes a variant of the canonical

precautionary-saving model with a no-borrowing constraint (see, for example, Aiyagari (1993)).
Since money no longer enters into the constraint, the persistence effect resulting from the

dynamics of money demand is lost. This is a shortcoming of the exercise, but the reduced
number of state variables is exploited to use exact-solution methods in solving the model under

the "occasionally binding" constraint. Moreover, as shown below, the critical dynamic effects
that result from the feedback effects of the dynamics of the relative price of nontradables on the
borrowing constraint are still present.
The baseline calibration is adjusted to take into account the features of the non-monetary

model. The calibration is normalized assuming a unit endowment of tradable goods and a
unitary relative price of nontradables. The parameters of the CES composite good C and the
labor share in nontradables are the Same as before, and the model is set to mimic the same
averages taken from Mexican data for sectoral ratios of consumption, investment and
government absorption, and the ratios of net exports to tradables output and tradables to

nontradables output. The labor exponent in utility w=1.455 is taken from Mendoza (1991a).
The parameters describing the regime-switching process of taxes are set as follows. The

low-tax regime is: t = [(1y)Iy]V(i*f = 0.0214, which mimics the price distortions of the
calibrated monetary model with e=0. The high tax is: ?1 =0.15, which corresponds to e=0.75
20The distortion on saving differs depending on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption. If c=1

the saving distortion is identical in both models. With elasticities higher than unitary the saving distortions differ,
but for small perturbations around the steady state the differences are negligible (since at steady state the saving
distortion vanishes in both models). This equivalence of tax and monetary distortions is similar to those explored
by Coleman (1996).

-29per year. Following Mendoza and Uribe (2000a), the time-invariant probability of reversal of the

tax cut is set to z=O.28, which implies an average duration of 3.6 years for r'. The mean duration
of V'1 is

set at 6 years, which implies c=O.833. Given these parameters, the ergodic probabilities

of r" and r' are 0.627 and 0.373 respectively. The unconditional mean of the tax rate is 10.2
percent, with a standard deviation of 60.9 percent, and the coefficient of persistence of tax
shocks is 0.55.

Figure 2 compares the effects of changes in brought about by dollarization on the
ergodic distribution that characterizes the model's stochastic steady state, assuming that the
credibility problem remains unaltered. The figure shows the limiting distributions for the case in
which the credit constraint is not binding at any point in the state space, which requires çoO.52,

and for a credit constraint that keeps debt at a maximum of 40 percent of GDP at tradables prices
(i.e., (1-ço,Vço=0.4, or ço=O.714). The state space of foreign assets is given by an evenly-spaced

grid with 1200 elements that spans the interval [-2.137,-0.698].

The limiting distribution of the credit-constrained economy is shifted to the right of the
limiting distribution of the unconstrained economy because of the binding limit on external debt.
The average debt-to-GDP ratio in the unconstrained economy is 56.3 percent, compared to 35.8

percent in the constrained economy. Note that in a deterministic version of this model with
ç=O.714 binding at steady state, steady-state debt is a corner solution that corresponds to the
largest allowable debt for which the credit constraint binds. In contrast, the ergodic distribution
of the stochastic debt-constrained economy has a mean debt-output ratio lower than that
mandated by the credit constraint, and only a fraction of the mass of that distribution is

concentrated at the lower bound of its support b1 (where bF1 is the smallest value of foreign
assets with positive long-mn probability, which is given by the lowest b such that for the state

(b,i*) the credit constraint is binding). Thus, in the limiting distribution of the stochastic credit-

-30constrained economy, the credit constraint binds with the probability attached to b"'tm (9.7 percent

in Figure 2). "Excess" holdings of foreign assets relative to bmffl, which result from precautionary

saving, correspond to states in which the credit constraint is not binding. It follows, therefore,
that while the credit constraint has major effects on the limiting distribution of foreign debt, most
of the mass of that distribution corresponds to states in which the constraint is not binding.

Table 4 lists unconditional business-cycle moments computed using the ergodic
distributions of foreign assets and taxes in credit-constrained and -unconstrained economies.

The stylized facts of business cycles in both cases are roughly consistent with those reported for
Mexican data in Table 1.21 The variability of GDP and expenditures in units of tradables, and
the variability of CES consumption, labor, and the price of nontradables are slightly higher in the

presence of the credit friction. This increased volatility reflects the extra difficulties for
smoothing consumption and utility flows faced by credit-constrained households. The fact that
these effects are small suggests that precautionary saving is an effective means of self-insurance.
Precautionary saving is also evidenced by the lower correlation between the tax rate and foreign
assets in the debt-constrained economy, which falls from -0.2 to -0.46 (i.e., realizations of the
low-tax state are more likely to result in an increase in foreign asset holdings in the debt-

constrained economy than in the unconstrained economy). In addition, output valued in
tradables, labor, and the price of nontradables are strongly negatively correlated with the tax rate,
so in the high-tax state the economy tends to borrow more but the debt constraint also tends to be
tighter because nontradables output and its unit price in terms of tradables are both falling.
A comparison across the two panels of Table 4 suggests that the credit friction has small
effects on the real economy, even though the moments describing foreign assets and the limiting
21The variability of GDP and expenditures in the model is larger than in the data, but the ratio of the standard
deviation of expenditures relative to that of GDP is similar in the model and in the data -- consumption in Table 1 is
valued in dollars so it corresponds to "Expenditures" in Table 4.

-31-

distributions in Figure 2 change dramatically. However, the moments of ergodic distributions in
that Table misrepresent the potentially large real effects of the credit constraint because the
constraint binds only with 0.097 long-mn probability, and in states in which the constraint does

not bind the behavior of real variables does not differ markedly across simulations with O.52
or p=O. 714. In contrast, the impact effects of a shift fromto1*1', summarized in Figure 3, show

that a binding credit friction has important macroeconomic consequences.

Figure 3 shows the percent change in the debt-output ratio, consumption, non-tradables
output, and the relative price of nontradables that occurs on impact when the tax shifts from low

to high. Each plot presents impact effects for the economy with a non-binding credit friction
(çoO.52) and for the economy with debt constrained at 40 percent of GDP (=O. 714). Consider

first the economy with non-binding credit constraints. The current debt position matters little for
the impact effects of a tax hike. The effects are in the direction predicted by uncertain-policyduration models (e.g., Calvo and Drazen (1998) and Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)). The
realization of the high-tax state reduces labor supply, output in the nontradables sector, and
consumption, and it induces a fall in the relative price of nontradables. These effects reflect the
credibility distortions described in Section 3 and the fiscal-induced wealth effects triggered by

the sudden surge in government absorption that follows the tax hike. Note that the regimeswitching process attaches some probability to a return to the low-tax state, so agents always
expected the future tax rate to be lower than the currently-observed high tax.
The impact effects of the tax shock differ significantly in the debt-constrained economy.

In particular, impact effects vary widely depending on the initial debt position. The effects are
particularly striking in the region of the state space in which the credit constraint is not binding
when the tax is low but becomes suddenly binding when the tax increases (coordinates 824 to

965 in the foreign asset grid). For the part of this range in which foreign assets are relatively

-32high (between coordinates 900 and 965), the model produces dynamics that display several

features of what Calvo (1999) refers to as a "sudden stop to capital inflows," and these result
from the credit contraction that follows the severe relative price and output collapses inducedby
the tax shock. There is a large fall in the relative price of nontradable goods that exceeds the fall

observed in the absence of credit frictions. Associated with the price collapse, there are sharp
declines in labor and output of nontradable goods and in aggregate consumption, as well as a
severe reversal in the current account (of about 7 percentage points of GDP). There is still a fall

in debt to output ratio (i.e., b,+i/[YT+p7r(L)]), as in the case without credit constraints, but it is
smaller the lower b, was before the tax hike.

For coordinates in the foreign asset grid below 824, the constraint always binds
regardless of the tax rate, so there is no adjustment in the debt-to-GDP ratio across tax states.
Output, consumption, and the price of nontradables still fall significantly because of the
distortions driven by the dynamics of the debt-constraint multiplier 'u,. For high values in the

foreign asset grid (i.e., coordinates 966 to 1200) the credit constraint does not bind and the
impact effects of the tax hike are similar to those observed in the unconstrained economy.
The welfare gains that dollarization would yield by lowering çü from 0.7 14 to 0.52 are

measured by calculating compensating variations in stationary consumption levels that render
households indifferent, in terms of lifetime utility, between the two environments. This
calculation is made for each coordinate in the state space. Using the ergodic distribution of the
economy with non-binding credit constraints, the mean welfare gain is 4.6 percent. This welfare
gain exceeds by a large margin the welfare gains from business cycle stabilization, international
asset trading, and radical tax reforms calculated for industrial countries (see Lucas (1990),
Mendoza (1991b), Tesar (1995), Cooley and Hansen (1992), and Mendoza and Tesar (1998)).
The state-contingent welfare gains for each coordinate under the low- and high-tax states are

-33-

plotted in Figure 4. Welfare gains are as large as 24 percent for the high-tax state and 18percent

for the low-tax state. These are associated with large initial debt positions which have zero
steady-state probability but may be relevant to consider depending on how far off the ergodic

distribution are the initial conditions of the economy. The gains become negligible as foreign
asset holdings reach values for which the credit constraint with ço—O.714 is not binding.

Consider next the gains of dollarization that result from eliminating the credibility

problem. For this purpose, "dollarization" is a once-and-for-all shift from the stochastic regime-

switching setting of noncredible tax cuts to a deterministic setting with a tax set at t forever.22
When "dollarization" is introduced, the economy takes off on the transitional dynamics to the
low-tax deterministic steady state from the initial conditions set at the end of the last period in

which the stochastic environment was in place. The welfare gain of dollarization depends on
these initial conditions, and on whether the credit constraint binds at any point during the
transition and in the long run. Note that while çoO.52 ensured that the credit friction did not
bind in the stochastic environment, it may still yield a binding credit constraint for the low-tax

deterministic economy. This is because the debt-output ratio of the "dollarized" regime is larger
than that of the regime-switching economy -- the mean tax in the regime-switching economy is

nearly 5 times higher than in the "dollarized" economy and steady-state debt is a negative
function of the tax rate. For the credit constraint to be non-binding in the "dollarized" economy,
it is necessary to set ço a 416. Thus, values of ç between 0.416 and 0.52 produce transitional
dynamics in which the credit constraint is not binding at the outset but becomeseventually
binding as the economy converges to the low-tax steady state.
Figures 5 and 6 and Table 5 summarize the welfare effects of different scenarios dealing

22Since dollarization yields the model deterministic, it does not have interesting business-cycle effects. Less thai
fully-credible dollarization can be considered by lowering z but keeping it positive.

-34with the elimination of the credibility problem. Some of these scenarios combine changes in
credibility and in credit frictions. Figure 5 considers the case in which the credit constraint in
the deterministic economy is nonbinding (i.e., çosO.4I6), and plots welfare gains measured as

compensating variations in consumption that equalize lifetime utility in the "dollarized"
economy with that of the originating regime-switching economy for each point in the state space.
The regime-switching economy can be credit constrained (ça=a 714) or unconstrained (çosO.52).
Thus, in these comparisons dollarization eliminates policy uncertainty and reduces ço.

Figure 6 considers the case in which the credit constraint binds in the dollarized economy
by a large margin (ço=O.714). The Figure plots again welfare gains relative to constrained
(tp=U. 714) and unconstrained (wO.52) regime-switching economies. The former captures the

case in which policy uncertainty vanishes but credit-market inefficiencies, as measured by 9, are
unaltered, while the latter is a perverse case in which the end to policy uncertainty is associated
with a sudden increase in ço. Table 5 combines the data of Figures 5 and 6 with the ergodic
distributions of Figure 2 and reports mean welfare gains.

The mean welfare gains of Table 5 suggest that the credibility gains of dollarization are
very large regardless of the outcome with respect to ço. The gains range from 5.5 to 9.7 percent.
Figures 5 and 6 show that state-by-state welfare gains are also generally large and that they vary

widely as the initial state in the pre-dollarization regime varies. The wide differences in welfare
gains reflect the interaction of the credit friction with policy uncertainty.
Table 5 shows that, if at the time policy uncertainty ends qi' increases to 0.714, so that the

economy runs into a sharply binding credit constraint as it converges to the steady state of the
"dollarized" regime, the mean welfare gain of dollarization falls from 8.98 to 6.44 percent.23
23Recall that values in the range 0.416 s ç

0.52 are enough to yield outcomes in which the credit friction is not
binding for the regime-switching economy but binding for the deterministic, low-tax economy. Hence, the sharp
increase to ç'= 0.714 is much larger than needed to make the constraint binding in the "dollarized" economy. The

-35-

Figure 6 shows there can even be non-trivial welfare losses rather than a gain if debt was high on
the date of dollarization. In contrast, if the credit constraint was binding under policy
uncertainty and the switch to credible policy coincides with a fall in cc that renders the constraint
nonbinding, Table 5 shows a trivial increase in the mean welfare gains from 8.98 to 9 percent

(relative to the case in which the constraint was not binding before dollarization). This result
reflects again the shortcomings of comparisons based on ergodic distributions to assess the

effects of the credit friction. As Figure 5 shows, welfare gains of dollarization are as high as 36
percent when the economy switches from a high-tax, debt-constrained setting under policy
uncertainty to an unconstrained deterministic environment. The mean welfare gains in Table 5
do not reflect these large gains because the limiting distribution of the credit-constrained

economy has virtually zero mass for the states in Figure 5 in which welfare gains across the

credit constrained and unconstrained scenarios differ by non-trivial amounts. The same
reasoning explains why, starting from a credit-constrained regime-switching setting, the mean
welfare gains of eliminating policy uncertainty are nearly the same whether çoO.4J6 or ço=O. 714

in the deterministic economy, even though welfare gains in Figures 5 and 6 vary widely.
Leaving aside changes in ço, the welfare gains of eliminating policy uncertainty (i.e.,

setting z=O) have two components: one relates to efficiency gains that result from a lower mean

tax rate, which reduce permanently price and wealth distortions, the other is due to the reduction
in the variance of the tax (i.e., a reduction in a mean-preserving spread of the tax rate process).
Of these two, the former is quantitatively the most important for producing the large welfare
gains of dollarization. The welfare gain of eliminating the variance of r while keeping a constant
tax equal to the 10.2-percent mean tax of the regime-switching process is only 0.11 percent.

welfare gains in the other scenarios would always be larger than the to 6.44 percent obtained with 9=0.714because
the values of would be smaller and would yield weaker credit constraints.

-36-

This reflects the well-known result that stabilization of mean-preserving fluctuations of the
arguments of utility with constant-relative-risk-aversion utility functions yields negligible
welfare gains (see Lucas (1987)).
The large efficiency gains of the mean tax cut have an important component driven by

the fiscal-induced wealth effect. This accounts for the larger welfare gains obtained in this
exercise relative to other existing studies of efficiency gains of tax reforms in deterministic
economies (see Cooley and Hansen (1992) and Mendoza and Tesar (1998)). The results are in
line with the estimates of Mendoza and Uribe (2000a) showing that in the presence of this fiscal-

induced wealth effect the welfare of an economy facing a time-invariant probability of
devaluation for six years increases by 4.5 percentage points by switching to a perfect foresight
economy, and that this gain increases with the horizon of devaluation risk.

5. Concluding Remarks
This paper examines the potential benefits of dollarization from the perspective of a
framework in which credit-market frictions and the lack of credibility of economic policy are

large distortions. The analysis focuses on a dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium model of a
small open economy with a managed exchange-rate regime and in which agents face a liquidity
requirement that sets a limit on the stock of foreign debt as a ratio of GDP plus liquid money

balances. The model adopts Epstein's (1983) Stationary Cardinal Utility function so as to
produce a tractable quantitative framework in which credit constraints may or may not bind in
the short run and in the long run.

The credit-market friction amplifies the distortions introduced by a non-credible
managed-exchange-rate regime and it also introduces distortions of its own. In particular, the
liquidity requirement distorts the labor-consumption and saving margins and the demand for

liquid assets. Trough these mechanisms, the interaction of non-credible policies and credit-

-37-

market frictions offers a potential explanation for the large and costly economiccollapses
observed in emerging-markets crises.

Numerical simulations based on a calibration to Mexican data suggest that dollarization
can produce large social welfare gains, in terms of the trend level of consumption per capita.

The mean welfare gains that dollarization can yield by enhancing the credibility of stabilization
policy range between 6.4 and 9.7 percent. The mean welfare gain that can result from the
weakening of financial frictions and improved access to global capital markets for a dollarized
economy, even if policy credibility remained weak, reaches 4.6 percent.
These findings lend support to radical strategies to address financial frictions and the lack

of policy credibility affecting emerging economies. Dollarization, the internationalization of the
financial system, the creation of strong-currency areas, and the strengthening of institutional and

legal arrangements to counter the governments' temptation to display time-inconsistency, could
do away both with the risk of collapse of managed exchange rates and with the negative shocks
caused by credit constraints that become acutely binding precisely when currencies collapse.
The numerical analysis of this paper assumes that dollarization is the only regime that

yields a permanent zero-inflation outcome. This is a strong assumption based on the notion that
the alternatives (exchange rate management or inflation targeting) suffer from chronic credibility

problems that prevent them from delivering that result. In turn, lack of credibility is seen as
deriving from two sources. First, the agents' misgivings regarding the actions of policymakers,
justified by the recurrent collapses of stabilization plans.24 Second, time inconsistency: in
models like the one proposed here, it is optimal for well-intentioned, fully-rational policymakers

to deviate from pre-announced policies. Hence, as long as a domestic currency exists, even the

24The Mexican experience during the post-war period in this regard includes the collapse of five managed
exchange-rate regimes (see Gomez-Oliver (1981) and Mendoza and Uribe (2000a)).

-38best-intentioned domestic monetary authority has an incentive to surprise the private sector.
Dollarization eliminates this possibility by replacing the domestic currency with a foreign

currency and thus transferring the control of the currency to a foreign authority. The country
runs the risk that the foreign authority may ignore the welfare of domestic agents in its policy
decisions, but it is precisely the fear that the domestic authority may do "too good a job" at this
that drives the time-inconsistency problem. Moreover, while in theory the foreign authority
faces a time-inconsistency problem with regard to its constituency, so that dollarization cannot
guarantee zero inflation, the Eederal Reserve has a strong reputation at avoiding high inflation.
An important shortcoming of this analysis is that it abstracted from the connection

between capital flows, asset prices and credit frictions evident in the data. Mendoza (2000b)
shows how a variation of the setup proposed here could address some of these issues. Consider a
global capital market in which residents of a small open economy trade equity with foreign

securities firms. If these firms face informational or institutional frictions that put them at a
disadvantage in trading the equity of the small open economy, and if domestic residents face
margin requirements in their equity holdings, equilibrium asset prices may fall below their

"fundamentals" level and display excess volatility. International capital flows will also display
higher volatility than in an environment free of financial frictions. Further research is needed to
assess the quantitative significance of credit frictions in this context.

-39-

References
Aiyagari, S. Rao, (1993), "Explaining Financial Market Facts: The Importance of Incomplete
Markets and Transaction Costs," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, vol.

l7,pp. 17-31.
Aiyagari, S. Rao and Mark Gertler, (1999), " 'Overreaction' of Asset Prices in General
Equilibrium," Review of Economic Dynamics.
Alvarez, Fernando and Urban J. Jermann, (2000), "Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing
with Risk of Default," Econometrica, forthcoming.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1995), "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
Monetary Policy Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives, v. 9, Fall, 27-48
Bernanke, Ben, Gertler, Mark and Simon Girlchrist, (1998), "The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," NBER Working Paper No. 6455, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge: MA.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Arvind Krishnamurthy, (1999), "Emerging Markets Crises: An Asset
Markets Perspective," mimeo, MIT, Cambridge: MA.

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1986), "Temporary Stabilization: Predetermined Exchange Rates," Journal
of Political Economy, v.94, pp.1319-1329
_______ ,and Allan Drazen, (1998), "Uncertain Duration of Reform: Dynamic Implications,"
Macroeconomic Dynamics.

(1999), "Contagion in Emerging Markets: when Wall Street is a Carrier," mimeo,
Center for International Economics, Department of Economics, University of Maryland.
_______ and Enrique G. Mendoza (1996), "Mexico's Balance of Payments Crisis: A Chronicle

of a Death Foretold," Journal of International Economics, v. 41, 235-264.
_______ and Enrique G. Mendoza (2000), "Capital-Markets Crises and Economic Collapse in
Emerging Markets: An Informational-Frictions Approach," American Economic Review: Papers

and Proceedings, forthcoming.
Coleman, John W., (1996), "Functional Equivalence between Transaction-Based Models of
Money and Distorted Real Economies," mimeo, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University.
Cooley, Thomas F. and Gary D. Hansen, (1992), "Tax Distortions in a Neoclassical Monetary
Economy," Journal of Economic Theory, v. 58, pp. 290-316
Cooley, Thomas F. and Vincenzo Quadrini (1997), "Monetary Policy and the Financial Decision
of Firms," mimeo, Simon School of Business, University of Rochester, Rochester; NY.

-40-

Copelman, Martina and Alejandro M. Werner, (1996), "Exchange Rate Policy and the Bank
Lending Channel: Sectoral Evidence from Mexico," mimeo, Division of International Finance,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington D.C.
Drazen, Allan and Elhanan Helpman (1987), "Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. 11, 1-13.
Epstein, Larry 0. (1983) "Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under Uncertainty",
Journal of Economic Theory, 31, 133-152.
Edwards, Sebastian, ed. (2000), Capital Flows and the Emerging Markets Economies, University
of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Fisher, Irving, (1933), "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions," Econometrica, v. 1,
337-357
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Schmukler, Sergio (1996), "Country Fund Discounts and the Mexican
Crisis of December 1994," Open Economies Review, Suppi. 1,7, 55 1-84
Gelos, Gaston and Alejandro M. Werner, (1999), "Financial Liberalization, Credit Constraints,
and Collateral: Investment in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector," IMF Working Paper
WP/99/25, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C.
Gomez-Oliver, Antonio (1981), Politicas Monetaria y Fiscal de Mexico: L.a Experiencia desde
la Posguerra, Fondo de Cultura Economica, Mexico DF, Mexico.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Huffman (1988) "Investment, Capacity
Utilization and the Real Business Cycle", American Economic Review, June.
Guerra de Luna, Alfonso, (1997), "La Relevancia Macroeconómica de los Bienes Raices en
Máxico," Serie Documentos de Investigación, Documento No. 9707, DirecciOn General de
Investigación Económica, Banco de Mexico, Mexico City: Mexico.
________ (1998), "Capital Inflows and Mortgage Crisis: The Case of Mexico," mimeo,

Economic Studies Division, Banco de Mexico, Mexico City: Mexico.
Helpman, Elhanan and Assaf Razin (1987), "Exchange Rate Management: Intertemporal
Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, vol. 77, pp.107-123.
Kehoe, Timothy J. and David K. Levine, (1993), "Debt-Constrained Asset Markets," Review of
Economic Studies, v. 60, pp. 868-888.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, (1997), "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, v.
105, 211-248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, (1996), "Implications of Efficient Risk Sharing without Commitment,"
Review of Economic Studies, 595-609.

-41Lucas, Robert E., Jr., (1990), "Supply-side Economics: An Analytical Review," Oxford
Economic Papers, v. 42, 293-3 16.
Mendoza, Enrique G. (1991a), "Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy," American
Economic Review, September.

(1991b), "Capital Controls and the Gains from Trade in a Business Cycle Model ofa
Small Open Economy," IMF Staff Papers, v. 38, 480-505.

_____ and Linda L. Tesar (1998), "International Ramifications of Tax Reforms:
Supply-Side
Economics in a Global Economy," American Economic Review.
_____,and Martin Uribe (2000a), "Devaluation Risk and the Business Cycle Implications of
Exchange Rate Management- Based-Stabilizations," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, vol. 53, forthcoming
_______ and ______ (2000b), "The Business Cycle of Balance of Payments Crises: A Revision of

a Mundellian Framework," Money, Capital Mobility and Trade: Essays in Honorof Robert A.
Mundell, edited by G. Calvo, R. Dornbusch and M. Obstfeld, MIT Press, Cambridge.
(2000a), "On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real Exchange Rate
across Exchange-Rate-Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United States," NBER Working
Paper No. W7768, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge: MA, available at
http://nberws.nber.org/papers/W7768.

(2000b), "Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Sudden Stops Economics in an Equilibrium
Framework," mimeo, Department of Economics, Duke University.
Mundell, Robert A. (1960). "The Monetary Dynamics of International Adjustment under Fixed
and Flexible Exchange Rates," Quanerly Journal of Economics, v. LXXIV, no. 2, 227-257.
,(1961), "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic Review,
September.
Obstfeld, Maurice. (1981). "Macroeconomic Policy, Exchange Rate Dynamics and Optimal
Asset Accumulation", Journal of Political Economy 89, 6, December 1142-1161.

Paasche, Bernhard, (1999), "Credit Constraints and International Financial Crises, "mimeo,
Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie-Mellon University.
Tesar, Linda L. (1995), "Evaluating the Gains from International Risksharing," CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, v.42, 95- 143.

Figure 1.
Impulse Response Functions for One Standard Deviation Shocks to Capital Inflows and the Real Exchange Rate
A) Shock to Private Capital In flows
Investment

0.10

Banking System Credit to the Private Sector

1.5E+12

1. OE+ 12

0.05

5,OE+1 1

0.00
0.OE+00

-0.05

-0.10

-5.OE±1 I

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

-1.0 E+ 12

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011 12131415

B) Shock to Real Exchange Rate

Banking System Credit to the Private Sector

Investment

1 .SE+12

1.0 E-i- 12
—

5.OE+1 1

0.OE+0C

-5.OE+1 1

1

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

-1.OE+12

Note: Unrestricted VAR using 1W-filtered cyclical components, one lag and no intercept.

1

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

C.

I-

2o

C

C

o
C)

C

(0

C

-

O
C')
C')

.C')

C')

LI)

1'

N

C')

LI)

N

0)

-

LI')

N
NOCO
CO
N N
C')

I

—

-

—

,-

N
0) ,- C") U)
L000JU)C

IhI.
0 0 0

0)
C") LI) N 0) — C') U)
COOt')
(0 0)
0,1
N C C C (0 04
0) Ct
0) 0)
0)

-- ____

binding constraint (right axis

Foreign Asset Grid

0) —

nonbinding constraint (left axis)

0.0000 - ______________________
r. C')
U) N 0) — C') LI) N 0)
jCD0)C.J

0.0010

0.0020-

0.0030

0.0040

0.0050

0.0060

0.0070

Figure 2
Limiting Distribution of Foreign Assets

-

-

0.0000

0.0050

0.0100

0.0150

0.0200

0.0250

0.0300

0.0350

0.0400

- 0.0450

—
—.

g

C)

a.

=

Figure 3. Impact Effects of Tax Increase
(percent changes relative to Iow1ax state)

Debt-Output Ratio

CES Consumption

-In
-15-20-

-4

-25.

-30- —.._

-8

F

-35.

N

-40-

/

—I

'
%1

-45.

2oo' 4oo

600

800

111111 IllijIlli
1000

foreign asset grid

foreign asset grid

Output of Nontradables

Relative Price of Nontradables
60

-5-

10•

!

40-

-l5
20-

-'---

.-

\

-20-

0-

\

-25'—.

'I

'

IUIIIIII

400

I

I

IIUIUIlII II 11111 1111111 II
1000
1200
600
800

loreign asset grid

-20-

II

"—I
.4(1 -

200

400

600

800

loreign asset grid

— unconstrained economy ---- constrained economy

1200

69k k

39k
SC

80

L80
t90 L

220
000
1L6
9V6

6k6
'a,

369

C

998

€5
1-

4€0
C

9C8

C)

VOL

L9

0

4•0

LSL

C)

OBL

C)

C0L

.0

9L9

1-

V

6V9

0

339

V

969

C)—

999

DI co
0,

I.10
-J

V kS

C)

09V

€5
'4-

8EV

C)

90V

C)

'-0,

I-

a
4a)
0)
(0
IC

C

C)
a)
I-

0

LOP

4-

GLC

C
C)
a)
C
4C

398
938
963

0

113

9C)

VV3

4€5
4-

LL3

a)

O6L

891

gc i
60
38
99
83

ci

0
C')

ci
In
C"

ci

0
C"

°i
In

r

ci

r
0

uoqdwnsuoo PUOJ1 0 ;ueajad

ci
U,

ci

0

LL

691. 1.

99 1.
£31. 1.

0601.

C

o

L90F
1'3011.66

VS
Wv
I-

896

a)

936

0

769

CS
Ca)

699

c
o2
5

Z

96L
09L

0

-'
— .c

£3L

=2

1.990

P69c

og

'a,

0)

969 'C

4- V

799 0)

o8

679

w

U-

961'
I—

€9',

Ca)
C)
C;:;

0917

£69

(5

Es'
I- a)

179€
1.9€

'4_ C

863

0)

993

o .2
(5cd

C,

661.

It

991-

Win
I- C

€91.

C,

001.

L9
PC

0
d

IL)

C)

q
0
0

0
cJ

0
d

0

ui

uo(4dwnsuoo puo JO 4uaosad

P
0

r

0

C
.— .2

.9 .
LI.. S

— .0

C)o

o

tc
c2

w C5a)
— C.,

Oc

I-

(50

C,
C)
&0

4,

(

wO
I- ' 0

C

0)

—

a,

I-

0

Li-

I— E

4-CC
w a'
C •c

C—to
C
0

'4,_

Oc
U,

I(5 .
I— Ct

0
0
c'l

0
1

0
a

0

0
d

uol;dwnsuoo puaq jo 4uaoJed

0

0
6
1

Table 1. Mexico: Stylized Facts of Business Cycles
Std. 0ev.

Std. Dev.
relative to GOP

Persistence

Correlation
with GOP

Correlation
with RER

GOP

4.005

1.000

0.512

1.000

0.717

Consumption

5.807

1.450

0.490

0.925

0.860

Investment

15.504

3.871

0.438

0.875

0.884

Real Exchange Rate

13.966

3.487

0.354

0.717

1.000

Land Price

25.417

6.346

0.704

0.648

0.472

Note: Cyclical components were derived using the Hodrick-Prescott filter with the smoothing parameter
set at 100. The real exchange rate is the exchange-rate-adjusted ratio of consumer price indexes
for Mexico and the United States. GOP. consumption and investment are measured atl 987 prices
and expressed in U.S. dollars. The land price is the price of land in the metropolitan Mexico City
area as reported by Guerra (1997).

0.578
0.503

0.884
0.526

0.860
0.642

-0.875
0.820

0.717
0.648
-0.794
0.888

Real Exchange Rate

Land Price

Current Account

M2 money balances

0.771

-0.788

0.552

-0.643

0.419

0.535

1.000

Flows

Rate

0.780

-0.828

0.472

1.000

Private Capital Real Exchange

!

0.396

-0.409

1.000

Land Price

-0.848

1.000

Current
Account

1987 prices.

1.000

M2 money
balances

Note: All data, except land prices and the real exchange rate, are expressed in U.S. dollars. Cyclical components were derived using the Hodrick-Prescottfilter
with the smoothing parameterset at 100. The real exchange rate is the exchange-rate-adjustedratio of consumer price indexes of Mexico and the United States.
Land price is the real price of land in the Mexico City metropolitanarea as reported in Guerra (1997). GDP, consumptionand investment are measured at

0.816

-0.882

0.697
0.761

0.691

0.701

Private Capital Flows

1.000

0.784

0.866

Credit

0.761

0.966

0.875

Investment

1.000

1.000

0.925

Consumption

Credit

1.000

Investment

GDP

GOP Consumption

Table 2. Cyclical Correlations of Macroeconomic Aggregates

-0.69
-3.86

1.82

(i.

0.24
0.80
-2.60
-15.77

-2.60
-15.77

6.46

0.21

1.93

2.68

2,51
0.21

10.87

2.68

-0.20
-0.11

4.49

1.22

Y

0.52
-0.69
-3.86

L

3/ Percentage point change in the domestic real interest rate in annual terms.

2/ Percentage points difference with respect to baseline

1/All inflation rates are quarterly rates.

Levels in baseline scenario with nonbinding creditfriction
044)
0.200
1.385
5.7 percent inflation
0.498

Sopercentinflation(nonbinding)

Dollarization (binding)
3 percent inflation (binding)
10 percent inflation (nonbinding)

With creditfrictions (q,=0. 75)

S0percentinflation

Withoutcreditfrictions (çø_<0. 406)
Dollarization
3 percent inflation 1/
10 percent inflation

C

-0.110

1.12
1.03
-2.77
-19.17

4.61
1.99
-2.77
-19.17

TBY2I

0.564

28.16
7.71
-5.95
-21.83

22.48
6.38
-5.95
-21.83

m

0.544

-1.75
-0.18
-0.92
-6.02

1.52
0.66
-0.92
-6.02

YT

(percent changes with respect to baseline scenario without credit friction)

0.840

3.69

1.000

1.81
14.36

17.66

1.17

14.36

1.81

-2.71
-1.23

Pa

0.55
-0.85
-5.29

1.44
0.62
-0.85
-5.29

YN

Table 3. Deterministic Steady-State Effects of Alternative StabilizationPolicies

1.065

0.41
0.11
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Rd3/

Table 4. Stylized Facts of Business Cycles in Model Economies
Mean

Std. 0ev.

Std. 0ev.
relative to GDP

Persistence

Correlation
with GOP

Correlation
with Rn

Correlation
with tax rate

(A) - Non-binding liquidity requirement pO. 52
GOP 1/

2.540

8.214

1.000

0.573

1.000

1.000

-0.994

Expenditures 1/

1.767

13.928

1.696

0.571

1.000

1.000

-0.995

Consumption

0.925

7.437

0.905

0.567

1.000

0.999

-0.997

Price of nontradables

0.982

10.235

1.246

0.577

1.000

1.000

-0.992

-1.417

8.960

1.091

0.996

0.301

0.319

-0.201

Labor

0.404

8.886

1.082

0.561

0.998

0.997

-0.999

Tax rate

0.102

60.944

7.420

0.553

-0.994

-0.992

1.000

Netforeign assets

(B) Occasionally binding liquidity requirement, co=O. 714

GOP 1/

2.610

8.628

1.000

0.577

1.000

t000

-0.998

Expenditures 1/

1.844

14.348

1.663

0.575

1.000

1.000

-0.998

Consumption

0.942

7.585

879

0.571

1.000

1.000

-0.999

Price of nontradables

1.021

10.622

1.231

0.581

1.000

1.000

-0.997

-0.926

4.652

0.539

0.973

0.514

0.522

-0.464

Labor

0.410

9.008

1.044

0.564

0.999

0.999

-1.000

Tax rate

0.102

60.944

7.064

0.553

-0.998

-0.997

1.000

Net foreign assets

1/GOP and expenditures are measured in units of lradables goods prices. Expenditures are the sum of tradables consumption
and nontradables consumption valued at tradables goods prices.

9.68
7.82
8.98

9.70
7.82
9.00

Binding Credit Constraint (9=0.714)
Conditional on high tax
Conditional on low tax
Unconditional mean

(p0.4l6)

Nonbinding Credit Constraint

9.66
7.78
8.96

6.98
5.53
6.44

Binding Credit Constraint
(p=O.714)

Deterministic Economy with Permanently Lower Tax

Nonbinding Credit Constraint (çø_<0. 52)
Conditional on high tax
Conditional on low tax
Unconditional mean

Originating Regime-Switching Scenario

(means computed using the ergodic distribution of the corresponding regime-switching scenario)

Table 5. Mean Welfare Gains of Permanent Tax Cut for Alternative Transition Scenarios

