 $%   

  
   
   

 !"#&'()
*++#,--.../0/"-##1-.&'()

      
2343115*61++176
80!9":3;2('
6"61+;333

          
          !"          # $ %
$&  ' (!) *  $ #  +(!)   ,!  -  -  -  
+ .("/ ( ' # (, "'( 
    
 "    0
  (    "' ! (.    "
12333(# 4)"$ "-   0  0 (
5  0     1   "

10!!+<=5*!5165=#!71

  !"#/&'()
6"61+;333
 /;):(2:>;:(;




080!!+<!1=+51!99+0!8#++165= .9"?+!+!1:
8 !"!+9!==!56+==!81+###!++61+!71+8+1/+*!1##:"6+*+
!+@=!8+1=1= .9"809!9!##1*690<A9.!+*!*685#!+
=8. /1+!"165*=8. 61!"8+5*98#<@8#<9+1+:=!9+*++*
+5*!51+==!@!+1!7=!81#<1=+* .9"+*<55686++*B0+*6"*
.."1!+*0"!!"=+*!5/++*<+6+*1!8#!5!+!71+8+1
+*6"**!"*."1/*!116""1+1+*++*#++!?+!+!1115!+9.!+*080!!+<:
+1++18?++:!+!A9!+*08 +/

."!5*= 58!51961!1198!!1++!
#+8+= 58!51
7(3:43)4"
.<
9++!1+!51.<:!558+!5!7!1!
B/8C**/

\Don't let your employees do to you what you did to your former boss."
The golden rule of protecting trade secrets,
as de¯ned by Intel general counsel Roger
Borovoy (Jackson; 1997)

1

Introduction

Labor mobility is likely to be a very important source of knowledge di®usion. Surveying one hundred founders of companies on the 1989 Inc. `500' list of the fastest
growing companies in the United States, Bhide (1994) ¯nds that 71 percent \replicated or modi¯ed an idea encountered through previous employment." With respect
to technical employees, Almeida and Kogut (1996), demonstrate by an analysis of
patent data from the semiconductor industry that ideas are spread through mobility of key engineers. Evidence of this kind, however, does not justify the common
proposition that labor mobility is an important source of knowledge spillovers. Such
spillovers (or externalities) are thought to cause underinvestment in private R&D because workers have incentives to exploit their employers' research results by setting
up or joining a competitor.
The aim of this paper is three-fold. First, I want to clarify conceptually how
labor mobility can a®ect R&D investments. I will argue that there are market
mechanisms that may internalize the potential externalities involved. Second, I
present a framework to test the existence of such market mechanisms, and third I
present empirical ¯ndings suggesting that these mechanisms actually exist.
The link between labor mobility and knowledge spillovers dates back to Arrow's
(1962) article on the public good aspect of knowledge. Arrow writes that \no amount
of legal protection can make a thoroughly appropriable commodity of something
as intangible as information" and adds that \[m]obility of personnel among ¯rms
provides a way of spreading information" (p. 615). Following Arrow's seminal work,
a large literature on R&D spillovers has evolved, and economists working in the ¯eld
have continued to consider labor mobility an important spillover channel. Geroski
(1995) expresses what appears to be a common view1 , writing that \[l]ast but not
least, spillovers occur when a researcher paid by one ¯rm to generate new knowledge
transfers to another ¯rm (or creates a spin-o® ¯rm) without compensating his/her
former employer for the full inventory of ideas that travels with him or her."
1

Ja®e (1996) writes that \[k]nowledge spillovers also occur when researchers leave a ¯rm and
take a job at another ¯rm". Stephan (1996) writes that \[f]uture work should also focus on the
role mobility within the industrial sector plays in facilitating spillovers". Gersbach and Schmutzler
(1997) write that \[s]pillovers arise because employees who change jobs take with them all their
knowledge, some of which is not speci¯c to their original ¯rm."

1

That workers do not make such compensations seems obvious since they already possess their employers' knowledge when they decide to leave. The timing
of events that Geroski implicitly suggest, however, is misleading. To the extent
that research work has a general training element, workers may pay for knowledge
as it is accumulated. Whether labor mobility actually reduces appropriability and
R&D investments, therefore, is an empirical question. The approach I suggest to
answer this question, is to test key implications of models that assume perfect markets. If using standard methodologies2 for estimating R&D spillovers without ¯rst
considering such a `benchmark' case, the results of ordinary market exchange may
mistakenly be interpreted as R&D spillovers, and public policy will be misguided3 .
The basic implications of labor mobility follows from classical human capital
theory, cf. Mincer (1958) and Becker (1962, 1964). To the extent that workers in
R&D-intensive ¯rms get access to valuable knowledge on the job, they will expect
higher wages in the future. When holding jobs that give access to such knowledge,
they should therefore be willing to pay for what they learn by accepting wages below
their alternative wage. This hypothesis can be tested by using extended Mincer
(1974) wage regressions, which is the standard approach in the training literature.
Utilizing a large matched employer-employee data set from the Norwegian machinery and equipment industry, I ¯nd that the technical sta® in R&D-intensive
¯rms pay for the knowledge they accumulate on the job through lower wages in
the beginning of their career, and that they later earn a return on these implicit
investments through higher wages. Scientists and engineers have to accept a wage
discount in the order of six percent in their ¯rst year after graduation if choosing
an `R&D intensive' career. This should be considered a conservative estimate, due
to a likely ability bias. Towards the end of their career, they receive a wage premium in the order of seven percent. Similar results apply for workers with secondary
technical education. When estimating the price paid for learning separately from
the return to research experience4 , I ¯nd that having work experience from R&D
intensive ¯rms is associated with higher wages, while the employers current R&D
intensity reduce wages for workers with less than 20 years experience. Furthermore,
as predicted by human capital theory, the youngest workers appear to invest most
heavily in on-the-job learning. These ¯ndings suggest that the potential externalities associated with labor mobility, at least to some extent, are internalized in the
labor market5 .
2

Cf. e.g. Ja®e (1986) and Ja®e, Trajtenberg and Henderson (1993).
Zucker, Darby and Armstrong (1998), Klette and M¿en (1999) and Klette, M¿en and Griliches
(2000) elaborate on this point.
4
I will use `R&D experience' as a short term for experience in R&D intensive ¯rms.
5
This does not guarantee optimal R&D investments, however, as credit restrictions or risk
averse preferences may reduce worker's willingness to `co-¯nance' R&D. I will return to this in
3

2

With respect to mobility patterns, I ¯nd a turnover rate of about 20 percent regardless of the ¯rms' R&D intensity. Excess labor turnover, however, is less in R&D
intensive ¯rms. This e®ect is particularly pronounced for workers with secondary
technical education. If changing employer, workers tend to move to a ¯rm with an
R&D intensity similar to their former employer. Consistent with the lower excess
turnover in R&D intensive ¯rms, research experience from the current employer
appears to be more valued than research experience from previous employers.

2

R&D investments and human capital theory

Research is a learning process, and R&D investments, therefore, may not only increase a ¯rms' stock of innovations, but also increase the human capital of research
workers. In the literature, however, R&D capital (Griliches; 1973), and human capital (e.g. Becker; 1964) are rarely discussed together. To clarify the relationship
between these concepts, I ¯nd it useful to classify knowledge along two main dimensions; ¯rst to what extent it can be codi¯ed, and second to what extent it is di®used
throughout the economy.
R&D capital is knowledge that is not di®used throughout the economy. As
long as knowledge is exclusive, those who possess it can earn a monopoly rent and
this rent is what motivates investments in R&D. When knowledge is di®used and
have become available in the public domain, it will earn a normal rate of return
for those who undertake the cost necessary to make it part of their human capital.
A research project whose results are perfectly codi¯able and not di®used, can be
considered pure R&D capital. It can in principle be protected by patents or other
intellectual property right instruments. Hence, labor mobility is not a concern to
¯rms when it comes to appropriating returns in this case.
However, many innovations cannot be properly codi¯ed or protected by patents.
Appropriability of rents then hinges on the ¯rms' ability to avoid that knowledge
leaks out to competitors. Innovations of this type make R&D spillovers and the
problem of underinvestment an important issue. If the intellectual property rights
cannot be protected by patents, the R&D capital of ¯rms is to a large extent embodied in their employees. Such knowledge resembles what Zucker, Darby and Brewer
(1998) have called intellectual human capital. A ¯rm that has ¯nanced R&D creating intellectual human capital, cannot prevent its workers from leaving and taking
the knowledge with them. Under these circumstances labor mobility is potentially
a threat to the ¯rms, and Pakes and Nitzan (1983) analyze the investment incentives of entrepreneurs facing such a situation. Pakes and Nitzan conclude that it is
the concluding section.

3

possible to design labor contracts which solve the problem, and that labor mobility
therefore does not reduce the appropriability of R&D investments. I will return to
their analysis below.
Over time, as knowledge di®uses, intellectual human capital may either become
more codi¯able and eventually be learned in schools, or it may become human capital acquired through on-the-job training. The latter kind of human capital also
has relevance for an analysis of labor mobility and R&D investments, as there may
be more to learn in ¯rms conducting research because such ¯rms are likely to use
the most up-to date technology and frequently change its products and production
processes. This training may be valuable to other ¯rms. Furthermore, the distinction between intellectual human capital and on-the-job training does not constitute
a clear dichotomy. Many innovations are incremental product and process improvements made at the factory °oor, and in the limit they may as well be considered
excellent craftsmanship as innovations. A case were di®erent ¯rms o®er di®erent
opportunities for on-the-job training is analyzed by Rosen (1972).
The rest of this section will outline the theoretical models of Pakes and Nitzan
(1983) and Rosen (1972). The main predictions of these models will be discussed
and tested in the empirical part of the paper.
The Pakes-Nitzan model The point of departure in Pakes and Nitzan (1983) is
Arrow's (1962) reference to labor mobility as a source of R&D spillover. They argue
that even though mobility of scienti¯c personnel will spread knowledge produced in
industrial laboratories, it need not be a mechanism which reduces the pro¯tability
of research projects and employment in such projects. Both scientists and ¯rms
are aware of the fact that working on a research project gives access to valuable
information6 . Once such information is disclosed or developed, scientists, if they
are to stay with the ¯rm, will have to receive a wage increase re°ecting their new
market value. Thus, scientists expect that accepting a research position implies
a future wage increase, and consequently they accept an initial wage below their
alternative wage.
Next, Pakes and Nitzan notice that if the innovation makes the ¯rm a true
monopolist, it will never be pro¯table for the ¯rm and the scientist to split, since
the sum of rents in a duopolistic market will be less than the monopoly rent7 .
6

Pakes and Nitzan (1983) explicitly model the uncertainty involved in research. This feature
of the model does not alter the simple intuition given here, however, because they assume that
utility functions are linear in income. Discussing this assumption, they acknowledge that both risk
aversion and a lower bound on wages will a®ect R&D investments.
7
Pakes and Nitzan (1983) model only a situation with one entrepreneur and one scientist. If
several scientists have equal access to the same critical information, this will complicate the analysis
because of potential strategic interaction among the scientists.

4

Mobility, therefore, should only be observed when it increases the joint pro¯t of the
¯rm and the scientist. This may happen if the ¯rm cannot avoid that other ¯rms
get access to valuable information and enter the market8 . The scientist, by setting
up a rival, will then break into pro¯ts which otherwise accrue to third parties, and
since this pro¯t will be part of the scientists alternative wage in `period two', it is
possible for the ¯rm to extract this rent when setting the `period one' wage. Another
situation which may induce the scientist to join or set up a rival is when the research
project create `spin-o®s', some of which are better exploited in a separate ¯rm due
to coordination costs. Summarizing the insight of their model, Pakes and Nitzan
writes that
mobility of scienti¯c personnel is not, in itself, a source of concern to
entrepreneurs. ... [A]n optimizing entrepreneur who is free to choose
among alternative contracts will always choose one which only induces
the scientist to leave and join a rival if the sum of the bene¯ts to the
two agents increases as a result of the scientist's leaving. Contracts
which specify labor payment in the form of a °at wage and stock option
(or other pro¯t sharing agreement) ought to be able to induce close
approximation to this behavior.
Balkin and Gomez-Mejia (1985) provide empirical evidence in support of Pakes
and Nitzan's prediction. Surveying 105 companies in the Route 128 region around
Boston, they ¯nd that incentive pay programs are far more common in high-tech
¯rms than in other ¯rms, and that such programs are used for broad levels of
technical employees. In addition, key scientists and engineers who help form the
companies at an early stage, are given long term stock options.
Rosen's 1972 model The Pakes and Nitzan (1983) model is a two period model
of scientists and entrepreneurs, where scientists get access to valuable information,
but don't increase their generic productivity. Rosen (1972) models on-the-job learning in a more general human capital context, although one where ¯rms do not have
market power. He uses a compensating di®erential framework, and turns it into \an
economic theory of occupational mobility". Rosen thinks of jobs as tied packages
of work and learning. Workers sell the services of their skills and simultaneously
purchase an opportunity to augment those skills. Some jobs provide more learning
8

Note that spillovers at this point enter the story, but mobility will be a consequence of spillovers,
not a source of spillovers. Information can leak out to third parties by reverse engineering, inspection of patent documents, independent research on the same technological problem, etc. Cf. Levin,
Klevoric, Nelson and Winter (1987) for a survey of the importance of various information channels.
Labor mobility receives a middle score in their study.

5

opportunities than others. The di®erence between the maximum market rental of
a worker's existing skills and the wage that he or she receives in a given job, is the
implicit price the worker pays for learning. Basic human capital theory suggests that
a worker's incentive to accumulate human capital is largest at young age. As the
worker grows older he or she will have fewer years to collect returns on a given investment, and obviously workers have no incentives to pay for increasing their human
capital in the last year before retirement. This imply that the \optimal human capital investment program is implemented by a sequence of job assignments in which
workers systematically move and are promoted across jobs that o®er successively
smaller learning opportunities" (Rosen; 1986).
The point of departure in Rosen's model is a net wage equation
y = !H ¡ P (k)

(1)

where y is income, ! is the unit rental price of human capital and k is an index
measuring potential learning-by-experience on the job, k 2 [0; k]. P (k) is an implicit
or shadow price function giving the market equalizing wage di®erential between a job
with no learning potential and a job with learning potential k. The actual amount
of learning by individual i is proportional to k and depends on individual i's ability,
®i 2 [0; 1] such that
:

Hit = ®i k:

(2)

The workers problem is then to choose a sequence of jobs, kt , over his or her lifetime,
T , to maximize the present value of income, i.e.
Z T
maxV =
[!Ht ¡ P (kt )] e¡rt dt
(3)
kt

0

:

subject to an initial stock of human capital, H0 and Hit = ®i k. Optimization
requires that at any time, t 2 [0; T ],
¤
P 0 (kt )
!£
=
1 ¡ e¡r(T ¡t) :
®i
r

(4)

The expression on the left hand side is the marginal cost of investing in human
capital, and the expression on the right hand side is the discounted marginal return.
It seems reasonable to assume that P 0 (k) > 0 and P 00 (k) > 0; i.e. that the marginal
cost of learning is positive and increasing. Given this, optimality requires kt to be
largest at the time of entry into the labor market and then to decrease monotonically
over time.
Note that the marginal cost of a given real investment in human capital decreases with ability. Hence, workers with higher ability will, all else equal, ¯nd it
6

pro¯table to choose jobs with greater learning potential. In the words of Rosen
(1972): \Economic incentives induce more `able' workers to learn more and to accumulate knowledge more rapidly than the less `able'." This will give rise to a
potential selection problem (ability bias) in the empirical application of the model.

3

Data issues

The data used in this study comes from three main sources: Governmental administrative records prepared by Statistics Norway9 , the annual manufacturing census
of Statistics Norway10 , and the biannual R&D survey of Statistics Norway11 supplemented with other surveys of immaterial investments and innovation done by
the same agency12 . The Norwegian data are extraordinary in the sense that the
entire working population can be followed over a number of years, and in the sense
that extremely rich information is available both about the workers and about their
employers. When analyzing labor mobility, the extensive coverage o®ered by the
Norwegian data is a great advantage.
I have chosen to focus on the technical sta®13 in the machinery and equipment
industries as these industries have many high-tech ¯rms and have a fairly complete
coverage in the R&D surveys. The matched employer-employee data set covers the
years 1986 to 1995, and I have only included men employed full time in the analysis
below. Women do not constitute a large share of the labor stock in these industries,
and they are known to have di®erent career patterns and preferences than men.
Even though the data set is rich, I do not have complete information about the
workers' careers. Small ¯rms are not necessarily included in the R&D surveys14 , and
the matching between the di®erent data sources is not perfect. Due to these problems R&D information is missing for approximately 20 percent of the worker-year
9

Cf. Barth and Dale-Olsen (1999), appendix 2, for some details on the various registers included
in the data base. I have taken great care to improve the data quality by checking for consistency
across years and across related variables for the same individual. Missing values are imputed where
possible.
10
The census is documented in the series Manufacturing statistics, O±cial Statistics of Norway
NOS C36, Statistics Norway, Oslo. Microdata are available annually from 1972, cf. Halvorsen,
Jensen and Foyn (1991) for documentation.
11
Microdata is available for 1970, biannually 1975-81, annually 1981-85 and biannually 1985-95.
Prior to 1991 the R&D surveys were conducted by the Royal Norwegian Council for Scienti¯c and
Industrial Research. The 1970 survey has been linked to the 1972 manufacturing census.
12
A survey of immaterial investments was conducted in 1988 covering the years 1986-88 and in
1990 covering the years 1988-90. An innovation survey was conducted in 1993 for the year 1992.
13
I de¯ne the technical sta® as workers with secondary technical education and workers with
higher technical or scienti¯c education. I refer to the latter group as scientists and engineers.
14
The R&D surveys have close to full coverage for ¯rms with more than 20 employees.

7

observations, and some of the R&D information present is imputed from previous or
later ¯rm observations15 . On the positive side, however, I do have some information
about workers' careers prior to 198616 , the ¯rst year included in the matched data
set. I know when the workers started the job they held in 1986, and this can be
combined with information about the employers' R&D investments, in some cases
dating as far back as 1970.
Both the (normalized) length of the highest attained education, and the type of
education, is recorded in the data. Occupation, however, is not available. Hence, it is
not possible to look speci¯cally at researchers, and workers' learning will be proxied
by the employers' R&D intensity. I measure R&D intensity as R&D man-years per
employee at the three-digit line of business level within ¯rms17 . I have censored this
variable at 0.8 in order to reduce the in°uence of outliers18 . If all workers within
a ¯rm participate equally in the ¯rm's R&D e®orts, R&D man-years per employee
will measure the share of time that each worker uses to perform R&D. Since R&D
work obviously is not shared equally among the employees, R&D intensity is a noisy
proxy for what we want to capture. Measurement errors in the R&D variable, cf.
footnote 15, add to this noise.
Earnings is measured as taxable labor income19 . The experience measure is real
work experience for the youngest cohorts, years since graduation for older cohorts,
and potential work experience for cohorts graduating before November 197020 . Both
15

I have used the following procedure when constructing the R&D database: First I have linked
the R&D surveys to the manufacturing census. Next, for ¯rms and years not included in the R&D
surveys I have used R&D information from the surveys of immaterial investments, and from the
innovation survey. For ¯rms and years were R&D information is still missing, I have used survey
information about planned R&D one and two years ahead, and information about previous R&D. In
the ¯nal stage, missing R&D variables were imputed by linear interpolation, and by extrapolating
the ¯rst observed R&D intensity backwards in time and the last observed R&D intensity forward
in time, ¯rm by ¯rm. Firms' R&D investments are known to be stable over time. Imputing missing
information when possible, therefore, seems preferable to deleting the observations. 80 percent of
the worker-year R&D variables are from surveys, 5 percent are imputed by interpolation and 15
percent are imputed by extrapolation. 65 percent of the imputed R&D intensities are zero.
16
Note, however, that for 16 percent of the observations, the starting date is censored at April
30th 1978. I have used a dummy variable to resolve this problem in regressions where tenure is
included.
17
This means that R&D intensity is measured at a level `in between' the ¯rm and the plant. I
will use the term ¯rm level R&D intensity in what follows. If R&D man-years were not reported,
this variable has been imputed based on the ¯rms' R&D spending.
18
This a®ects 0.4 percent of the observations with positive R&D intensity.
19
I will often refer to this as the workers' wage.
20
Potential work experience is age minus schooling minus seven. Real work experience is measured as years since graduation adjusted for pre graduation work experience, part time employment
and unemployment within the sample years 1986-1995. When dummy variables are used, they are
based on the integer of experience.

8

experience and tenure are measured in years completed at the beginning of the
calendar year.
Information about trimming procedures is given in table A1. In the mobility
analysis, all observations with complete information are used, whereas observations
with unreliable earnings measures have been excluded from the wage regressions.
Trimming based on earnings reduces the sample by 8 percent. Table A2-A6 describe
the sample and the main variables.

4

R&D investments and labor mobility.

At ¯rst sight, both Rosen (1972) and Pakes and Nitzan (1983) seem to have speci¯c
predictions with respect to mobility patterns. A main prediction of Rosen's model
is that workers consistently move to jobs with less learning opportunities. In my
context, that may imply that workers move from more to less R&D intensive ¯rms,
but as pointed out by Rosen himself, there is heterogeneity with respect to the
learning content of jobs not only across, but also within ¯rms. Hence, a clear
prediction cannot be deduced.
Pakes and Nitzan (1983) predict that R&D ¯rms are able to avoid turnover, and
thereby spillovers, by sharing the monopoly rent at stake with the workers. In the
presence of spin-o® innovations or sources of spillovers other than labor mobility,
however, they show that mobility actually can be a way of appropriating returns.
The model, therefore, like Rosen's, fails to give clear predictions with respect to
worker mobility between ¯rms. Furthermore, Pakes and Nitzan (1983) do not consider ¯rm speci¯c knowledge. If ¯rms with di®erent levels of R&D intensities di®er
with respect to ¯rm speci¯c human capital, this will also in°uence the relationship
between turnover and R&D investments21 .
In lack of strong predictions, empirical mobility patterns cannot be used as a test
of the theories. A descriptive analysis of mobility patterns still has interest, however,
as it will give insight into the outcome of the di®erent forces at play. The extent to
which technically educated workers change employers also illuminate how important
labor mobility may be as a source of knowledge di®usion and hence indicate the size
of the potential externalities involved.
R&D investments and worker °ows Based on Rosen's model, despite the lack
of a clear prediction, one would expect a tendency for workers to move from more
to less R&D intensive ¯rms as a way of reducing their learning in accordance with
21

In the training literature, the e®ect of training on turnover propensities has been used to assess
whether the human capital built up is general or ¯rm speci¯c, cf. e.g. Loewenstein and Spletzer
(1999) and Parent (1999).

9

an optimal human capital investment plan. To investigate this I have calculated a
transition matrix of job changes for technical employees between plants with known
R&D intensities. The matrix is reported in table 1. The most striking result is
that workers tend to move between ¯rms with similar levels of R&D intensity. 65.5
percent of workers leaving a ¯rm that does not conduct R&D (within the plant's line
of business) move to another ¯rm that does not conduct R&D, even though jobs in
such ¯rms account only for 34.6 percent of all jobs. 64.0 percent of workers leaving a
¯rm with R&D intensity above 0.2 move to another ¯rm with R&D intensity above
0.2, although such ¯rms only account for 5.9 percent of all jobs. The pattern is the
same for workers leaving ¯rms with intermediate levels of R&D intensity.
One explanation for the observed stability in R&D intensity across jobs may
be that there is some speci¯city associated with a given technology level within
the industry. As workers grow older, they will then prefer jobs with less learning,
within ¯rms at the same level of R&D intensity as those they have previously worked
for. Another explanation may be that workers have preference for work at a given
technology level22 .
R&D investments and labor turnover As explained above, Pakes and Nitzan
(1983) investigate the relationship between R&D and labor turnover theoretically
without reaching a ¯rm conclusion. Table 2 reports labor turnover for technical employees in ¯rms with di®erent levels of R&D intensity in my sample. The turnover
rate is about 20 percent, and does not seem to vary much across ¯rms with di®erent
levels of R&D intensity. What seems most relevant to explore, however, is how R&D
investments a®ect `churning', i.e. hires and quits over and above the level necessary
to accomplish changes in the number of employees. Excess turnover, a measure of
churning23 , lies between 5 and 10 percent and seems to decrease with R&D intensity
both for workers with secondary technical education and for workers with higher
technical or scienti¯c education. A descriptive analysis of excess turnover is not suf¯cient, however, as a closer inspection of the data reveal that there are signi¯cant
di®erences between ¯rms having di®erent levels of R&D intensity, with respect to
other characteristics known to in°uence turnover such as workers' experience. In order to isolate the e®ect of R&D on excess turnover, therefore, a regression framework
is called for.
Table 3 reports regression results for both a tobit and a maximum likelihood
22

The work of Almeida and Kogut (1996), Stern (1999) and others suggests that scientists and
technical personnel have preferences regarding the technological environment that they work in.
23
Cf. Burgess, Lane and Stevens (1996) and Barth and Dale-Olsen (1999). The excess turnover
rate is half the churning rate. I have calculated the excess turnover rate as separations out of jobs
that continue divided by the number of continuing jobs.

10

grouped logit estimator24 . The estimated relationship is
excess turnover it = f (R&D-int. ¤ Dsec.

edu.

; R&D-int. ¤ Dhigher edu. ; X)

(5)

The unit of observation is educational groups within plants. Control variables, X,
include a quadratic in the educational group number of workers, a quadratic in their
average experience, a quadratic in plant age and year dummies25 .
In the tobit regression I have followed Barth and Dale-Olsen (1999) by excluding
small units, limiting the sample to educational groups that consist of at least ¯ve
workers, cf. footnote 24. Both the tobit and the grouped logit speci¯cation show that
excess turnover is lower in R&D intensive ¯rms. The e®ect is, however, particularly
evident for workers with secondary technical education. One possible explanation is
that human capital accumulated by workers with secondary technical education is
more ¯rm speci¯c than human capital accumulated by workers with higher technical
or scienti¯c education. It may also indicate that the mechanisms related to spino® innovations and other spillover channels, modelled in Pakes and Nitzan (1983),
are relevant in the industries investigated. Workers with higher education would
probably be most a®ected by these mechanisms which increase turnover.
The results in table 3 is consistent with other ¯ndings in the empirical literature. Pacelli, Rapiti and Revelli (1998) who estimate the probability of worker
¯rm separations in Italy, ¯nd that \more innovative ¯rms cultivate more durable
employer-employee relationships", and Greenhalgh and Mavrotas (1996) analyzing
the British labor market, ¯nd that sectoral R&D is negatively correlated with lower
24

Barth and Dale-Olsen (1999) estimate the e®ect of employers' wage policies on excess turnover,
and treat the excess turnover rate as a characteristic of the ¯rm. This leads them to use a tobit
estimator. Within such a framework, the observed excess turnover rate must be considered an
estimate of a target rate implicit in the ¯rms' personnel policy, and Barth and Dale-Olsen (1999)
think in terms of a latent variable censored from below at zero. (One might add to this that
the excess turnover rate is also censored from above at one.) As an estimate for the target rate,
however, the observed rate is heteroscedastic with a variance proportional to the inverse of the
number of employees. Barth and Dale-Olsen (1999) do not explicitly discuss this, but alleviate the
problem by limiting the analysis to large ¯rms. Grouped logit eliminates this heteroscedasticity
problem. Thinking of the data in this way also changes the perspective from the ¯rm unilaterally
deciding an excess turnover rate to individual employer-employee relationships which may or may
not continue, depending on both ¯rm and worker characteristics. I ¯nd this to be a preferable
perspective, as individual employer-employee relationships is the true unit of observation, and it
makes sense conceptually to divide observed quits into two groups, those who are replaced, and
those who are not replaced. The ¯rst type of quits constitute excess turnover while the second
type of quits are due to job destruction. If we knew which of the workers who separate that belong
to which group, we would no doubt use logit or probit. When we only know the proportion of
workers belonging to each group, we can apply grouped logit or probit, cf. Greene (1997, chapter
19.4.3).
25
A complete list is given in the subtext to table 3.

11

mobility. They attribute this only to the presence of ¯rm speci¯c human capital,
however, claiming that \the skills acquired [in R&D intensive sectors] are rather
more speci¯c than average".

5

The e®ect of R&D investments on wages

Pakes and Nitzan (1983) predict lower starting wages and higher wage growth for
workers choosing a research career, and Rosen (1972) predicts the same pattern more
generally for workers having jobs with a high learning potential. A key assumption
behind both models is that workers mainly acquire general human capital on the
job. Testing these models, i.e. testing to what extent di®erent ¯rms o®er di®erent
learning opportunities, and to what extent workers pay for their knowledge accumulation, we would like to estimate equation (1) which is Rosen's point of departure.
In principle this is possible. Human capital, H, can be decomposed and the price
or relative weight of its various components can be estimated using a standard loglinear hedonic wage regression. Furthermore, potential learning-by-experience on
the job, k, may be proxied by the employer's R&D intensity as it seems reasonable
to assume that workers in `high-tech', R&D intensive ¯rms learn more than workers in `low-tech' ¯rms. However, some problems are immediately evident. Work
experience needs to be decomposed according to the training or research content of
the jobs that workers have had at di®erent stages of their career, but as explained
earlier, complete information about the worker's career histories is not available.
Furthermore, it is far from obvious how one can summarize what is known about
the workers' experience from di®erent ¯rms into a good measure of human capital.
In what follows, I will suggest several solutions to these problems.
A ¯rst look at the e®ect of R&D on the earnings pro¯le One way to
get around the missing career data, is to assume that workers career trajectories
are such that the R&D intensity is constant over their career. Table 1 show that
this assumption is valid as an approximation26 . We can then utilize the structural
relationship between k and H, given in equation (2) together with the optimal
time path for learning investments implicit in (4). Under this assumption the R&D
intensity will at each point of time reveal information both about k and about
the component of H representing accumulated R&D experience. More speci¯cally,
the estimated joint e®ect will give the returns to R&D experience minus the cost
26

The correlation coe±cient between R&D intensity in year t and t-1 is 0.84. It falls somewhat
when the time intervall is increased, but the coe±cient is still 0.57 and highly signi¯cant between
year t and t-9. This is the longest observable time span. Note that the correlation coe±cients are
downward biased due to measurement errors in R&D intensity.

12

of learning. Working for a highly R&D intensive employer should cause a large
negative wage premium early in the career, re°ecting the implicit price paid for the
R&D experience. At the same time, this experience has not had much time to a®ect
the stock of human capital. As time goes by, workers' willingness to pay for human
capital accumulation decrease and approaches zero, but di®erences in previous R&D
experience will translate into di®erences in human capital. Workers who are in R&D
intensive ¯rms and have a long R&D intensive career behind them, will therefore
have a large positive wage premium re°ecting the human capital accumulated.
Table 4 reports the results of simple OLS wage regressions where cross-terms
between experience and current R&D intensity are added to test the hypothesis
that employees with a career in R&D intensive ¯rms have a steeper experienceearnings pro¯le than other workers. Additional control variables included are years
of schooling, seven experience dummies27 , a quadratic in plant number of employees
and year dummies. In column 1 and 3 the experience dummies are interacted directly
with R&D intensity while column 2 and 4 report the results of interacting the
experience dummies with a dummy which is one if the R&D intensity is above 0.228 .
An R&D intensity of 0.2 represents the 97th percentile for workers with secondary
technical education, and the 82th percentile for workers with higher technical or
scienti¯c education. The dummy approach is used as an easy way to assess the
magnitude of the e®ect of R&D intensity on wages. An alternative illustration is
given in ¯gure 1, where earnings-experience pro¯les for workers in ¯rms with no
R&D and in ¯rms with R&D intensity 0.2 is graphed, based on a speci¯cation with
a quartic in experience interacted with a quadratic in R&D intensity.
The results support the main theoretical prediction of Pakes and Nitzan (1983)
and Rosen (1972). Early in the career both workers with secondary technical education and scientists and engineers accept a signi¯cant wage discount when working
for R&D-intensive ¯rms, but over time this discount is changed into a signi¯cant
wage premium. The pattern strongly suggests that R&D-investments of ¯rms translate into general human capital, and that workers both pay and get paid for the
knowledge they accumulate.
It is evident from table 4, columns 2 and 4, using the dummy variable approach,
27

I have chosen to use experience dummies rather than a higher order polynomial in the main
speci¯cation because the tabulation of cross terms between R&D intensity and a higher order
polynomial is di±cult to interpret. A polynomial in experience interacted with R&D intensity also
imply a stronger restriction on the e®ect of R&D over the career.
28
In these regressions, workers in ¯rms with medium R&D intensity have been excluded. Medium
R&D intensity is de¯ned as an R&D intensity between 0.05 and 0.2. The exclusion is done to
facilitate a sharper comparison between workers in ¯rms with high and low R&D intensity. The
results are robust to including workers in ¯rms with medium R&D intensity, and to using the 90th
percentile for each group as a cuto® point instead of 0.2 R&D intensity.

13

that the discounts as well as the premia are of economic signi¯cance. Scientists
and engineers working in ¯rms with an R&D intensity above 0.2, have on average
6.1 percent lower wages in their ¯rst year than scientists and engineers in ¯rms
with R&D intensity below 0.05. Scientists and engineers with more than 35 year
experience and working in a ¯rm with R&D intensity above 0.2, have wages that
on average are 6.8 percent above the wages of scientists and engineers with similar
experience in ¯rms with R&D intensity below 0.05. The magnitudes of the discounts
and premia are similar for workers with secondary technical education in R&D
intensive ¯rms. They have a 5.5 percent wage discount in the beginning of their
career, and an 8.6 percent premium in the end of their career.
One way to check the plausibility of the coe±cients is to calculate the internal
rate of return to choosing an R&D intensive career. For a worker with secondary
technical education, the internal rate of return is 5.7 percent, and for workers with
higher technical or scienti¯c education it is 3.6 percent29 . These numbers should be
considered rough estimates, but they are in a reasonable range.
Estimates based on earnings growth One major obstacle to identifying compensating di®erentials, whether associated with training or other job amenities, has
been the potential correlation between job amenities and unobserved individual characteristics. In Rosen's model, an ability bias arises because highly talented workers
have a lower cost of learning, and absorb more knowledge in a job with a large potential for learning, than less talented workers30 . This imply a tendency for talented
workers to self-select into R&D intensive ¯rms, causing the wage discount in the
beginning of the career to be underestimated, and the wage premium in the end of
the career to be overestimated31 .
Another potential bias in table 4 arises from workers switching between employment in `high-tech' and `low-tech' ¯rms. Although table 1 indicates that this kind
of behavior is not very common, it clearly does happen. A bias then arises because
the regressions in table 4 assume that we can compare experienced workers in R&D
intensive ¯rms to experienced workers in less R&D intensive ¯rms, and learn how
29

The calculation is based on the regressions in table 5, column 2 and 4. I assume that the
workers are employed in a ¯rm with 100 employees, and that the business cycle is as it were in
1995. Workers with secondary education are assumed to have 12 years of schooling and work for
45 years. Workers with higher education are assumed to have 15 years of schooling and work for
42 years.
30
Cf. Autor (2000) for a model with the same feature.
31
It is in this respect interesting to note that the estimated coe±cients on R&D-intensity become
smaller (more negative) if the share of scientists with post graduate degrees at the plant is included
in the regression, despite this variable being strongly correlated with R&D intensity. One possible
explanation is that the share of post graduate scientists also is correlated with unobserved worker
ability. This would be consistent with the `O-ring theory' of Kremer (1993).

14

much more human capital is accumulated in R&D intensive ¯rms. Workers who
transfer out of R&D intensive ¯rms, however, will increase the wage level of the
`comparison group' in the less R&D intensive ¯rms, and cause a downward bias on
the estimated gain from working in R&D intensive ¯rms. In the same way, workers
who transfer from ¯rms that do not invest much in R&D to ¯rms that do, have less
human capital than those who have been in R&D intensive ¯rms for their entire
career. Hence, they will reduce the average wage level in R&D intensive ¯rms and
add to the bias. The result is that the wage premia associated with the last periods
of a `high tech career' is underestimated, i.e. we will underestimate the steepness of
the experience earnings pro¯le.
A simple way to avoid the potential ability and `switching' bias, is to estimate
the wage equation in ¯rst di®erences, i.e. investigate how ¯rms' R&D intensity a®ect
wage growth directly. This is done in table 5. The drawback of this speci¯cation is
that we do not learn about the e®ect of R&D on the wage level32 . Given that ability
is expected to bias results against ¯nding support for the hypothesis that workers
pay for R&D experience, however, this is not a serious problem.
The broad picture emerging from the upper part of table 5 is that workers with
technical or scienti¯c education in R&D-intensive ¯rms who do not change employer,
have higher wage growth throughout their career33 . This is consistent with the
previous ¯nding that R&D translates into human capital that workers earn a return
on34 . Wage growth also appears to level o® towards the end of the career, consistent
with workers having less incentive to accumulate human capital when getting closer
to the retirement age.
Since the correlation between ¯rms' R&D intensity and workers' learning investments is expected to be strongest for young workers, it should be possible to observe
changes in `payment' associated with transitions between ¯rms with di®erent R&D
intensities. Moving from an R&D-intensive ¯rm to a less R&D-intensive ¯rm early
in the career should induce a wage increase, and transitions the opposite way should
induce a wage decrease. Both types of moves will contribute to a negative relation32

The wage level is identi¯ed if using a ¯xed e®ects speci¯cation, but such a speci¯cation does
not perform well. This may be due to its more restrictive assumption regarding the dynamics of
unobserved worker characteristics.
33
Note, however, that wage growth for workers with secondary technical education is negatively
correlated with the employers' R&D intensity in the ¯rst two years of the career. This is also
evident in table 4, column 1. It may re°ect that it takes some time to `absorb' the complexity
of R&D intensive ¯rms, or that workers due to imperfect information about the quality of the
training, are unwilling to pay the full cost of the training at once, but that ¯rms are able to extract
more through lower wage growth during the very ¯rst years of the workers' career.
34
Cash °ow before wage payments per worker, is included to control for the rent sharing e®ect
of successful innovations found by van Reenen (1996). Such a rent sharing e®ect is present in the
data, but it does not dominate the e®ect of R&D.

15

ship between wage growth and change in R&D intensity. For old workers, a change
in R&D intensity should not a®ect wages as much, since they are not expected to
invest much in human capital. The estimated coe±cients do not fully con¯rm these
hypotheses. For old workers, the coe±cients are small and not very signi¯cant as
expected, and for young workers with secondary technical education the coe±cient
is negative and highly signi¯cant, but for young scientists and engineers the coef¯cient is positive and signi¯cant. A problem with the estimates, however, is that
mobility cannot be considered exogenous with respect to wages.
Estimating the price of learning and the return to R&D experience separately Table 4 utilize cross sectional information only, and estimates in one coe±cient the return to previous R&D experience minus the price paid for current
learning opportunities. Utilizing the longitudinal dimension of the data set it is
possible to specify these two components separately. The learning opportunity that
a worker faces depends only on current R&D intensity, while average R&D intensity in previous years reveal information about the workers' R&D experience. Note,
however, that the stability in R&D intensity over the workers careers, evident in
table 1, makes current and previous R&D intensities somewhat collinear. A high
level of precision can therefore not be expected when including both variables.
Table 6, column 2 and 4, reports the results of interacting current R&D intensity
and the average of previously observed R&D intensities separately with experience
dummies. The ¯rst thing to notice is that the coe±cients on the average of previously
observed R&D intensities, i.e. the return to R&D experience, are mostly positive,
while the coe±cients on current R&D intensity, i.e. the implicit price paid for
learning opportunities, are mostly negative. Note also that current R&D intensity
has a more negative impact when previous R&D experience is included, cf. column
1 and 3.
The price paid for learning decreases over time as predicted by theory, but the
data do not bring out the expected wage increase over time that should be associated
with R&D experience. Furthermore, the coe±cients on current R&D, i.e. learning,
does not go to zero, but becomes positive late in the career. These two features seem
connected. The employer's current R&D intensity appears to be a better proxy for
old workers' human capital than the average of previously observed R&D intensities.
This could be due to some selection process where workers whose technological
experience has become obsolete, move out of or are displaced from R&D intensive
¯rms.
In order to asses the importance of learning for the industry on an aggregate
level, I have summarized the estimated wage discount for all R&D ¯rms. This sum
amounts to 0.7 percent of the total wage bill for technical personnel in all R&D
16

performing ¯rms and 2.6 percent of industry R&D investments. Looking only at
¯rms with R&D intensity above 0.2, the wage discount represent 3.0 percent of
their total wage bill and 2.5 percent of their R&D investments. These numbers are
not very big, but nor are they negligible.
The value of R&D experience from the current employer vs. previous
employers Lengermann (1996) and Loewenstein and Spletzer (1998, 1999) who
study the e®ect of formal on-the-job training, ¯nd that the return to training received
from previous employers exceed the return to training received from the current
employer. Loewenstein and Spletzer argue that this may re°ect that employers
extract some returns to general training, and that workers do not realize the full
returns until they change jobs. If something similar applies to the value of experience
from R&D intensive ¯rms, it would imply that the potential R&D spillovers involved
when workers in R&D intensive ¯rms change employers, is only partially internalized
in the labor market. In order to investigate this possibility, I have for each employee
where su±cient career information is present, calculated the average observed R&D
intensity in previous years when working for the current employer and the average
observed R&D intensity in years working for previous employers.
With a smaller sample size and three R&D measures, an extension of the speci¯cation with experience dummies interacted with R&D-intensities, used in table 4
and 6, is not feasible. It is necessary to put more restrictions on the speci¯cation
and I have chosen to approximate the price paid for learning opportunities with current R&D intensity and its interaction with years of overall work experience. R&D
experience built up with the current employer is proxied with the average observed
R&D intensity in previous years working for this employer times years of tenure
with this employer. R&D experience built up with previous employers is proxied
with the average observed R&D intensity while working for previous employers times
years of experience prior to the current employment relationship. These measures,
resembling sums of R&D intensities, are consistent with equation (2).
Table 7, column 1 and 3 reports the results. Column 2 and 4 report a slightly less
restrictive speci¯cation where non-linear interactions with experience and tenure is
allowed. All regressions con¯rm the previous ¯nding that current R&D intensity
have a signi¯cantly negative impact on wages early in the career. The positive
cross-term with experience also con¯rm that this negative impact, interpreted to
be the price paid for learning opportunities, diminishes over time. With respect
to the R&D experience built up over the career, both R&D experience from the
current employer and R&D experience from previous employers have a positive and
signi¯cant impact on wages. R&D experience from the current employer, however,
seems to be more highly valued. Unfortunately, this result is more suggestive than
17

conclusive. In order to construct the variables needed, all years working with the
current employer must be included in the sample, while information about previous
employers can be less complete. Hence, the average R&D intensity in years working
for previous employers is measured with greater error than average R&D intensity
in years working for the current employer, and coe±cients on variables involving
the former measure will therefore be more biased towards zero35 . In addition, the
coe±cient on R&D experience with the current employer could be upward biased.
This would happen if recent R&D experience show that knowledge accumulated
earlier in the career has not become obsolete. The results for old workers in table 6
indicate that this may be the case.
Robustness and econometric issues A number of alternative speci¯cations
have been tried to asses the robustness of the results36 . In one speci¯cation, more
than 30 additional control variables were included, such as proxies for hours worked37 ,
the capital to labor ratio, the Her¯ndal index, the market share of the ¯rm, the union
density38 and four-digit industry dummies. This did not change the quantitative re35

If the sample is restricted to workers whose complete career is known, the return to R&D
experience from previous employers appears to be above the return to R&D experience from the
current employer for workers with higher education, while both coe±cients become insigni¯cant for
workers with secondary education. For these workers the coe±cient on previous R&D experience
even has a negative sign.
36
In addition to trying out di®erent speci¯cations within the sample of workers with technical
education, I have also run the basic regressions on workers with non-technical education. The e®ect
of R&D experience on workers with non-technical secondary and higher education resembles the
e®ect on workers with technical education in that they seem to have a steeper experience-earnings
pro¯le if working in R&D-intensive ¯rms. The results are fairly strong for workers with secondary
non-technical education, but less evident for workers with higher non-technical education. It is not
clear why these workers should be a®ected by the R&D-intensity of their employers, but several
explanations are possible. First, R&D intensive ¯rms may be advanced along many dimensions,
and hence o®er valuable work experience also to the non-technical sta®. Second, R&D intensive
¯rms also appear to be intensive in formal training. In years where the dataset includes measures
of both R&D investments and formal training, these measures are signi¯cantly, positively correlated. Third, it is possible that not only the technical sta®, but also administrative managers in
R&D intensive ¯rms have access to sensitive technological information. Then the Pakes and Nitzan
(1983) model applies to this group as well as to the technical employees, and it is in any case conceivable that R&D intensive ¯rms to a larger extent than other ¯rms use stock options and similar
compensation schemes for their managers, e.g. due to cash constraints. Finally, the Norwegian
economy is strongly unionized. Unions often demand similar earnings plans for all employees in a
¯rm.
37
The following measures are available: Average hours per week worked at the plant, number of
part time jobs and number of months unemployed.
38
The union density is only available after 1990. In 1990 and before, I have used the 1991 value,
since union density as a ¯rm characteristic is fairly stable over time.

18

sults. The results are also robust to including ¯rm size, years of education and union
density in interaction with experience. Dividing the sample into di®erent time periods, however, reveals that the e®ect of R&D on the wage-experience pro¯le is more
pronounced in the 1980s than in the 1990s. This may be related to the severe recession in the Norwegian economy starting in the late 1980s, causing a restructuring
of, and a decline in, some of the most innovative subindustries.
All regressions reported in tables 4, 6 and 7 allow for correlated error terms
across observations of the same individual in di®erent years. However, one could
also argue that error terms for workers belonging to the same ¯rm may be correlated.
Allowing for such correlations when computing the standard error of the estimated
coe±cients, reduce their signi¯cance, but the qualitative results are even robust to
including ¯rm speci¯c ¯xed e®ects in the regressions.
A comparison with the training literature Before concluding it may be worthwhile to compare the overall results to similar analyses of `on-the-job training' in
the labor literature. Although this paper, as far as I know, is the ¯rst to look at
the e®ect of R&D on wages, there exists a large literature on the e®ect of formal
training. In this literature, a number of authors have found training to be correlated
with wage growth, but ¯nding support for a negative e®ect on starting wages such as
human capital theory predicts, is unusual, cf. e.g. Barron, Black and Loewenstein
(1989), Lynch (1992) or Barron, Berger and Black (1999)39 . Common interpretations are that workers do not pay for general training, or that the implicit price is
masked by a positive ability bias. In this perspective, the strong negative e®ect of
R&D on starting wages present in this sample, is remarkable. It suggests that ¯rms'
technology levels are more important to wages than formal on-the-job training. One
explanation for this could be that while most formal training is short term, working
in a technologically challenging environment a®ects human capital accumulation for
the entire duration of a job.

6

Concluding remarks

Labor mobility is often considered to be an important source of knowledge externalities, making it di±cult for ¯rms to appropriate returns to R&D investments.
Pakes and Nitzan (1983), however, analyze the problem formally, and ¯nd that labor turnover should not be a problem for R&D ¯rms. Both scientists and ¯rms
39

One exception is Autor (2000). Studying temporary help ¯rms, he ¯nds that \[w]ages are
lower at ¯rms o®ering training by a modest, but statistically signi¯cant magnitude". Lynch (1992)
¯nd a negative e®ect of uncompleted training for workers with less than high school education, but
not for workers with a high school degree or some college education.

19

are aware of the fact that working on a research project gives access to valuable
information. Once such information is disclosed or developed, scientists, if they
are to stay with the ¯rm, will have to receive a wage increase re°ecting their new
market value. Thus, scientists expect that accepting a research position implies a
future wage increase, and consequently they can accept an initial wage below their
alternative wage, without experiencing a welfare loss.
Research ¯rms are likely to use the most up-to date technology and frequently
change its products and production processes. Because of this, one would think
that even workers who don't have direct access to the results of the R&D projects,
learn more in these ¯rms. Rosen (1972) provides a model where di®erent ¯rms o®er
di®erent opportunities for on-the-job learning, and derive implications with respect
to wages that closely resemble those of Pakes and Nitzan (1983). Rosen thinks of
jobs as tied packages of work and learning. Workers sell the services of their skills
and simultaneously purchase an opportunity to augment those skills.
I have argued in this paper that inter-¯rm transfers of R&D-results embodied in
people, should be analyzed within a human capital framework similar to the models
of Pakes and Nitzan (1983) and Rosen (1972). Testing such a framework using
matched employer-employee data from the Norwegian machinery and equipment
industries, I ¯nd that the technical sta® in R&D-intensive ¯rms indeed pays for
the knowledge they accumulate on the job through lower wages in the beginning of
their career. Later in the career they earn a return on these implicit investments
through higher wages. This suggests that potential externalities associated with
labor mobility, at least to some extent, are internalized in the labor market40 .
Determining whether workers pay for the full value of the knowledge they accumulate in R&D intensive ¯rms, however, is di±cult, and beyond the scope of this
paper. Information asymmetries and other barriers to mobility may enhance the
¯rms ability to appropriate rents, but at the same time reduce workers' incentives
to pay for knowledge accumulation. Under such circumstances it is conceivable that
labor mobility creates some knowledge spillovers41 . A complete welfare analysis must
40

The only related ¯nding I know of in the literature is Zucker, Darby and Armstrong (1998) who
in an academic setting, claim that \competitive university salaries are lower, other things equal,
in areas where faculty expect the possibility of receiving substantial outside income or wealth as a
result of skills developed doing research at the university."
41
Cf. Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) although these authors do not write with reference to R&D
investments. A particularly important kind of imperfection may be distortions in the wage structure
which makes a wedge between wages and marginal productivity increase with the workers' human
capital. Firms then have an incentive to invest in R&D producing general human capital because
they get a share of the return. A simple mechanism which could cause such wage compression, is
that ¯rms receive a fraction of the productivity of the workers as pro¯t due to matching, search
costs or other sorts of labor market friction. If the employer receives a fraction of the workers'
productivity, the employers level of pro¯t will increase with the workers' productivity and therefore

20

also incorporate that, even if workers pay for all the knowledge they accumulate, this
`solution' to the spillover problem does not guarantee optimal R&D investments. If
workers co-¯nance R&D through lower wages, and if the value of the knowledge they
accumulate depend on the outcome of the R&D project, they become exposed to
the risk associated with the project. Risk aversion among workers may then become
a new source of distortion since human capital investments cannot be diversi¯ed42 .
Liquidity constraints making workers unwilling to trade o® current wage for future
wage on a large scale, may also create problems.

References
Acemoglu, D. and Pischke, J.-S. (1999). Beyond Becker: Training in imperfect labor
markets, Economic Journal 109: F112{F142.
Almeida, P. and Kogut, B. (1996). Thechnology and geography: The localization
of knowledge and the mobility of patent holders. Working Paper, The Huntsman
Center for Global Competition and Innovation, Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention,
in R. R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and
Social Factors, Vol. 13 of NBER Special Conference Series, Princeton University
Press, New Jersey, pp. 609{625.
Autor, D. H. (2000). Why do temporary help ¯rms provide free general skills training. NBER Working Paper No. 7637.
with their human capital. Another possible mechanism is complementarity between ¯rm speci¯c
and general human capital. In this case, the alternative wage for the scientist will increase less
than his or her productivity as he or she receives training. Mechanisms which induce employers
to pay for general human capital accumulation, create a positive externality to the worker's future
employer if the worker decides to quit or if the ¯rm goes out of business. If labor mobility does
create some knowledge spillovers, multiple equilibria may be possible. One mechanism that may
produce such a result is complementarity between ¯rms' own research investments and the faster
knowledge di®usion and improved matching associated with a high-mobility equilibrium. Cf. e.g.
Cohen and Levinthal (1989) for an analysis which stress the importance of complementarities
between spillovers and ¯rm's own R&D investments. A tolerant attitude towards movement of
personnel, reported to be present e.g. in Silicon Valley (Saxenian; 1994), could then promote
R&D investments and growth, whereas a situation where ¯rms make labor mobility costly could
produce an equilibrium with low R&D investments and growth. The latter result would be due
to low quality matches combined with a low in°ow of new ideas, and despite the fact that lower
probability of quits, all else equal, improves the incentives to invest in R&D.
42
Cf. footnote 6.

21

Balkin, D. B. and Gomez-Mejia, L. R. (1985). Compensation practices in hightechnology industries, Personnel Administrator (June): 111{123.
Barron, J. M., Berger, M. C. and Black, D. A. (1999). Do workers pay for on-the-job
training?, Journal of Human Resources 34(2): 235{252.
Barron, J. M., Black, D. A. and Loewenstein, M. A. (1989). Job matching and
on-the-job training, Journal of Labor Economics 7(1): 1{19.
Barth, E. and Dale-Olsen, H. (1999). The employer's wage policy and worker
turnover, in J. C. Haltiwanger, J. I. Lane, J. R. Spletzer, J. J. M. Theeuwes
and K. R. Troske (eds), The Creation and Analysis of Employer-Employee Data,
Contributions to Economic Analysis 241, North Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 285{
312.
Becker, G. S. (1962). Investment in human beings, Journal of Political Economy
pp. 9{49.
Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital, Columbia University Press, New York. [Third
Edition by the University of Chicago Pess 1993].
Bhide, A. (1994). How entrepreneurs craft strategies that work, Harvard Business
Review 72: 150{161.
Burgess, S., Lane, J. and Stevens, D. (1996). Job °ows and workers °ows: Issues
and evidence from a panel of US ¯rms, in R. Schettkat (ed.), The Flow Analysis
of Labour Markets, Vol. 3 of Studies in the Modern World Economy, Routledge,
London and New York, pp. 96{114.
Cohen, W. M. and Levinthal, D. A. (1989). Innovation and learning: The two faces
of R&D, Economic Journal 99: 569{596.
Geroski, P. A. (1995). Do spillovers undermine the insentive to innovate?, in
S. Dowrick (ed.), Economic Approaches to Innovation, Edwar Elgar, Aldershot,
UK, pp. 76{97.
Gersbach, H. and Schmutzler, A. (1997). Endogenous spillovers, the market for human capital, and incentives for innovation. Discussion Papers No. 248, UniversitÄat
Heidelberg.
Greene, W. H. (1997). Econometric Analysis, Third Edition, Prentice Hall, New
Jersey.
Greenhalgh, C. and Mavrotas, G. (1996). Job training, new technology and labour
turnover, British Journal of Industrial Relations 34(1): 131{150.
Griliches, Z. (1973). Research expenditures and growth accounting, in B. R.
Williams (ed.), Science and Technology in Economic Growth, MacMillian, Lon22

don, pp. 59{95.
Halvorsen, R., Jensen, R. and Foyn, F. (1991). Dokumentasjon av Industristatistikkens Tidsseriebase. Mimeo, Statistics Norway.
Jackson, T. (1997). Inside Intel: Andrew Grove and the Rise of the World's Most
Powerful Chip Company, Dutton Books.
Ja®e, A. (1986). Technological opportunity and spillovers from R&D, American
Economic Review 76: 984{1001.
Ja®e, A. (1996). Economic analysis of research spillovers: Implications for the
advanced technology program. National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Report GCR 97-708.
Ja®e, A. B., Trajtenberg, M. and Henderson, R. (1993). Geographic localization
of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108: 577{598.
Klette, T. J. and M¿en, J. (1999). From growth theory to technology policy - coordination problems in theory and practice, Nordic Journal of Political Economy
25(1): 53{74.
Klette, T. J., M¿en, J. and Griliches, Z. (2000). Do subsidies to commercial R&D reduce market failure? Microeconometric evaluation studies, Research Policy 29(45): 471{495.
Kremer, M. (1993). The O-ring theory of economic development, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 108: 551{575.
Lengermann, P. A. (1996). How long do the bene¯ts of training last? Evidence
of long term e®ects across current and previous employers, education levels, test
scores, and occupations. Working Paper 96-18, CAHRS, Cornell University.
Levin, R. C., Klevoric, A. K., Nelson, R. R. and Winter, S. G. (1987). Appropriating the returns from industrial research and development, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Microeconomics pp. 783{831.
Loewenstein, M. A. and Spletzer, J. R. (1998). Dividing the costs and returns to
general training, Journal of Labor Economics 16(1): 142{171.
Loewenstein, M. A. and Spletzer, J. R. (1999). General and speci¯c training, evidence and implications, Journal of Human Resources 34(4): 710{733.
Lynch, L. M. (1992). Private sector training and the earnings of young workers,
American Economic Review 82(1): 299{312.
Mincer, J. (1958). Investment in human capital and personal income distribution,

23

Journal of Political Economy 66: 281{302.
Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience and Earnings, Columbia University Press,
New York.
Pacelli, L., Rapiti, F. and Revelli, R. (1998). Employment and mobility of workers in
industries with di®erent intensity of innovastion: Evidence on Italy from a panel
of workers and ¯rms, Economics of Innovation and New Technologies 5: 273{300.
Pakes, A. and Nitzan, S. (1983). Optimum contracts for research personnel, research employment, and the establishment of `rival' enterprises, Journal of Labor
Economics 1: 345{365.
Parent, D. (1999). Wages and mobility: The impact of employer-provided training,
Journal of Labor Economics 17(2): 298{317.
Rosen, S. (1972). Learning and experience in the labor market, Journal of Human
Resources 7: 326{342.
Rosen, S. (1986). The theory of equalizing di®erences, in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. I, North-Holland, Amsterdam,
chapter 12, pp. 641{692.
Saxenian, A. (1994). Regional Advantage: Culture Competition Between Route 128
and Silicon Valley, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Stephan, P. (1996). The economics of science, Journal of Economic Literature
34(3): 1199{1235.
Stern, S. (1999). Do scientists pay to be scientists? NBER Working Paper No. 7410.
van Reenen, J. (1996). The creation and capture of rents: Wages and innovation in
a panel of UK companies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 195{226.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R. and Armstrong, J. (1998). Geographically localized
knowledge: Spillovers or markets?, Economic Inquirey 36: 65{86.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R. and Brewer, M. B. (1998). Intellectual human capital and the birth of US biotechnology enterprises, American Economic Review
88: 290{306.

24

Figure 1. Estimated earnings-experience profiles

Workers with higher technical or scientific education

earnings in 1000 1995 NOK

400

in firms with no R&D

350

in firms with R&D intensity 0.2
300

Workers with secondary techncial education
250

in firms with no R&D
in firms with R&D intensity 0.2

200

150
0

5

10

15
20
25
30
experience in years

35

40

45

The graphs are based on regressions similar to those in table 4, column (1) and (3) except that experience dummies
interacted with R&D intensity is exchanged with a quartic in experience interacted with a quadratic in R&D intensity. R&D
intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of business level within firms. The sample
consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full time in the machinery and equipment industry in
Norway 1986-1995. The graphs for workers with higher education are based on 15 years of education and a firm with 100
employees. The graphs for workers with secondary education are based on 12 years of education and a firm with 100
employees. Business cycle conditions are assumed to be like 1995.

i

Table 1. Worker mobility between plants with known R&D intensity
with
no R&D

with
R&Dintensity
∈ 〈0,.05]

with
R&Dintensity
∈ 〈.05,.2]

with
R&Dintensity
> .2

Total
number
of separations

left a non R&D-plant and joined a plant
left a plant with R&D-intensity ∈ 〈0,.05] and joined a plant
left a plant with R&D-intensity ∈ 〈.05,.2] and joined a plant
left a plant with R&D-intensity > .2 and joined a plant

65.5
27.8
11.9
12.9

27.3
61.1
42.6
9.3

5.7
8.9
40.4
13.9

1.5
2.2
5.1
64.0

3 168
3 330
2 841
497

percentage of jobs in plants

34.6

42.3

17.2

5.9

The numbers are percentage shares of total separations from each category of plants and sum to 100 horizontally. The
sample consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full time in the machinery and equipment industry
in Norway 1986-1995 at a plant where the R&D-intensity is known. Transitions out of the sample have been excluded.
R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of business level within firms.

ii

Table 2. Labor turnover by education and R&D intensity
Turnover
rate

Excess
turnover
rate

Number of
job-year
observations

Secondary technically educated in a plant
with no R&D
with R&D-intensity ∈〈0, .05]
with R&D-intensity ∈〈.05, .2]
with R&D-intensity >0.2

.194
.210
.211
.208

.095
.091
.072
.059

110 091
84 886
37 280
7 246

Higher technically or scientifically educated in a plant
with no R&D
with R&D-intensity ∈〈0, .05]
with R&D-intensity ∈〈.05, .2]
with R&D-intensity >0.2

.191
.210
.211
.216

.074
.075
.071
.065

14 806
20 444
20 782
11 838

The turnover rate is separations in year t as a share of employment in year t. The excess turnover rate is separations out of
jobs that continue as a share of continuing jobs. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the threedigit line of business level within firms. The sample consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full
time in the machinery and equipment industry in Norway 1986-1995.

Table 3. The effect of R&D intensity on excess turnover
R&D-intensity
* secondary technical education

-.119***
(.030)
-.042
(.030)

* higher technical or scientific education
Estimator
Sample size
Pseudo R-squared

Tobit
6 904
.42

-2.041***
(.416)
-.721*
(.376)
Grouped logit
266 173
.01

The dependent variable is the excess turnover rate within plant educational groups. The excess turnover rate is separations
out of jobs that continue as a share of continuing jobs. Control variables included in the regressions, but not reported are a
dummy for higher technical or scientific education, plant job destruction rate, plant job creation rate, a quadratic in the
educational group number of workers, a quadratic in their average experience, a quadratic in plant age and year dummies.
The sample sizes in the tobit regressions refer to the number of within plant educational groups. Educational groups with
less than five workers have been excluded from the tobit regressions due to the turnover estimates being uncertain when
based on few workers. The sample sizes in the grouped logit regressions refer to the number of workers. Standard errors are
given in parentheses. In the grouped logit regressions, the standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedastisity and correlated
error terms within plants. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of business
level within firms. The sample consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full time in the machinery
and equipment industry in Norway 1986-1995.
*** Significant at the 1% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*
Significant at the 10% level

iii

Table 4. The effect of R&D on the experience-earnings profile
(1)

(2)

Secondary technical
education

(3)

(4)

Higher technical or scientific
education

R&D
* less than one year experience
* 1-2 year experience
* 3-5 year experience
* 6-10 year experience
* 11-15 year experience
* 16-20 year experience
* 21-35 year experience
* more than 35 year experience
R&D measure
Sample size
R-squared

-.207***
(.049)
-.297***
(.052)
-.163***
(.032)
-.169***
(.026)
-.083***
(.032)
-.065*
(.035)
.088***
(.029)
.222***
(.048)

-.055**
(.024)
-.048**
(.019)
-.029***
(.011)
-.025***
(.009)
.001
(.010)
.023**
(.011)
.045***
(.009)
.086***
(.016)

-.132***
(.044)
-.097***
(.025)
-.049**
(.021)
-.012
(.022)
.008
(.026)
.025
(.032)
.101***
(.029)
.229***
(.055)

-.061***
(.014)
-.044***
(.009)
-.025***
(.007)
-.018***
(.007)
-.009
(.009)
.001
(.009)
.031***
(.009)
.068***
(.019)

intensity
244 657
.20

dummy
207 776
.20

intensity
71 372
.28

dummy
50 216
.26

The dependent variable is ln (real annual earnings). Control variables included in the regression, but not reported are seven
experience dummies, years of schooling, a quadratic in plant number of employees and year dummies. The coefficients are
estimated using ordinary least squares. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity and correlated error terms within
individuals, are given in parentheses. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of
business level within firms. The R&D dummy is one if the R&D intensity is above 0.2. Observations with R&D-intensity
between 0.05 and 0.2 are excluded from the regressions in column (2) and (4). The sample consists of men with technical or
scientific education employed full time in the machinery and equipment industry in Norway 1986-1995.
*** Significant at the 1% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*
Significant at the 10% level

iv

Table 5. The effect of R&D on biannual earnings growth
Secondary technical
education
Stays with same employer from year t-2 to year t
* 2 year experience * R&D-intensity
* 3-5 year experience * R&D-intensity
* 6-10 year experience * R&D-intensity
* 11-15 year experience * R&D-intensity
* 16-20 year experience * R&D-intensity
* 21-35 year experience * R&D-intensity
* above 35 year experience * R&D-intensity
Separates in year t-1
* 2-10 year experience * ∆R&D-intensity
* 11-20 year experience * ∆R&D-intensity
* above 21 year experience * ∆R&D-intensity
Sample size
R-squared

Higher technical or
scientific education

-.203**
(.082)
.077***
(.027)
.079***
(.016)
.101***
(.016)
.093***
(.018)
.063***
(.011)
.047**
(.022)

.021
(.040)
.065***
(.017)
.048***
(.012)
.039***
(.014)
.049***
(.015)
.007
(.011)
.008
(.021)

-.232***
(.057)
.044
(.045)
-.076*
(.045)

.097***
(.037)
.037
(.033)
-.021
(.040)

139 108
.09

42 466
.13

The dependent variable is the first difference of ln (real annual earnings) between year t and year t-2. Control variables
included in the regression, but not reported are cash flow before wage payments per employee, seven experience dummies,
a dummy for being a separator in year t-1interacted with dummies for the three levels of experience used for separators, a
quadratic in the change in plant size measured by number of employees and year dummies. The coefficients are estimated
using ordinary least squares. Standard errors are given in parentheses. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per
employee at the three-digit line of business level within firms. R&D intensity for stayers is the average over year t, t-1, and
t-2. The sample consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full time in the machinery and equipment
industry in Norway 1986-1995.
*** Significant at the 1% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*
Significant at the 10% level

v

Table 6. The effect of current R&D and previous R&D experience on earnings
(1)

(2)

Secondary technical
education

(3)

(4)

Higher technical or scientific
education

Current R&D-intensity
* less than one year experience
* 1-2 year experience
* 3-5 year experience
* 6-10 year experience
* 11-15 year experience
* 16-20 year experience
* 21-35 year experience
* more than 35 year experience

-.204***
(.050)
-.314***
(.062)
-.190***
(.031)
-.177***
(.028)
-.080**
(.032)
-.069*
(.036)
.089***
(.029)
.234***
(.048)

-.204***
(.050)
-.342***
(.073)
-.233***
(.039)
-.208***
(.032)
-.084**
(-.037)
-.079*
(.041)
.038
(.030)
.285***
(.053)

-.134***
(.044)
-.131***
(.030)
-.058**
(.023)
.010
(.023)
.014
(.027)
.031
(.034)
.094***
(.030)
.222***
(.056)

-.130***
(.044)
-.266***
(.038)
-.123***
(.027)
-.097***
(.025)
-.062**
(.069)
-.022
(.038)
.039
(.032)
.265***
(.062)

Average R&D-intensity over previous career
* 1-2 year experience

.055
(.093)
.094
(.057)
.070
(.055)
.010
(.062)
.028
(.059)
.171***
(.060)
-.158**
(.072)

* 3-5 year experience
* 6-10 year experience
* 11-15 year experience
* 16-20 year experience
* 21-35 year experience
* more than 35 year experience
Sample size
R-squared

227 418
.19

227 418
.19

.261***
(.051)
.142***
(.038)
.186***
(.036)
.167***
(.038)
.134***
(.052)
.165***
(.053)
-0.149
(.103)
65 422
.28

65 422
.28

The dependent variable is ln (real annual earnings). Control variables included in the regression, but not reported, are seven
experience dummies, years of schooling, a quadratic in plant number of employees and year dummies. The coefficients are
estimated using ordinary least squares. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedasticity and correlated error terms within
individuals, are given in parentheses. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of
business level within firms. The sample consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full time in the
machinery and equipment industry in Norway 1986-1995. Workers, for whom no R&D information from previous years is
available, have been excluded.
*** Significant at the 1% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*
Significant at the 10% level

vi

Table 7. The effect of current R&D, R&D experience from the current employer and R&D
experience from previous employers
(1)

(2)

Secondary technical
education
current R&D intensity
* experience

(3)

(4)

Higher technical or scientific
education

-.316***
(.042)
.017***
(.002)

-.480***
(.063)
.038***
(.008)
-.001***
(.0002)

-.104***
(.034)
.003
(.002)

-.157***
(.052)
.008
(.007)
-.0001
(.0002)

.028***
(.008)

.124***
(.018)
-.014***
(.002)

.032***
(.007)

.089***
(.014)
-.008***
(.002)

.008**
(.003)

.005
(.008)
.0001
(.0003)

.005**
(.002)

.013**
(.006)
-.0004
(.0003)

62 243
.23

62 243
.24

17 675
.33

17 675
.33

* experience 2
mean R&D intensity in previous years with current
employer
* tenure
* tenure 2
mean R&D intensity in years with previous employer(s)
* (experience – tenure)
* (experience – tenure) 2
Sample size
R-squared

The dependent variable is ln (real annual earnings). Control variables included in the regression, but not reported, are years
of schooling, a quadratic in plant number of employees, a quartic in experience, a quadratic in tenure, a dummy for having
changed employer at least once, year dummies and a dummy variable for job relationships whose starting date is censored at
April 30th 1978 together with its interactions with all tenure variables. The coefficients are estimated using ordinary least
squares. Standard errors, adjusted for heteroscedastisity and correlated error terms within individuals, are given in
parentheses. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of business level within
firms. Mean R&D intensity is calculated over the years where information about the R&D intensity is available. The sample
consists of men with technical or scientific education employed full time in the machinery and equipment industry in
Norway 1986-1995. Workers in firms where R&D information is not available in the sample year and in at least one prior
year, and workers who have had previous employment without R&D intensity being known in at least one year, have been
excluded.
*** Significant at the 1% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*
Significant at the 10% level

vii

Table A1. Sample size and trimming procedures
Total number of observations in the machinery and equipment industries 1986-1995

810 559

– Women
– Part time workers
– Workers with unknown education
– Workers with primary education
– Workers with secondary or higher non-technical/non-scientific education
Total number of observations of full time working male technical staff

125 111
11 314
8 968
141 216
94 325
429 625

– Workers in firms that cannot be matched to the time series files of the manufacturing statistics
– Workers in firms where R&D information is not available
Total number of observations of full time working male technical staff in the matched sample

39 527
46 744
343 354

– Workers not working for the whole year because they are entering the labor force
– Workers not working for the whole year because they are leaving the labor force
– Workers with secondary technical education and earnings below NOK 75.000 (1995 value)
– Workers with higher technical or scientific education and earnings below NOK 150.000 (1995 value)
Main sample (trimmed)

9 982
14 044
2 723
566
316 029

Each entry refers to the number of observations deleted among the observations left after the deletions in the rows above
have been conducted. Workers with secondary technical education and earnings below NOK 75.000 (1995 value), and
workers with higher technical or scientific education and earnings below NOK 150.000 (1995 value) have been excluded
because such low earnings suggest that they have not worked full time for an entire year. Tables 1-3 are based on all
observations of full time working male technical staff in the matched sample, whereas the wage regressions in tables 4-7 are
based on the trimmed ‘main sample’.

viii

Table A2. Observations in main sample by year and education
Number of
workers

Secondary technical
education

Higher technical or
scientific education

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995

29 256
30 329
29 450
29 952
31 576
31 482
33 857
33 261
35 315
31 551

75.0 %
75.8 %
76.0 %
76.2 %
77.1 %
79.6 %
79.2 %
78.8 %
78.3 %
77.4 %

25.0 %
24.2 %
24.0 %
23.8 %
22.9 %
20.4 %
20.8 %
21.2 %
21.7 %
22.6 %

Observations

316 029

77.4 %

22.6 %

Table A3. Observations in the main sample by experience and R&D intensity

Less than one year experience
1-2 year experience
3-5 year experience
6-10 year experience
11-15 year experience
16-20 year experience
21-35 year experience
More than 35 year experience

Observations

No R&D

R&D-intensity R&D-intensity R&D-intensity
>.2
∈ 〈0,.05]
∈ 〈.05,.2]

7017
18446
36167
57802
44545
37563
86846
27643

36.6 %
36.8 %
37.7 %
42.1 %
41.0 %
42.9 %
40.6 %
41.4 %

42.9 %
40.3 %
37.7 %
32.8 %
32.3 %
32.0 %
33.9 %
35.7 %

16.5 %
16.9 %
17.6 %
17.5 %
19.3 %
18.6 %
19.3 %
17.8 %

4.0 %
6.0 %
7.0 %
7.5 %
7.4 %
6.4 %
6.2 %
5.1 %

316 029

40.6 %

34.4 %

18.4 %

6.6 %

R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of business level within firms.

ix

Table A4. Worker characteristics by education

Years of education
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Years of experience
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Years of tenure‡
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Wage in 1995 NOK
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Union membership
share
Working at R&D performing plant
share
R&D-intensity if at R&D performing plant
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile

Secondary technical
education

Higher technical or
scientific education

11.2
(.9)
10.0
12.0

14.5
(1.7)
13.0
17.0

16.8
(11.9)
3
34

17.4
(11.6)
3
35

6.3
(5.6)
.9
13.2

6.0
(5.1)
.9
12.5

245 400
(71 000)
176 500
336 100

353 500
(125 900)
240 200
479 700

44%

27%

54%

78%

.057
(.085)
.002
.152

.125
(.134)
.006
.278

The numbers are based on all worker-year observations in the machinery and equipment industry included in the main
sample, cf. table A1. An R&D plant is a plant belonging to a firm that conducts some R&D within the plant’s three-digit
ISIC industry. R&D intensity is measured as R&D man-years per employee at the three-digit line of business level within
firms. Wage in 1995 NOK is rounded to the nearest 100.
‡
16 percent of the observations have the job starting date censored at April 30th 1978.

x

Table A5. Plant characteristics by plant size
Number of employees:
Number of employees
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Average experience of technical staff
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Average tenure of technical staff‡
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Average education of technical staff
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Share of work force with higher technical or
scientific education
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
R&D performing firm
share
R&D man-years per employee if R&D performing
firm
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Capital per employee in 1995 NOK
mean
st.dev.
10th percentile
90th percentile
Union density among technical staff
mean
st.dev.
Market share
mean
st.dev.
Part of multi-plant firm
share
Plants founded before 1972
share
Number of plants

Less than 50

50-200

more than 200

All plants

18.3
(12.9)
4
39

96.2
(38.6)
54
158

483.3
(347.7)
221
906

83.3
(169.9)
6
185

16.9
(6.6)
9.3
25.3

17.1
(4.4)
12.0
23.0

17.2
(4.4)
12.2
22.5

17.0
(5.9)
10.2
24.1

5.7
(3.3)
1.9
10.0

6.0
(3.0)
2.3
9.8

6.1
(3.3)
2.1
10.7

5.8
(3.2)
2.0
10.0

11.7
(1.1)
10.7
13.0

11.7
(0.8)
10.8
12.9

12.0
1.0
11.2
13.4

11.8
(1.1)
10.8
13.0

10%
(16)
0
32%

10%
(11)
1%
23%

13%
(12)
2%
31%

10%
(14)
0
29%

34%

54%

63%

42%

.14
(.18)
.007
.39

.07
(.09)
.005
.17

.08
(.10)
.003
.21

.10
(.15)
.006
.26

805 800
(1 137 600)
245 700
1 359 600

831 700
(682 300)
268 300
1 575 200

977 100
(746 400)
233 700
1 838 500

828 900
(995 100)
262 000
1 472 800

23%
(36)

33%
(39)

41%
(43)

27%
(38)

2%
(8)

6%
(12)

19%
(25)

5%
(13)

37%

47%

64%

42%

44%

64%

66%

52%

4 728

2 195

697

7 620

The numbers are based on all plant-year observations in the machinery and equipment industries included in the main
sample, cf. table A1. An R&D plant is a plant belonging to a firm that conducts some R&D within the plants three-digit
ISIC industry. R&D man-years per employee and R&D sales ratio are measured at the three-digit line of business level
within firms. Market share is measured at the five-digit line of business level for the firm that the plant belongs to. Capital
per employee is rounded to the nearest 100.
‡
16 percent of the underlying employee observations have the job starting date censored at April 30th 1978.

xi

Table A6. Aggregate growth from 1986 to 1995 and R&D intensity by sub-industries
ISIC
38210
38220
38230
38241
32249
38250
38291
38292
38299
38310
38320
38330
38391
38399
38411
38412
38413
38414
38421
38422
38430
38440
38450
38490
38510
38520

1986
Engines and turbines
Agricultural machinery
Metal and wood-working machinery
Oil and gas well machinery and tools
Other industrial machinery
Computers and office machinery
Household machinery
Repair of machinery
Other machinery
Electric motors and eq. for el. production
Radio, TV and communication apparatus
Electrical household appliances
Insulated cables and wires
Other electrical apparatus and equipment
Building of ships
Building of boats
Ship and boat engines and motors
Components and fixtures for ships/boats
Railway and tramway equipment
Repair of railway and tramway eq.
Motor vehicles
Motor cycles and bicycles
Aircraft
Other transport equipment
Professional and scientific instruments
Photographic and optical goods

382-385 All machinery and equipment industries

Number of plants
1995
∆

Number of observations R&D
1986
1995
∆ intensity

9
52
37
92
73
50
11
709
339
139
190
32
12
124
163
438
36
53
1
18
174
1
28
6
57
10

11
33
26
104
104
28
8
458
351
153
135
20
17
100
188
232
29
55
1
8
80
2
20
12
109
8

2
-19
-11
12
31
-22
-3
-251
12
14
-55
12
5
-24
-25
-206
-7
2
0
-10
-94
1
-8
6
52
-2

939
514
200
4709
607
1052
95
480
4132
2428
3335
251
689
596
3738
535
557
590
136
1258
740
114
1167
11
306
77

856
597
183
8270
878
334
92
594
3197
2010
2858
187
627
282
4350
400
353
981
178
1015
1207
77
1173
52
749
51

-9 %
16 %
-9 %
76 %
45 %
-68 %
-3 %
24 %
-23 %
-17 %
-14 %
-25 %
-9 %
-53 %
16 %
-25 %
-37 %
66 %
31 %
-19 %
63 %
-32 %
1%
373 %
145 %
-34 %

.03
.04
.04
.02
.06
.26
.04
.11
.09
.07
.17
.12
.12
.04
.01
.04
.04
.02
.06
.01
.02
.11
.22

2 854

2 292

-562

25 863

30 698

19%

.10

The number of plants is taken from the manufacturing census. The number of observations refers to the technical staff in the
main sample, cf. table A1. The growth in the technical staff does not imply that there has been employment growth in these
industries, but is a result of old workers with primary education not included in the sample, gradually being replaced by
workers with secondary education. R&D-intensity is the weighted average R&D man-years per employee, measured at the
three-digit line of business level within firms, for the plants in the sample over the years 1986-1995.

xii

