                                   #         "" 




                                         
                                             


                                             
                                           


                                          !"$%&'
                                 ())***+!))*$%&'



                                           ,
                                   -.'. /00
                                     1+ 2! .3-&%
                                         0!03...




           
       !  "   #   $

%&'''( # )$ )       
 (*              %    
  
                      
    
  !"  #$%&
!'(((
)* +(


                                           $%#%

                   ,, - ! ,    
   -  . .            ! ,  !/      . 
    . .-0  !  1.   -  ,
        .     !-2 . . 3     /
.        . !/          .                 
   , 4


                                                       
5.   !                                           .   !  
56  -                                               2
+%&" .                                             &(    0 
"7 1'($'((                                                   !('+8'
,9 (:&'(                                            
 !;-                                           ; 
     In a noisy capital market with imperfect information, there is room for rational agents
with heterogenous beliefs. In this paper we compare the optimal portfolio strategies of two
types of agents – conformists who believe in the log-normal market consensus and “rebels”
whose alternative beliefs incorporate price predictability. Surprisingly, we find that
momentum trading is optimal for rebels who believe that the market is grossly mispriced.
     The empirical work of Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny (1994), Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993) and Gatev, Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (1999) documents profits from momentum
and contrarian strategies that appear to exploit predictable price movements. These profits
raise the question whether such momentum and contrarian strategies are, in fact, the optimal
trading strategies of agents who incorporate price predictability in their alternative beliefs
about the market process. The main contribution of our paper is to enable the empirical
detection of non-conformist beliefs about the possibility of market timing.
     Recent papers like DeLong et al. (1990), Barberis et al. (1997) and Hong and Stein
(1999) merely postulate the existence of irrational agents who behave as momentum traders.
However, alternative beliefs need not be irrational – Merton (1980), Summers (1986) and
Poterba and Summers (1989) have argued that it is extremely difficult to distinguish
statistically between randomness and certain forms of price-predictability.
     Alternative specifications of the price process were explored in the early work of Merton
(1971) who showed that an agent who believes in an exponential trend always invests more
in the single risky asset than the log-normal agent. The recent work of Wachter (1998) also
solves the portfolio-consumption problem for an alternative price dynamics in which the
expected return is mean-reverting. Cox and Ross (1976) and Lo and Wang (1995) examine
specifications that incorporate price predictability and show that they imply different option
valuations.
     In our model, the market is sequentially complete and the rebels remain price-takers at
all times. Most importantly, the rebels’ beliefs do not adapt as events unfold2. Presumably,
the rebels either cannot learn the self-fulfilling market beliefs, because it takes too long to
gather enough evidence to rationally change beliefs, or, alternatively, the rebels may
dogmatically consider the market consensus wrong.



       2
         Brennan and Cao (1996) have demonstrated that asymmetric information may lead to
rational momentum trading when information is revealed gradually in the market.

                                                 2
    We employ the Cox-Huang (1989) martingale approach to the terminal wealth portfolio
problem of the agent, to address a collection of issues about the optimal trading strategy
under the alternative beliefs that incorporate price predictability. What will the rebel do?
How well will the rebel do? Can we distinguish the rebel from the typical market
participant?
    Our main results show that the rebels act as momentum traders when they believe that
the current market price is far from the “right” price. In contrast, the conformists are
contrarian or momentum traders depending on whether they are more or less risk averse than
the representative agent. Thus, to an outsider, risk-averse rebels whose beliefs are far from
the market’s beliefs may appear as risk-tolerant conformists. The terminal wealth
distribution of rebels whose beliefs are sufficiently different from those of the market are
first-order dominated by certain conformist portfolios. But, in general, the properties of the
terminal wealth distribution under different beliefs suggest that it is difficult to detect wrong
beliefs from limited performance data. Finally, the long-run investment portfolios of both
conformists and rebels need not be heavily biased towards equities. Both the conformist’s
and the rebel’s long-run portfolios include a positive equity component, however equities
need not dominate the portfolio.
    Our conformist momentum results generalize and make empirically relevant the
qualitative momentum aspect of the early portfolio insurance work of Leland (1980) and
Brennan and Solanki (1981). Moreover, Leland (1980) considered the optimal portfolio
insurance for agents who have different estimates of the mean holding period return.
    Our paper differs from Leland (1980) in two major ways. First, we define alternative
beliefs more generally, as beliefs about market dynamics, i.e. the specification of the market
process. In contrast Leland defined differing expectations narrowly as different estimates of
the mean within the same static log-normal specification. Second, we obtain in closed form
empirically relevant results relating the number of shares traded to the form of the alternative
beliefs in reversion. Leland’s main stated objective is to characterize qualitatively the
investors who would demand generalized portfolio insurance, i.e. convex payoffs. Ultimately,
these two differences are necessary because they allow us to answer the following questions
that have not been addressed before.


                                                3
    Our main objective is to enable the empirical detection of alternative beliefs in reversion
and the feasibility of market timing. Our dynamic specification of the beliefs in reversion
allows the investment opportunity set to depend on the current market conditions. Hence the
more general dynamic definition of alternative beliefs is necessary in order to capture beliefs
in the possibility of opportunistic market timing. We relate this alternative dynamic
specification to observable trading patterns. In contrast, Leland (1980) emphasizes that his
model does not allow for market timing, while the Brennan and Solanki (1981) model has no
differences in expectations. These models remain within the static log-normal specification,
and there are no perceived changes in the investment opportunity set. On the other hand, we
are able to solve for the more general dynamic beliefs by using the Cox-Huang methodology,
which was not available at the time of the earlier models. Our results explain observed
counter-intuitive momentum trading with deviant beliefs in market reversion to a growth
trend, while remaining within the attractive rational paradigm of utility-maximizing agents.
The wrong beliefs are maintained because of market noise that prevents the timely
unambiguous learning of the proper dynamic specification.
    In section I we present the model. Section II analyzes the momentum and contrarian
appearance of the optimal trading for different beliefs about the market dynamics. In section
III we examine the performance of the strategies that are optimal under different beliefs.
Section IV explores the feasibility of empirically discriminating between different beliefs and
different risk aversion. Section V contains results on the long-run portfolios of the different
agents. The concluding discussion of the results is in section VI.


                                         I. The Model
A. Differential Beliefs
    We assume that there is a single risky asset, the market portfolio, and a riskless asset
with a constant risk-free rate r. The market is sequentially complete, with states distinguished
by the price P of the market. The representative agents arrive in overlapping generations.
There are two types of agents, who cannot affect the price individually. The market
conformists agree with the representative agents’ beliefs, but have different risk aversion.




                                               4
The rebels are price takers, who have non-market beliefs. The rebels are assumed not to
adapt to the self-fulfilling market beliefs.
     We assume the usual continuous time primitives. Let B denote a standard
one-dimensional Brownian motion living on Ω x [0,T], T @ Q, where (Ω ,              , - ) is a
complete probability space with the standard filtration       ={   t   : t Œ [0,T]}. All the
processes we consider are adapted to      . When there is no ambiguity we will suppress the
subscript for the current time t.


A.1 The Market
     The price of the risky market follows a log-normal Ito process

                                         dP
                                            ' µdt % σdB                                          (1)
                                          P

with constant drift µ and local volatility σ which implies that the probability density π M of
the price PT at time T conditional on price P at time t is



                                                 1          ln(PT/P) & (µ&σ2/2)τ
                                πM(PT|P) '              Φ                                        (2)
                                               P Tσ τ               σ τ



where and τ = T - t and Φ(z) ' 1/ 2π exp(&z 2/2) is the standard normal density.


A.2 The Rebels
     The rebel’s beliefs for the specification of the price dynamics incorporate return
predictability in the form of mean-reversion of the log-price. Specifically, the log-price p
follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process


                                        dp ' α(γ&p)dt % σdB                                      (3)


so that the price P = exp (p) follows the process

                                                 5
                                 dP          σ2
                                    ' α[(γ %    ) & lnP]dt % σdB                             (4)
                                  P          2α

The analysis is easily modified to a price process that is deflated and adjusted for a growth
trend. The conditional probability density π α of the price PT at time T conditional on price P
at time t is (see appendix I)



                                              1              lnPT&γ & (lnP&γ)e ατ
                        πα(PT|P) '                       Φ                                   (5)
                                     PTσ (1&e 2ατ)/2α          σ (1&e 2ατ)/2α




We assume that all agents agree on the value of σ and can differ only in their estimate of the
drift.


B. Arrow-Debreu Digital Options
     Since there is a single risky asset and the market is complete, the Arrow-Debreu
state-prices can be viewed as point-mass digital options, e.g. see Ingersoll (2000). Both the
market conformists and the rebels value these digitals using the same Black-Scholes formula.
The replicating portfolio for the digitals is the same for all agents.
     Let q[P;PT] denote the time t price of the Arrow-Debreu security that pays $1 if the price
(state) at time T is PT, conditional on price P at time t. Since there is a single risky asset in a
complete market, the Arrow-Debreu security is a digital option whose value is uniquely
determined as the discounted expected payoff under the risk-neutralized probability π r e.g.
see Cox and Ross (1976):



                                q[P;PT] ' e rτ πr(S|P)δP dS
                                               ‹S        T
                                                                                             (6)
                                           rτ
                                       ' e πr(PT|P)




                                                  6
where δx is the point mass at x. The expected payoff of the Arrow-Debreu security for state
        T




PT is just the conditional probability density of the price PT. Armed with this result, we
obtain the price of the Arrow-Debreu security for the two agents.


    Proposition 1. The market and the rebels’ valuation of the digital option is given by



                                               e rτ       ln(PT/P) & (r&σ2/2)τ
                                 q[P;PT] '             Φ                                     (7)
                                              P Tσ τ                 σ τ



which is the usual Black-Scholes conditional price density.


    Proof: from (6) using (2) with µ = r for the risk-neutralized density π r. °


    The digital options are replicated as follows.


    Proposition 2. The number of market units in the hedge portfolio for a digital option
q[P;PT] is

                                    jq[P;PT]
                       ∆q[P;P ] '
                             T
                                          jP
                                           ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ       ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ       (8)
                                       rτ
                                 ' e                            Φ
                                              PTPσ3 τ3                     σ τ


    Proof: in appendix I. °


C. The Agent’s Intertemporal Problem
    All agents solve their portfolio problems in terms of Arrow-Debreu state-prices (see
Cox-Huang (1989) or its exposition in Merton (1990). Since the market is complete, if the
agent wants a security with payoffs schedule {c(PT ,T)}, this security can be constructed from
Arrow-Debreu securities, and has price

                                                  7
                                             Q
                               S(t;c) '         c(P ,T)q[P;PT]dPTdT                           (9)
                                          ‹t ‹PT T

    In a sequentially complete market, each agent can achieve the optimum consumption
schedule c for the agent's lifetime utility maximization.

                                            Q
                               maxc(.)               U[c(PT,T)]π(P T|P)dPTdt
                                          ‹t0 ‹PT
                                                                                              (10)
                                                          s.t.
                                                 Q
                                   W(t0)A             c(P T,T)q[P;PT]dP Tdt
                                            ‹t0 ‹PT

                                   c(PT,T)A0 for all P and 0@T@Q



where π(PT| P) is the agent's subjective transition probability density of the price of the
market. Note that the budget constraint is computed with the market valuation for the
Arrow-Debreu securities q[P;PT].
    For any agent, the optimum consumption c* is given by


                                                                 1   q[P;P T]
                                         c (PT,T) ' Uc [λ                       ]            (11)
                                                                      π(P T|P)

where the constant λ is found from

                                             Q         1    q[P;PT]
                               W(t0) '               UC [λ               ]q[P;P T]dPTdt       (12)
                                          ‹t0 ‹PT            π(PT|P)

Rewriting (11) as

                                                                 π(P T|P)
                                         Uc [c (PT,T)]                     ' λ               (13)
                                                                 q[P;P T]




                                                      8
we see that the risk averse agent equalizes across states the expected return π(PT| P )/q[P;PT]
in state PT weighted by the marginal utility in that state.
    The agent's demand for each Arrow-Debreu security q[P;PT] is such as to achieve the
optimal consumption c*(PT ,T). Hence the optimum digital options portfolio D*q[P;PT] is
exactly c*(PT ,T). Because their subjective specification is not log-normal, the rebels believe
that the expected return πα(PT|P)/q[P;PT] of the Arrow-Debreu security is different from the
market expected return πM(PT|P)/q[P;PT]. Therefore, the digital options portfolio D*q[P;PT]
that is optimal for the rebels is different from that of the market conformists.
    Since the market is sequentially complete, an agent replicates the Arrow-Debreu security
q[P;PT] by holding a number of market units, nq , equal to the option's delta ∆ q[P;PT]

                                                                    jq[P;PT]
                                          nq ' ∆q[P;P ] '                                  (14)
                                                            T
                                                                      jP

Hence, the agent's optimal total demand n for the stock at time t is



                                      Q       
                             n '          Dq[P0;PT]∆q[P;P ]dPTdT
                                    ‹t ‹PT                      T


                                      Q          1    q[P0;PT] jq[P;PT]                    (15)
                                '            Uc [λ             ]         dPTdT
                                    ‹t ‹PT             π(PT|P)     jP




Note that the option's delta ∆ q[P;PT] is the same for both agents even though the conditional
price density πα(PT|P) of the rebels is different from the market conformist's conditional price
density πM(PT|P). The agents effectively perceive different investment opportunity sets.
    The wealth process of the agent is given by

                                             Q          
                               W(t) '                 Dq[P0;PT]q[P;PT]dPTdT                 (16)
                                          ‹t ‹PT




                                                       9
The time t wealth for the rebels is different from the market conformist’s wealth, because
their optimum digital options portfolios D* are different. As long as the market is
sequentially but not statically complete, there are two possibilities. Either the rebels do not
know that they are wrong and assume that the market is mean-reverting, or the rebels know
the market’s log-normal beliefs and dogmatically presume that the market is wrong.


                     II. Optimal Momentum and Contrarian Trading
     In order to determine whether an agent's demand for the market appears like momentum
or contrarian trading, we focus on the number of physical units of the market held rather than
the wealth fraction, or the dollar amount invested in the market. While a pristine economic
definition of momentum would isolate the wealth effect, we note that in general only returns
and volume are empirically observable, so that the following definitions are more empirically
relevant.


     Definition 1: An agent is a contrarian trader if the optimal number n(t) of market units
held satisfies

                                               jn
                                                  < 0                                      (17)
                                               jP

     Ceteris paribus, an increase in the price causes a decrease in the number of market units
held. In other words, the agent buys low and sells high.


     Definition 2: An agent is a momentum trader if the optimal number n(t) of market units
held satisfies

                                               jn
                                                  > 0                                      (18)
                                               jP

     Ceteris paribus, an increase in the price causes an increase in the number of market units
held. In other words, the agent buys high and sells low.



                                               10
    Definition 3: An agent is a momentum trader relative to the market if the fraction w of
the agent’s current wealth that is invested in the market satisfies

                                                   jw   jwM
                                                      >                                         (19)
                                                   jP    jP

where wM is the fraction of the conformist’s current wealth invested in the market.
Conversely, an agent is a contrarian relative to the market if

                                                   jw   jwM
                                                      <                                         (20)
                                                   jP    jP

    Ceteris paribus, a price increase implies that the exposure change, net of the market
conformist’s exposure change, is positive for the relative momentum trader and negative for
the relative contrarian. In other words, after a price increase, the relative contrarians decrease
their excess exposure, while the relative momentum traders increase it.


    The optimal market position at time t is exactly the number n(t) of market units that are
necessary in order to replicate all digital options positions that are optimal for the agent.
Thus, to analyze the optimal trading of the agent, we translate the optimum demand schedule
for digital options into optimum demand for market units. The hedge ratio ∆ q[P;PT] for the
digital option given in Proposition 2, together with the optimal demand schedule {D*q[Po;PT] }    ]




for digital options, determine the number n of market units demanded by each agent at time t:



                                               
                                n(t) '      Dq[P0;PT]∆q[P;P ]dPT                                (21)
                                         ‹PT              T




Agents with different beliefs have different optimal demand schedules D*q[Po;PT] and
consequently have different demands for market units.
    For simplicity, we will assume that each agent solves a terminal wealth problem with
                                                               W 1η
time horizon T and power utility of terminal wealth, U[W] '          .
                                                               1&η
                                                   11
A. The Contrarian Conformists
     In equilibrium, a representative agent holding the market of risky assets has relative risk
aversion η* that satisfies

                                              µ&r
                                       η '                                                     (22)
                                              σ2

When agents conform to the market beliefs, we specialize (11) and (12) to get


     Proposition 3. The market conformist’s optimum demand schedule, D*M (PT), for
digital options is given by

                                                             η
                                                             η
                                       DM(PT) ' m          PT                                   (23)
where

                                                          η             η      η σ2
                                                                  (1      )(r       )(Tt)
                                                          η              η       η 2
                                       m ' Wt P                e                                (24)


     Proof: in appendix II. œ


     Substituting in (21) the optimal demand schedule D*M for digital options and ∆ q[P;PT]
from Proposition 2 , we obtain the following


     Proposition 4. The market conformist demands nM(t) units of the market, where

                                                  η W
                                       nM(t) '                                                  (25)
                                                  η P

where η*/η is the constant fraction of current wealth invested in the market.


     Proof: see appendix II. œ




                                                 12
    The individual conformists who are less risk-averse than the representative agent lever
up their portfolios, borrowing from those conformists who are more risk-averse than the
representative agent. The conformist's demand does not depend on the planning horizon T.
    Now we are ready to characterize the trading of the market conformist.


    Theorem 1: Market conformists who are more risk-averse than the representative agent
are contrarian. Conversely, conformists who are more risk-tolerant than the representative
agent are momentum traders.
    Proof:
    Writing the current wealth as a function of the current price, we have

                               jnM(W(P),P)              jn M jW       jnM
                                                '                 %                      (26)
                                     jP                 jW jP         jP

where the first term is the wealth effect and the second term is a substitution effect. From
proposition 4, we have


                                         jnM     η W
                                               ' &
                                          jP      η P2
                                                                                         (27)
                                         jnM   η 1
                                             '
                                         jW    η P


Now, from appendix II.4 we have

                                         jW   η W
                                            '                                            (28)
                                         jP   η P

Substituting (28) and (27) into (26) and using (25) we obtain

                                               2
                               jnM        η        W         η W
                                     '                    &
                                jP        η         P2        η P2
                                                                                         (29)
                                                    η W
                                     ' (η& η)
                                                     η2 P 2
Hence


                                                   13
                                         jnM >       < 
                                               0 z η   η                                   (30)
                                         jP <        >

This is the result we wanted to prove. œ


     The result is driven by the balance between the wealth and the substitution effects. The
substitution effect is always negative, with a higher price implying lower holding of the
market. However, a higher market price also implies higher wealth and the agent has to buy
extra units of the market in order to maintain the constant fraction of current wealth invested
in the market. The two effects offset each other exactly for the conformist whose risk
aversion is equal to that of the representative agent. Conformists who are more risk-tolerant
than the representative agent maintain higher-than-representative fraction of wealth invested
in the market and require more units than the representative agent. Conversely, the
substitution effect dominates the wealth effect when the conformists are more risk-averse
than the representative agent. The lesson from this result is that the appearance of the
conformists as momentum or contrarian traders is driven exclusively by risk-aversion. As we
will see shortly, this is not the case for the deviant rebels.
     As a somewhat wistful aside, the risk-aversion explanation of conformist momentum
trading is consistent with the recent phenomenon of momentum day-trading in risky Internet
stocks. According to theorem 1, only conformists with high risk tolerance would rationally
engage in the day-trading practices.


B. The Momentum Rebels
     The rebels’ demand schedules for digital options and for market units differ from those
of the market conformists. We have the following


     Proposition 5. The rebel’s optimum demand schedule D*α for digital options is


                                                                q lnP T  s
                                        Dα (PT;λα(t)) ' k PT                               (31)
where



                                                 14
                                    θ(1η) (LQ)2
                             rτ
                 θ&(1&η)           θ(1η) 2ησ2τ              θ&1             θL&Q
     k ' Wt              e                          , q ' &           , s '
                                                                 2
                    η                                         2ησ τ           ησ2τ

                                                                                       (32)
     Q ' lnP%(r&σ2/2)τ, L ' γ%(lnP&γ)e ατ, τ ' T&t, θ ' 2ατ/(1&e 2ατ) .


     Proof: in appendix III. œ


     Similarly, the rebels’ demand for market units is determined by their different beliefs.


     Proposition 6. The rebel has optimum demand for the risky asset given by

                                                                      W
                                            nα ' (a lnP % b)                                  (33)
                                                                      P
where

                                 1&e ατ                                  (r&σ2/2)τ
                a ' &                          , b ' a[g&γ] , g '                             (34)
                         [1&(1&η)/θ]σ2τ                                    1&e ατ



     Proof: in appendix III. œ


     Observe that unlike the conformist, the fraction wα = a ln P + b of the rebel’s wealth that
is invested in the market, is a function of the current price P. Intuitively, the current price
level determines the expected adjustment of the price towards the “right” level, and hence the
expected return over the holding period. In other words, the rebels’ perceived investment
opportunity set depends on the price, as the market may appear to be under- or over-priced
relative to the “right” price.


     In general, the rebels’ deviant beliefs shape their unusual trading strategy.




                                                      15
    Theorem 2: The rebels are momentum traders when they believe the market is grossly
mispriced.
    Proof:
    Writing the wealth and substitution effects as before and using proposition 6, we have


                                  jnα(W(P),P)           jnα jW          jnα
                                                    '               %
                                          jP            jW jP            jP
                                                                                                   (35)
                                                1    jW    jw  w
                                              '   wα    % [ α & α ]W
                                                P    jP    jP   P


where wα is the fraction of the rebel’s wealth that is invested in the market. From Appendix
III.4, we have

                                              jW   η W
                                                 '                                                 (36)
                                              jP   η P
so that

                                  jnα          1 wα          jwα
                                          '         (wα&1) %     W                                 (37)
                                  jP           P P           jP

    The sign of jnα/jP is determined by the expression in the parentheses. Since we are
interested in the sign of jnα/jP as a function of the rebel’s beliefs , we observe that


                                              wα(γ) ' a[(p&γ) % g]
                                                   jwα       a                                     (38)
                                                       (γ) '
                                                   jP        P


                              θ(1&e ατ)                 (r&σ2/2)τ
where p ' lnP , a ' &                           , g '                   . Now we rewrite (37) as
                           [θ&(1&η)]σ2τ                   1&e ατ


                        jnα       aW
                              '           [ ap 2 % [2a(g&γ)&1]p % a(g&γ)2&(g&γ)%1 ]                (39)
                        jP        P   2



The quadratic equation in the brackets always has two real roots, pL and pH, and we have

                                                    16
                                jnα
                                      < 0 z pL < p < p H
                                jP
                                                                                            (40)
                                jnα
                                      > 0 z p < pL or p > p H
                                jP


    When the rebels believe that the current mispricing is large, they act as momentum
traders. Note that this behavior does not depend on the risk aversion of the rebels.


                                                œ


    The properties of jnα/jP are illustrated in Figure 1, which shows how the partial
derivative jnα/jP, with the price level fixed at P = 50 at time t = 0.5, varies with different
beliefs about the “right” price level exp(γ) and with risk aversion. The three lines correspond
to rebels’ risk aversion that is higher, equal to and lower than the risk aversion of the
representative conformist. The most risk-tolerant rebels have the largest deviations.


                                             Figure 1


    The figure reveals the characteristic behavior of the derivative – it is positive when the
rebels believe that the “right” price exp(γ) is much higher or lower than the current price, and
it is negative for a range of values close to the current price. This behavior is independent of
the risk aversion of the agent, but is driven by the deviant beliefs of the rebel.
    The above result is rather surprising – the optimal trading for the rebels who believe that
the market is grossly mispriced is to buy after the price went up, or to sell after it went down!
Moreover, certain risk-averse rebels trade on the other side of equally risk-averse market
conformists. To better understand the rationale of this optimal momentum trading, consider
the fraction of the rebel’s current wealth that is invested in the market. Figure 2 shows this
fraction for the three rebels considered above, as their beliefs about the “right” price vary.


                                             Figure 2



                                                17
     Observe that when the rebels believe that the market is currently overpriced they short it.
Conversely, the rebels increase their market exposure when they believe that the “right” price
is above the current price. This behavior is usually characterized as value investing.
Intuitively, the rebels’ beliefs in mean-reversion imply that the investment opportunity set is
changing as the price moves. Had they believed in the log-normal market consensus, the
rebels would have maintained their market exposure constant. The following theorem
captures this distinction.


     Theorem 3: The rebels are contrarian relative to the market conformists.
     Proof:
     We obtain from (33) above

                                       jwα(t)        a       jwM(t)
                                                '      < 0 '                               (41)
                                         jP          P        jP



     where we are using the same notation. This is the result we wanted to prove. °


     Notice that jwα/jP does not depend on the rebel’s beliefs about the “right” price exp(γ).
How contrarian relative to the market the rebels appear depends only on their risk aversion.
     The above results show that the rebels can be momentum traders, while they are
contrarian relative to the market. This behavior is due to a dominant wealth effect. As the
current price moves away from the “right” price, the rebels act as relative contrarians,
increasing their (possibly negative) excess exposure. However, they also believe that they are
wealthier, because of the higher expected return from the expected price reversion. As a
result, the exposure increase from the price change is more than the optimal one and the
rebels trade market units as momentum traders.
     We are now ready to compare the performance of the rebel’s and the conformist’s
strategies. In the next section we consider the external observer-econometrician, who
attempts to discriminate empirically between the agents’ beliefs based on their performance.




                                                18
                    III. Performance of the Rebels and the Conformists
    Clearly, with their incorrect beliefs, the rebels cannot do as well as the market
conformist. To examine the difference in performance, we will compare the wealth of the two
types of agents in different states, as well as their terminal wealth distributions.


A. Wealth in Different States
    The wealth of an agent at the terminal date is equal to the number of digital options held
for the realized market state. Therefore, the terminal wealth as a function of the state is just
the agent’s demand schedule for digital options. More generally, we can solve for the current
wealth in different states P at time t @T.
    Proposition 7: The conformist’s wealth at time t @T is

                                                                      η
                                                                     η
                                        WM(P)         ' mt P                               (42)
where

                                                 η             η      η σ2
                                                         (1      )(r       )(tt0)
                                                 η              η       η 2
                                mt ' W0 P0            e                                    (43)


Proof: in appendix II. œ


    We pointed out before that the critical parameter of the conformist’s trading program is
the risk aversion. Consequently we expect the conformist's performance to show strong
dependence on risk-aversion. Figure 3 shows the terminal wealth of three conformists, who
have different risk-aversion parameters.


                                       Figure 3


    Since risk-tolerant conformists have more market exposure than risk-averse ones, a
market appreciation benefits them more ex-post and a market decline hurts them more.
   Consider now the rebel’s current wealth as a function of the state.



                                                      19
    Proposition 8: The rebel’s wealth at time t @T is


                                                                     a t lnP  βt
                                          Wα (P) ' κ P                                                    (44)
where

                         θ0&1             θ0L0&Q0&(θ0&1)τ
                at ' &           , βt '                                     , νt ' ησ2τ0%(θ0&1)σ2τ
                          2νt                             νt
                                                                         2              2     2
                                                              (rσ2/2)2 σ [θ0L0Q0η(rσ /2)τ]            (45)
                                W0        ν0           [ r                                    ](tt0)
                                                                 σ 2             ν0νt
                   κ '                             e
                          a lnP  β       νt
                         P0 0 0 0



    Proof: in appendix III. œ


    We emphasized before the key role that the rebels’ beliefs play in their trading. Figure 4
shows the terminal wealth of four rebels, who have the same risk-aversion, but differ in their
beliefs about the market. First, there are two types of rebels according to their beliefs about
the “right” log-price level. Rebels of the first type believe that the “right” price is lower than
the current price, so that the market is currently overpriced. The other type believes that the
market is currently underpriced. The second aspect of the rebels’ beliefs is the speed of the
expected log-price correction, i.e. the reversion horizon. We consider rebels who either
believe in fast, or in slow reversion, with expected log-price reversion over 1 and 5 years
respectively.
                                                       Figure 4


    The striking feature of the rebel's beliefs is the sharp concentration of maximum wealth
around the state corresponding to the “right” price level exp(γ). Intuitively, the path
realizations that are more consistent with reversion beliefs are more profitable for the rebels,
whose trading program is predicated on the highest likelihood of these paths. The subjective
speed of reversion also has a dramatic effect. When the rebels believe in faster reversion,
they bet more aggressively on any perceived mispricing and their wealth has higher peak, and
is more concentrated around the “right” price level.


                                                          20
    Figures 3 and 4 also highlight the crucial qualitative difference between the wealth of the
two types of agents in different states. While the conformist's wealth is monotonely
increasing in the price, the rebel's wealth reaches a global maximum at some finite price, and
then decreases as the price-state increases. Intuitively, when the log-price is above the “right”
reversion level, the rebel believes that further increases are less likely. Accordingly, when
the price keeps rising further, the rebels sell more of the market, realizing losses and
consequently their terminal wealth is lower in these high market states. We now turn to the
terminal wealth distributions of the two agents.


B. Wealth Distributions
    Since PT/Pt is log-normally distributed, we can compute the distribution of wealth from
the terminal wealth functions in the previous section. The terminal wealth density for the
conformist has analytical representation, but the inversion of the rebel's wealth in different
states had to be carried out numerically, as described below.
    Proposition 9: The market conformist’s terminal wealth density is given by

                                                   1
                                1          ln[WM (x)/P]&(µ&σ2/2)(T&t)
                fW    (x) '            Φ                                                         (46)
                  M(PT)
                              xσ T&t                              σ T&t

where                                                    η              η σ2               η
                                                   (1           )(r         )(Tt)
                                1                       η             η 2            x    η
                               WM (x)      ' P e                                                 (47)
                                                                                       Wt

    Proof: see appendix II. œ


    The properties of the wealth density are inherited from the properties of the demand
schedule for digital options. Figure 5 shows the wealth densities for the three conformists
from Figure 3, who differ only in their risk aversion.




                                              Figure 5



                                                   21
    The more risk-tolerant conformists have a density of terminal wealth which is less
concentrated, with the left-most peak and the fattest right tail. Intuitively, investing with
higher risk-tolerance involves more leverage and a higher probability of losses – the left-
most peak location, as well as a greater probability of high terminal wealth outcomes, as
reflected in the fattest right tail. Conversely, the most risk-averse conformists are most
concentrated, with the right-most peak location and the thinnest right tail. With the lowest
leverage, they are less likely to incur large losses, or gains. Now, let us consider the rebels.


    Proposition 10: The rebel's wealth distribution is given by

                          1     1
     fW (P )(x) ' fP [Wα (x)]Wα (x)                                                         (48)
       α   T        T
                                                              1
                                  1                       ln(Wα (x)/P)&(µ&σ2/2)(T&t)
               '                                     Φ
                     1
                   Wα (x)σ T&t W 'α(PT)|P W 1(x)                  σ T&t
                                           T    α




where Wα is given in (44).


    Proof: see appendix III. œ


    Consider the wealth densities of rebels who have different beliefs. Figure 6 shows the
densities of the four rebels considered before (Figure 4), who believe in slow and fast
reversion, and in a current under- and over-pricing respectively.


                                               Figure 6


    The densities for the two believers in slow reversion are concentrated over the shorter
intervals to the right. The beliefs in long-term reversion imply that there are smaller bets on
the unlikely short-term market collapse, so the rebels have small probability of ruin. Of these
two rebels, the one who believes in current underpricing has the higher probability of
achieving higher wealth. Intuitively, the slow upward reversion beliefs are most reasonable
from the market’s perspective.


                                                    22
    Conversely, rebels who believe in short-term reversion have densities that are more
dispersed and U-shaped, with high probability of ruin. Intuitively, the far-fetched beliefs lead
to betting on highly-unlikely outcomes, and are characterized by more dispersed densities.
The rebels who believe in current overpricing are most dispersed, as their heavy betting on
near-term collapse implies higher wealth in that unlikely outcome. These rebels’ beliefs are
the most unreasonable from the market perspective. In the likely event of a market rally,
their bets against the market are the largest so that they are penalized by the highest
probability of ruin. Simply put, the rebels who believe in short-term reversion appear much
less risk-averse than the ones who believe in long-term reversion.
    Figure 6 also highlights the crucial qualitative difference between the terminal wealth
densities of the conformists and the rebels. This difference can be better understood in
conjunction with the hump-shaped rebel's wealth in different states in Figure 4. As the
non-monotone function Wα * increases, it reaches a global maximum, so that it has a non-
empty inverse function only over a finite interval. Using this inverse to compute the
probability density for the terminal wealth implies that the density is discontinuous at the
finite maximum wealth attainable by the rebel, jumping to zero after its maximum value.
Thus, the rebel’s wealth density is compactly supported. In contrast, the market conformist
can reach an arbitrarily large wealth with non-zero probability.
    We now compare the agents’ performance. Is it always the case that the conformist has,
in a meaningful way, better risk-adjusted performance? Our main result is stated in the
following theorem.


    Theorem 4: Market conformists’ terminal wealth distributions do not first-order
stochastically dominate the rebels’ terminal wealth distributions for all parameter classes, but
there are ranges for which the market conformist’s distribution does first-order stochastically
dominate the rebel's distribution.
    Proof:
    The easiest way to prove the theorem is to exhibit one case for each scenario. Figure 7
shows the two cases considered in the theorem.




                                               23
                                            Figure 7


    The first panel shows that rebels who believe in long-term market reversion to a higher
level are not dominated by risk-averse conformists, nor vice versa. Intuitively, the rebels’
beliefs in this case are not so far-fetched from the market perspective, so that their trading
strategy is predicated on the high likelihood of paths whose realization is in fact quite
probable according to the market consensus distribution.
    The second panel shows that the distribution of a risk-tolerant conformists dominates the
distribution of fatalist rebels who believe that the market will tank fairly soon. Intuitively, as
the market is likely to rise, the risk-tolerant conformist’s bet on the chance for large gains is
better aligned with the probable market paths than the doomsday rebel strategy that only pays
off in the highly unlikely event of an imminent market crash.
                                                œ


                      IV. Different Beliefs or Different Risk Aversion?
    Based on performance data alone, can econometricians determine whether an agent acted
as a market conformist or a deviant rebel? To answer this, we consider some examples of
conformist and rebel terminal wealth densities.


    Figure 8 shows the densities of a risk-tolerant conformist and of a rebel who believes in
short-term reversion to a much lower market level. The densities of the two agents are
“close” over the most relevant range of terminal wealth outcomes.


                                            Figure 8


    Distinguishing between the two distributions is clearly difficult in the absence of
extreme observations, but the qualitative difference between the two densities has an intuitive
economic explanation. The conformists with low risk-aversion are likely to have losses if
the market falls, but since they optimize based on the correct process, they cannot be


                                                24
bankrupt. If the market takes-off, their gains potential is unlimited. Contrast this with the
pessimistic rebels, whose losses mount without limit as the market price increases towards
infinity, while in the unlikely event of a market collapse, the fatalists have limited rewards.
    To recapitulate, although the densities of the two agents are close, the same wealth
outcome for the agents occurs in exactly the opposite market scenario realizations. This
analysis suggests that very bearish rebels should fare poorly in good times, so that a time-
series regression methodology may uncover their inadequate beliefs.
    Figure 9 shows another case of similar-shaped densities. The densities of a conformist
with high risk aversion and a rebel who believes in long-term upward reversion essentially
overlap over the most probable states.


                                            Figure 9


    The two densities are qualitatively different. The conformist density has the feel of the
underlying log-normal density, with infinite right tail and vanishing probability of ruin. The
rebel density is compactly-supported, with the characteristic jump driven by the bounded
maximum wealth. In this case, distinguishing between the two agent types with high
confidence is likely to be infeasible with regression methods and limited data.
    In general, the parameters of the rebel’s beliefs affect the shape of the implied terminal
wealth density. The density always retains its qualitative features – the compact support and
the jump to zero – which are the result of the hump-shaped function for the wealth in
different states. However, the parameters affect the location of the peak of the hump, as well
as the hump dispersion. When the hump is massed around the outcomes which are more
likely to occur for the log-normal market density, the rebel’s beliefs appear more reasonable
from the market perspective. Accordingly, the rebel’s terminal wealth density overlaps more
with the conformist’s density, and the rebel’s distribution is not dominated by the
conformist’s distribution. Intuitively, rebels whose beliefs are not unreasonable from the
market perspective, invest in a way which makes more sense to the conformist. The above
examples are summarized in the following




                                               25
    Observation: When the rebels’ beliefs are not unreasonable from the market’s
perspective, their terminal wealth densities are not very different from the market
conformists’ terminal wealth densities.


    The lesson from this section presents a challenge for the empiricist. In the absence of
extreme observations beyond the compact support of the rebel’s terminal wealth density, an
econometrician may not be able to distinguish the agents' beliefs using only performance
data. Not knowing the risk aversion of the agents further complicates the problem.


                                V. Investing for the Long Run
    The common wisdom appears to be that agents who invest for the long run should hold
portfolios that are heavily biased towards equities. This clearly depends on preferences and,
more generally speaking, the optimal long-run investment is a function of what the agent
believes. Agents who hold plausible beliefs have optimal long-run portfolio that need not be
dominated by equities.
    In this section we explore the limiting case of our previous results, as the investment
horizon increases, i.e. letting terminal date T S Q.


A. The Conformists
    A closer inspection of Proposition 4 reveals the well-known result that in the absence of
changes in the investment opportunity set, the conformist’s fractional investment in the
market does not depend on the terminal date T. The fractional exposure to the market, ξM, is
constant,

                                              η
                                       ξM '                                                (49)
                                              η

    Increasing the investment horizon T S Q does not affect the conformist’s optimal
exposure to the market. Given an opportunity set (µ, σ, r), the conformist’s market exposure
is completely determined by the risk aversion parameter η.




                                               26
B. The Rebels
    To find out how the long-term investment horizon affects the rebel’s fractional
investment in the market, we let τ S Q in Proposition 6. The market exposure ξα is



                                                     1   r
                                ξα ' a lnP % b S       &                                    (50)
                                                     2   σ2

where

                  1&e ατ                   γ(1&e ατ)&(r&σ2/2)τ       1   r
     a ' &                     S 0 , b '                           S     &                  (51)
              [1&(1&η)/θ]σ2τ                   [1&(1&η)/θ]σ2τ          2   σ2



    Figure 10 illustrates the effect of increasing the time horizon τ S Q on the fraction of
the wealth invested in the market, for the four rebels with different beliefs that we considered
in the previous sections.




                                            Figure 10


    Depending on whether they believe that the market is underpriced or overpriced, the
rebels are long or short the market when the holding period is short. However, as we increase
the investment horizon, the market exposure of all agents converges towards a fixed positive
value. Intuitively, as the investment horizon increases, the rebels find that the market is more
likely to revert to its intrinsic growth rate, which has a fixed risk-return tradeoff. The rebel’s
long-run portfolio balances this long-run risk-return tradeoff and the riskless investment
according to the rebel’s risk aversion.
    Observe that the long-run portfolio is not dominated by equities, in the sense that the
equity exposure is less than 0.5. Both the conformist’s and the rebel’s long-run portfolios
include a positive equity component, but equities need not dominate even the very long-term
investment portfolio.


                                                27
                                        VI. Conclusion
    In this paper, we have developed a model of optimal investment under different beliefs
in a noisy market. We have considered rebels who do not conform to the market beliefs. We
assumed that instead of using the market’s log-normal specification for the market price, the
rebels believe in log-price reversion towards a “right” level. This setup can be reversed – we
could posit log-price reversion of the market beliefs, while the non-conformist rebels would
believe in a deviant log-normal specification. The analytical results that we have developed
are sufficient to consider the 2 x 2 scenario table, which has log-normal or log-reverting,
conformists or rebels. First, we have characterized the trading behavior of the agents, which
is the same in either scenario. Next, the investment performance is symmetric, with market
conformist wealth distributions that can dominate the terminal wealth distributions of rebel
types, whose beliefs are far-fetched from the market perspective. Finally, the task of
empirically distinguishing certain agents’ beliefs using performance results alone, remains
tenuous in all scenarios.
    Focusing on the intuitive case of a log-normal market and a log-reverting rebel, our main
conclusions are as follows. First, momentum trading is rational for rebels, who believe that
the market is grossly mispriced. These rebels take the opposite side, trading with contrarian
risk-averse conformists. Momentum trading is also optimal for the market conformists with
high risk tolerance. These results are rather surprising, because momentum trading has long
appeared counter-intuitive in a utility-maximization context. These optimal momentum
strategies can be rationalized by interpreting the rebels as value investors, who buy in a
subjectively underpriced market and sell when they believe the market is overpriced. On the
other hand, the conformists’ momentum is optimal when their risk aversion is higher than the
risk aversion of the representative agent.
    The performance of the conformists compares favorably to that of the rebels in the
following sense. For a given utility function, the terminal wealth densities of the conformists
are superior to the densities of the rebels. Moreover, if the rebel’s beliefs are far-fetched
from the market perspective, e.g. when a market crash is anticipated in the near future, the
wealth distribution of risk-tolerant conformists first-order dominates the rebel’s terminal
wealth distribution.

                                               28
    The wealth densities of the conformists and the rebels are qualitatively different. The
investment program which is optimal given the rebel’s subjective beliefs in log-reversion
allows for a limited upside potential. The bounded maximum terminal wealth implies that
the rebels are characterized by a compactly-supported wealth density function.
    Our results provide a theoretical foundation for the difficulties that lay in store for the
econometrician attempting to distinguish agent types using only limited performance data.
Consider, for example, the implications for the measurement of investment fund
performance. Suppose that different beliefs are the result of different use of imperfect public
information, e.g. asset allocation based on subjective interpretation of news about the global
economy, or stock-picking based on proprietary financial analysis. Our results indicate that
in the absence of more detailed information, the plausible translation of performance into
superior ability is not feasible. Rebels whose beliefs are more reasonable from the market
perspective usually appear as risk-averse conformists, while rebels with far-fetched beliefs
may attempt to pose as conformists with high risk-tolerance.




                                               29
                                       Appendix I: The Basics
1. The α-density
    Writing the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for p as

                                                           σ2 2αt
                                 p(t) ' γ % e αtB[           (e &1)]
                                                           2α

we obtain the conditional probability density

                                               1                    pT&γ&(p&γ)e ατ
                       πα(pT|p;τ) '                             Φ
                                        σ (1&e 2ατ)/2α             σ (1&e 2ατ)/2α



Hence, P = exp(p) is lognormally distributed as

                                                   1                    lnPT&γ&(lnP&γ)e ατ
                       πα(PT|P;τ) '                                 Φ
                                         PTσ (1&e 2ατ)/2α                  σ (1&e 2ατ)/2α



                                                   œ


2. Digital Options
    The Arrow-Debreu security's hedge ratio is



                                    jq[P;PT]
                       ∆q[P;P ] '
                             T
                                          jP
                                       rτ
                                           ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ               ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ
                                 ' e                                    Φ
                                                       3    3                      σ τ
                                              PTPσ τ



    Set Q ' lnP%(r&σ2/2)τ and pT ' lnPT , so that dpT ' dPT/PT . For the number n(t) of
units of the risky asset in the hedge portfolio, it follows from the above that



                                                   30
               n(t) ' ∆q[P;P ]dPT
                                   T


                          rτ
                              ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ                                        ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ
                   ' e                                                          Φ                                              dPT
                                           PTPσ3 τ3                                                      σ τ
                                                                   2
                             p &[lnP%(r&σ
                          rτ T
                                                                       /2)τ]             pT&[lnP%(r&σ2/2)τ]
                   ' e                                                          Φ                                               dpT
                                                      3       3                                           σ τ
                                             Pσ τ
                               e rτ                                                [pT&Q]2
                   '                             (pT&Q)exp &                                             dpT
                         P 2πσ τ       3     3                                           2σ2τ



                                                                                œ


                                           Appendix II: The Conformists
1. The Constant λM(t)
                                   µ&r                            µ&r                                                                       σ2
    Setting τ ' T&t, a '                     , b '                             [2lnP%(µ%r&σ2)τ] , Q ' lnP%(r&                                  )τ and
                                   ησ2                            2ησ2                                                                      2

pT ' lnPT , and using the defining expression for DM*, we obtain, for 0 @ t < T

                                                  
                         Wt '               DM(PT;λM(t))q[P;PT]dPT
                                       ‹PT
                                                                                                                2
                                                              1                         1 [µr][2ln(PT/P)(µrσ )τ]
                                                          
                                                                  e   rτ
                                                                                Q       η                2                            pT&Q
                          ' (λM(t)e rτ)                      η
                                                                                    e                 2σ
                                                                                                                              Φ               dpT
                                                                  σ τ ‹Q                                                              σ τ
                                                              1
                                                 rτ
                                                          
                                                              η   e rτb           Q                          pT&Q
                          ' (λM(t)e                    )                                exp(apT)Φ                           dpT
                                                                   σ τ ‹Q                                      σ τ
so that
                             1
                         rτ η                   e rτb                   Q                    (pT&Q)2
               (λM(t)e     )       '                                           exp apT&                              dpT
                                                                      ‹Q                               2σ2τ
                                           Wt 2πσ2τ
                                                                                           2
                                           e rτb                     Q                 pT &2(Q%aσ2τ)pT%Q 2
                               '                                           exp &                                                      dpT
                                           2πWtσ τ ‹Q                                                    2σ2τ
                                                                                    a 2σ2τ
                               ' e rτbWtexp aQ%
                                                                                       2
                                                       µr                                     µr                 σ2      (µr)2
                                           rτ                   [2lnP(µrσ2)τ]                     [lnP(r      )τ]        τ
                                       e               2ησ    2
                                                                                               ησ   2              2       2η2σ2
                               '           e
                                        Wt

                                                                                31
                                                                (1η)(µr)2
                                                      rτ                         τ
                                              e                       2η2σ2
                                            '     e
                                               Wt
and hence

                                                  1                           1η     (µr)2
                                                                                [r        ]τ
                                                  η                            η       2ησ2
                                     λM(t)            ' Wt e


                                                                      œ


2. Demand for Digital Options
    For the market conformist, the optimum demand schedule DM* for digital options
q[P;PT] with strike price PT at time T is given by


                                                                          ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ
                                                                Φ                                            1
                                                                                                         
                                             rτ                                      σ τ                   η
               DM(PT;λM(t))      ' {e              λM(t)                                             }
                                                                       ln(PT/P)&(µ&σ2/2)τ
                                                                Φ
                                                                                       σ τ
                                                          (1η)(µr)2
                                                    rτ                       τ
                                                                2η2σ2                  µ&r               µ%r&σ2
                                 ' Wt e                                        exp            [lnPT/P&          τ]
                                                                                        ησ2                2
                                                                µr           µr      µr
                                                      PT                  (r     )(1     )τ
                                                                ησ2           2η       ησ2
                                 ' Wt                                 e
                                                      P



3. Demand for the Risky Asset
                   µ&r          1                σ2
    Set       a L        , A L      , Q ' lnP%(r& )τ , B ' Q%aσ2τ , C ' Q 2
                    ησ2        2σ2τ              2
                                µr               µr    σ2
                          rτ            {lnP[       r ]τ}
                                ησ   2            2η     2                                k e rτ
               k L Wt e                                                   , K L
                                                                                       P 2πσ3 τ3

    For the conformist, the stock position nM(t) that replicates the digital options is


                                                            Q     
                                     nM(t) '                    DM(PT;λM(t))∆q[P;P ](t)dPT '
                                                     ‹0                 T

                                                         Q
                                                   ' k exp(alnPT)∆q[P;P ]dPT
                                                       ‹0              T


                                                           32
                                Q                             (pT&Q)2
                      ' K           exp apT&(pT&Q)dpT
                            ‹Q      2σ2τ
                           Q      2
                      ' K exp(&ApT &2BpT%C)(pT&Q)dpT
                         ‹Q
                      ' K πA(B&Q)exp[A(B 2&C)]

                                              µ&r                         µ&r                        σ2 µ&r
                      ' K 2πσ2τ                        σ2τ exp                     [lnP%(r&            %    )τ]
                                              ησ2                            ησ2                     2 2η
                                                     µr                 σ2 µr
                                                              {lnP[r         ]τ}
                          e rτ µ&r                  ησ   2              2 2η
                      ' k           e
                           P ησ2
                        µ&r Wt
                      '
                         ησ2 P


                                    1
                                
                                    η
where we substituted λM(t)              from section 1 of the appendix.


                                                                         œ


4. Wealth at time t @ T
    Using the expression for DM* from part 2 of this appendix, we have,


                            
               Wt '       DM(PT;λM(0))q[P;PT]dPT
                      ‹PT
                                    µr             µr      µr
                             
                                    ησ2
                                              (r
                                                    2η
                                                        )(1
                                                             ησ2
                                                                 )τ0
                                                                     rτ            Q                      pT&Qt
                   ' W0 P0                e                              e              exp(apT)Φ                  dpT
                                                                               ‹Q                           σ τ
                                    µr             µr      µr              µr              µr      µr
                                             (r       )(1     )τ0                    (r       )(1     )τ
                                    ησ2             2η       ησ2              ησ2              2η       ησ2
                   ' W0 P0                e                              P0         e
                                µr      µr
                            (r     )(1     )(tt0)
                                2η       ησ2
                   ' W0 e



where we used notation from part 1 of this appendix and a similar argument.


                                                                         œ

                                                                     33
5. Terminal Wealth Density                                                                                    µr      µr               µr
                                                                                                        (r       )(1     )(Tt)   PT
                                                                                                              2η       ησ2               ησ2
     The inverse to the conformist wealth function WM(PT) ' Wt e
                                                                                                                                    P
is

                                                     ησ2     µr      µr                         ησ2
                                                        (r     )(1     )(Tt)
                         1                          µr     2η       ησ2                x        µr
                        WM (x)         ' P e
                                                                                         Wt

so that

                                                                    ησ2     µr      µr                  ησ2
                                                                       (r     )(1     )(Tt)
                         1              ησ2 P                      µr     2η       ησ2           x      µr
                        WM (x)'        '       e
                                         µ&r x                                                     Wt
                                                           1
                                         ησ2 WM (x)
                                       '
                                         µ&r x

Hence the density fW        (x) of the wealth function WM(PT) is
                     M(PT)




                                        1                 1
               fW     (x)    ' fP [WM (x)]WM (x)'
                 M(PT)             T

                                                                                           1                      σ2
                                       1                                           ln[WM (x)/P]&(µ&                  )(T&t)
                                  ησ2 WM (x)                        1                                              2
                             '                                                  Φ
                                  µ&r        x              1
                                                       WM (x)σ τ                                    σ T&t
                                                                        1                σ2
                                                           ln[WM (x)/P]&(µ&                  )(T&t)
                                  ησ2 1                                                   2
                             '             Φ
                                  µ&r xσ τ                                      σ T&t



where the first equality follows from the next section.


                                                                     œ


                                        Appendix III: The Rebels
1. The Constant λα(t)                                                     1
                                                                      
     Set θ ' 2ατ/(1&e   2ατ
                                 ), k ' (λαe         rτ
                                                            1/θ)          η
                                                                              , Q ' lnP%(r&σ2/2)τ , L ' γ%(lnP&γ)e ατ .
Using the defining expression for Dα*, the rebel’s constant is found from

                                                                     34
                                   
               Wt '           Dα (PT;λα(t))q[P;PT]dPT
                         ‹PT
                              e rτ       Q                 [pT&Q]2&θ[pT&L]2                     pT&Q
                        ' k                   exp                                         Φ                dpT
                              σ τ ‹Q                               2ησ2τ                         σ τ
                                  e rτ           Q             θ[pT&L] &(1&η)[pT&Q]2
                                                                            2
                        ' k                           exp &                                               dpT
                                              ‹Q                               2ησ2τ
                                  2πσ2τ
                                         θL 2(1η)Q 2
                                  rτ                                                            2
                              e               2ησ2τ
                                                               Q            [θ&(1&η)]pT &2[θL&(1&η)Q]pT
                        ' k                                         exp &                                               dpT
                                                  2           ‹Q                                  2ησ2τ
                                         2πσ τ
                                            η       [(1&η)Q&θL]2 θL 2&(1&η)Q 2
                        ' ke rτ                exp              &
                                          η%θ&1     2η(η%θ&1)σ2τ     2ησ2τ

so that

                                              1                                                 θ(1η) (QL)2
                                                                                        rτ
                                                                                               θ(1η) 2ησ2τ
               (λα(t)e rτ 1/θ)               η
                                                  ' Wt (θ&(1&η))/η e

                    1                         1                                          θ(1η) (QL)2
                                                                                rτ
                    η                                                                   θ(1η) 2ησ2τ
               λα       ' (e rτ θ) Wt (θ&(1&η))/η e
                                              η




                                                                       œ


2. Demand for Digital Options
    Using the same notation, the optimum demand schedule D*α for digital options q[P;PT]
with strike price PT at time T is given by


                                                                                                 ln(PT/P)&(r&σ2/2)τ
                                                                                           Φ                                 1
                                                                                                                         
                                                     rτ                 2ατ                             σ τ               η
               Dα (PT;λα(t))             ' {e           λα(t) (1&e               )/2ατ                                  }
                                                                                                 lnPT&γ&(lnP&γ)e ατ
                                                                                          Φ
                                                                                                      σ (1&e 2ατ)/2α
                                                             [pT&Q]2&θ[pT&L]2
                                       ' k exp
                                                                      2ησ2τ
                                                                      2
                                                             (1&θ)pT &2(Q&θL)pT%Q 2&θL 2
                                       ' k exp
                                                                                 2ησ2τ

                                                                      35
                                                                         2
                                                         (1θ)pT 2(QθL)pTQ 2θL 2 θL 2(1η)Q 2 [(1η)QθL]2
                                                                                                 
                                         η%θ&1                      2ησ2τ                2ησ2τ      2η(ηθ1)σ2τ
              ' Wt e rτ                        e
                                           η
                                                                         2
                                                         (1θ)pT 2(QθL)pTηQ 2 [(1η)QθL]2
                                                                                
                                         η%θ&1                     2ησ2τ          2η(ηθ1)σ2τ
              ' Wt e rτ                        e
                                           η
                                                                                                     2
                                                        Q2           [(1η)QθL]2              (1θ)pT 2(QθL)pT
                                                                 
                                 η%θ&1                  2σ2τ 2η(ηθ1)σ2τ                            2ησ2τ
             ' Wt e rτ                 e                                                   e
                                   η
                                     2
                        (1θ)pT 2(QθL)pT
                                     2ησ2τ
              ' Ce


                                                                         Q2          [θL(1η)Q]2
                                                             rτ                 
                                     θ&(1&η)                         2σ τ 2η[θ(1η)]σ2τ
                                                                          2
where we set C ' W                           e
                                        η

                                                                                         œ


3. Demand for the Risky Asset
                                                                                                                             σ2
Using the notation in the previous sections, and also setting Q ' lnP%(r&                                                       )τ , the stock
                                                                                                                             2
position nα(t) that replicates the digital options positions for the rebel is



                             Q           
             nα(t) '             Dα (PT,λα(t))∆q[P;P ]dPT
                        ‹t                                                       T


                                 ke rτ                  Q                    [pT&Q]2&θ[pT&L]2 [pT&Q]2
                   '                                         exp                              &        (pT&Q)dpT
                                                      ‹Q                          2ησ2τ         2σ2τ
                         P 2πσ3 τ3
                                                 Q2
                                                                            1                   2
                                                 2σ2τ                               [(θ(1η))pT 2((1η)QθL)pT]
                         Ce rτe                         Q               2ησ2τ
                   '                                             e                                                   (pT&Q)dpT
                                             3     3    ‹Q
                            P 2πσ τ
                                                             2
                                  Q                   bpT %2cpT
                   ' M                   exp[&                                       ](pT&Q)dpT
                             ‹Q                                 a

                            Q2
                        
                            2σ2τ
              Ce rτe
where M '                                , a ' 2ησ2τ , b ' θ&(1&η) , c ' (1&η)Q&θL
                        3        3
              P 2πσ τ


                                                                                        36
so that integrating we get



                                                 c%bQ     c2
               nα(t) ' & M πa/b                       exp( )
                                                   b      ab
                                        Q2
                                 rτ                                                   [θL(1η)Q]2
                                        2σ2τ
                          Ce                            η    θ(L&Q)                     2η[θ(1η)]σ2τ
                      '                                              e
                              Pσ2τ                   θ&(1&η) θ&(1&η)

                                 θ(L&Q)W
                      '
                                                 2
                          [θ&(1&η)]σ τ P



where we substituted λα from section 1 of the appendix.
                                                                  œ


4. Wealth at time t @ T
    Using the expression for DM* from part 2 of this appendix, we have,

                              
               Wt '       Dα (PT,T;λα)q[P;PT]dPT
                      ‹PT
                                                                        2
                             e rτ          Q             (1&θ0)pT &2(Q0&θ0L0)pT                          pT&Qt
                    ' C                         exp                                                Φ              dpT
                             σ τ0 ‹Q                                   2ησ2τ0                              σ τ
                                            2
                                        Qt
                                 rτ                                                       2
                             e          2σ2τ
                                                     Q           (ητ0&(1&θ0)τ)pT &2(ητ0Q%(θ0L0&Q0)τ)pT
                    ' C                                  exp &                                                          dpT
                                        2       ‹Q                                             2ησ2ττ0
                                 2πσ τ0
                                                                            1             [ητ0Q(θ0L0Q0)τ]2
                                                               rτ             τ0Q 2
                                                                       2σ2ττ0               η[ητ0(θ01)τ]
                    'C η/(ητ0%(θ0&1)τ)e
                                                                        1                 [ητ0Q(θ0L0Q0)τ]2
                                                               rτ             τ0Q 2
                                                                      2σ2ττ0                η[ητ0(θ01)τ]
                                 ητ0%(θ0&1)τ0 e
                    'W0
                                 ητ0%(θ0&1)τ                                1       2     [ητQ0(θ0L0Q0)τ]2
                                                               rτ0            τQ0 
                                                                       2σ2ττ0               η[ητ(θ01)τ]
                                                           e



where we used notation from part 1 of this appendix and a similar argument.
                                                                      °

                                                                      37
5. Terminal Wealth Density
    This result also applies to the conformist discussed above. We have


                                                         1
                     Pr{ Wα(PT) @ z } ' Pr{ P T @ Wα (z) }


so that


                                  d
                     fW (P )(x) '        Pr{ Wα(PT) @ z } '
                        α   T
                                  dz |zx
                                   d                 1            1     1
                                '         Pr{ PT @ Wα (z) } ' fP [WM (x)]WM (x)'
                                                                T
                                  dz |zx


                                            œ




                                            38
                                        REFERENCES
      Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343
      Brennan Michael and H. Henry Cao, 1996, Information, trade and derivative securities,
The Review of Financial Studies 9, 163-208
      Brennan Michael and R. Solanki, 1981, Optimal portfolio insurance, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 26, 279-300
      Cox, John C. and Chi-Fu Huang, 1989, Optimum consumption and portfolio policies
when asset prices follow a diffusion process, Journal of Economic Theory 49, 33-83
      Cox, John and Stephen Ross, 1976, The valuation of options for alternative stochastic
processes, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 145-166
      De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence Summers and Robert Waldman, 1990,
Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation, Journal of
Finance 45, 379-395.
      Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1996, Multifactor explanation of anomalies, Journal
of Finance 47, 427-465
      Gatev, Evan, William Goetzmann and Geert Rouwenhorst, Pairs trading: performance of
a relative value arbitrage rule, NBER working paper 7032
      Hong and Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading and
overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184
      Ingersoll, Jonathan, Jr., 2000, Digital contracts: Simple tools for pricing complex
derivatives, Journal of Business 73, 67-88
      Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and
selling losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-9.
      Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1995, Overreaction, delayed reaction, and
contrarian profits, The Review of Financial Studies 8, 973-993
      Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1994, Contrarian investment,
extrapolation, and risk, Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.
      Leland, Hayne, 1980, Who should buy portfolio insurance?, Journal of Finance 35, 581-
594

                                               39
    Lo, Andrew and Jiang Wang, 1995, Implementing option pricing models when asset
returns are predictable, Journal of Finance 50, 87-129
    Merton, Robert, 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time
model, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413
    Merton, Robert, 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323-361
    Merton, Robert, 1990, Continuous-time finance, Blackwell, Cambridge, Massachusetts
    Wachter, Jessica A., 1998, Portfolio and consumption decisions under mean-reverting
returns: an exact solution for complete markets, working paper, Harvard University.




                                             40
                                    Figure 1
                 ∂na ê∂P for different beliefs and risk aversion
                             H P0 = Pt=0.5 = 50 L
  ∂nα ê∂P




0.4




0.2




                                                                               expHγL
            50                        100                          150   200




-0.2




-0.4
                               Figure 2
            Rebels’exposure for different beliefs and risk aversion
                        H P0 = Pt=0.5 = 50 L
      wα



 10




                                                                             expHγL
           50                        100                         150   200




-10




-20




-30
                                        Figure 3
                Conformist wealth in states PT for different risk aversion
      WM
                                H h = 0.2 , 0.5 , 0.8 L



400




300




200




100




                                                                                         PT
           20   40             60              80             100            120   140
                                         Figure 4
                     Rebels’wealth in states PT for different beliefs
      Wα
                        H a = 0.2, 1 and g = Ln@20D , Ln@60D L
400



350



300



250



200



150



100



 50



                                                                                    PT
           20   40             60              80             100       120   140
                                    Figure 5
                 Conformist wealth density for different risk aversion
    Prob
                             H h = 0.1 , 0.5 , 0.9 L


0.012




 0.01




0.008




0.006




0.004




0.002




                                                                                WM
           100                        200                           300   400
                                   Figure 6
                 Rebels’wealth density for different beliefs
                  H a = 0.2, 1 and g = Ln@20D , Ln@60D L
    Prob



0.014



0.012



 0.01



0.008



0.006



0.004



0.002



                                                                           Wα
           100                      200                        300   400
                                    Figure 7

                          A. No first-order dominance
                       H h = 0.8 , a = 0.2 , g = Ln@60D L
      Prob
      1



 0.8



 0.6



 0.4



 0.2



                                                                          WT
                 100                 200                    300    400



             B. Conformists that first-order dominate the rebels
 Prob                 H h = 0.2 , a = 1 , g = Ln@20D L
  1



0.8



0.6



0.4



0.2



                                                                           WT
                100                  200                    300     400
                                      Figure 8
           Terminal wealth densities for risk-tolerant conformists H h = 0.2 L
           and rebels who believe in near-term crash H a = 1 , g = Ln@20D L
    Prob



0.014



0.012



 0.01



0.008



0.006



0.004



0.002



                                                                                       WT
             100                          200                          300       400
                                       Figure 9
           Terminal wealth densities for risk-averse conformists H h = 0.8 L and
           rebels who believe in long-term appreciation H a = 0.2, g = Ln@60D L
    Prob



0.014



0.012



 0.01



0.008



0.006



0.004



0.002



                                                                                         WT
               100                         200                         300         400
                                                    Figure 10
                       Rebels’initial market exposure for increasing investment horizon
Market Exposure
                                H P0 = 40 ; a = 0.2, 1 and g = Ln@20D , Ln@60D L

     1




   0.8




   0.6




   0.4




   0.2



                                                                                                     T − t0
                  20                     40                      60                       80   100


  -0.2




  -0.4
