                                                    




                            


                                            
                                          !  "#$!%&


                                          # ' %#()*)
                                  +""%,--.../##'-%%#-.()*)



                              
                                01213+$"" 4$
                                  !/#5'6 170*)
                                        $'$"7111




                     
             ! !   "###$%%$&$$$  '    
$!! '  (     )*(+(,,  - !  )  .
-   !     '/           ! 
! ! .-    !          *%011    
 2  !                     .   3!  
                 *      .

4"###  .    5  %.%!.$    .%   3 
 3 !   !  6  3!!  !     4
      .
++4#8!3&$"+ ! '
  5!  "#$!%&
# ' %#()*)
  $'$"7111
9 0


                                            $%#%

       +545$! '/+4#%#"4#"!6"$ ..+"+#"+#%"5
/+4#5$"553"#545$%#%""! 55#"+$6.54%
 58!3 !%#3 !5 & ! ' 53 .+3+ :%3"8 33$" &# "+ !%3" &
%#4$ ! ' /+4# 5 . &# $/#45 545$ +"#'"8  + !5 
"!"5$''"$55"#%#""4!%&"&#!21"5 ""&#!
0;))"0;;7&5"+"3$##"! ##/"+!# 8"3"$! '5#
%#3"4"+3$##"<! ##:!%6! ')WK'#5=%%5""
! '> 3#5 "+ %#//"8 & ! ' ". 8# "# "+# &56 .+ ! '
%#"3%"#"#5$/&$#8#"#+"!"5%#3"4"&%#4$<
! #5%#4$! ##<1*7511)6#%3"48+$''""+"3'#""%#3
3#.+4#'#''#'"&&3""+'#$"+"++#"#$!#545$
33$!$""+%#3<"4<! ''#$% ""65#3#3'#""%#3
#5$3='0)>! '%#"3%"%#53"/8&$#%#3"'%"!#.+$/#45
545$+"#'"85/+4#!5&3"3"5."+%#4$%#33+'#" 
"33$""+.+"+8#'#5


                                       !  "#$!%&
%#"!"&3!3                                %#"!"&3!3
4#"8&#"+#"+%            4#"8&#"+#"+%
+%672(;;<**12                             +%672(;;<**12
5                                               3'#?$35$
5@' ?$35$
       Smoking remains one of the primary public health concerns in the U.S. The case for government
intervention has recently grown stronger with new evidence of negative externalities such as the e ects
of second hand smoke. Although individual states are experimenting with di erent ways to reduce
smoking, the most common policy tool remains federal and state cigarette taxation.
       One important element in assessing the e ectiveness of tax policies is the role of smoking dy-
namics. Individuals who smoked in the past are several times more likely to smoke today relative
to previous non-smokers. For example, using data from the National Education Longitudinal Study,
we see that 75% of youth aged 14 to 18 who smoked in the past continue to smoke; only 10% of
non-smokers begin smoking. Previous smoking intensity also seems to matter; 31% of light smokers
quit smoking while less than 13% of heavy smokers quit. There is also movement toward higher levels
of smoking in the future among those who were moderate or heavy smokers in the past. Most impor-
tantly, while individuals under age 18 consume only 2% of the total amount of cigarettes smoked in a
year in the U.S., there are long-term dynamic implications because youth smoking behavior appears
to persist into adulthood.1
       The e ectiveness of cigarette taxes as a smoking deterrence depends on the source of smoking
persistence. It could be that previous smoking behavior in uences the future marginal bene t of
smoking through such channels as addiction or habituation.2 For example, the utility of not smoking
today might be relatively low for an individual who was a long-time or high-quantity smoker in the
past. Under this explanation, tax or price increases have a larger e ect on previous non-smokers than
on previous smokers. Tax policies are quite powerful in this case: by discouraging some individuals
from smoking today, they will increase the proportion of relatively more price sensitive non-smokers
in the future. This compositional change produces a multiplier e ect as future taxes become more
e ective at reducing aggregate smoking rates. Alternatively, the intertemporal smoking correlation
could simply re ect an individual propensity to smoke that is persistent over time. This propensity
is likely to result from both observed and unobserved individual factors. In this case tax policy is
unlikely to signi cantly in uence smoking patterns which are driven by individual heterogeneity.
   1
     In addition, smoking is initiated at an early age: almost 42% of current or former adult smokers started
before age 16 and 75% started before age 19 (Gruber and Zinman, 2000).
   2
     Addiction refers to the pharmacological e ect of smoking while habituation indicates a psychological ef-
fect that alters one's habits. As economists we make no attempt to measure the precise source of behavior
modi cation and use these terms interchangeably.



                                                     1
      This paper provides the rst estimates of price/tax sensitivity based on a dynamic behavioral
model of smoking using longitudinal data on a representative sample of individuals from all 50 United
States. The theoretical model considers the decisions of forward-looking individuals whose smoking
history might in uence the value of smoking today. We estimate an approximation to the theoretical
model that allows previous smokers to have di erent price sensitivity than non-smokers. These esti-
mates also include controls for observed and unobserved individual heterogeneity. Our approach allows
us to simulate both the immediate and long-run e ects of a tax change. As we discuss in more detail
in the next sections, the results depend crucially on whether smoking history is treated as exogenous
and whether unobserved heterogeneity is controlled.
      We focus on the smoking behavior of teens using restricted use data from the National Education
Longitudinal Survey (NELS:88) which follows a representative sample of 8th graders in two year
waves beginning in 1988. These data contain detailed individual demographic information as well
as parent, school, and community characteristics. Unlike most school-based surveys, dropouts are
followed providing a better representation of all youth in the U.S. Also, because the survey reinterviews
participants each wave, our data do not su er from retrospective bias. In general, we nd that
price sensitivity decreases over time and non-smokers are more price sensitive than smokers (with
price elasticities of -0.32 and 0.08, respectively). We provide additional evidence of the behavioral
modifying (i.e., \addictive" or \habitual") nature of smoking even after controlling for observed and
unobserved individual di erences. For example, smoking in 8th grade (as opposed to not smoking)
increases the probability of smoking two years later three fold, while smoking participation rates are
double four years later. Modeling unobserved individual heterogeneity and accounting for the behavior
modi cation associated with previous price changes produces signi cantly di erent predictions of
smoking behavior than when these components are ignored.
      In the next section we review the relevant smoking literature and highlight the new contributions
of our paper. In Section 2 we introduce a general theoretical model of smoking decisions over time
which serves as the basis of our empirical model of individual smoking behavior. Having introduced the
data used in estimation in Section 3, we describe in detail the set of equations to be jointly estimated
in Section 4. We motivate our empirical model with comparisons to those in the recent literature, and
discuss the main results and several policy simulations in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.



                                                   2
1 Introduction
1.1 Review of the Literature
Most papers in the empirical literature on smoking ignore dynamic issues regarding endogenous past
cigarette consumption, rely on aggregate state data or cross-sectional individual data, and treat
cigarette prices (or state taxes) as exogenous.3 Among the few papers focusing on behavioral dynamics,
none address the limitations of previous work in a single model.4 Chaloupka (1991) and Gruber and
Zinman (2000) investigate the role of smoking dynamics using data on individuals.5 Chaloupka (1991)
considers the e ect of smoking history on current smoking decisions of adults within the context of a
rational addiction model. To account for the endogeneity of previous behavior, he uses instrumental
variables to form predictions of past consumption levels. While Chaloupka is the rst to estimate
the e ect of smoking history using individual data, his data are somewhat limited. Because he uses
retrospective data, he has only limited and inaccurate measures of previous cigarette use. Addition-
ally, he has little information on current or lagged individual demographics, cannot accurately identify
the prices individuals faced in the past due to lack of knowledge of residence, and does not control
for the potential endogeneity of prices.6 Our results demonstrate that the latter omission imparts a
signi cant negative bias on price parameters.
       Gruber and Zinman (2000) consider how a proxy for previous smoking behavior | the average
of state cigarette tax rates when one was 14-17 years old | in uences the smoking participation of
pregnant women. However, it is dicult to assess the appropriateness of their instrument without
formally modeling smoking behavior over time. For example, they do not interact the teen tax with
the individual's age. The tax proxy re ects a recent smoking history for young women and an earlier
history for older women. More importantly, because they do not estimate the quantitative relationship
   3
     See Chaloupka and Warner (forthcoming) for an excellent summary of previous work.
   4
     The theoretical \rational addiction" literature considers the relationship between cigarette consumption in
consecutive periods, but most empirical tests of such adjacent complementarity are based on state aggregate
data (see Becker, Grossman, and Murphy, 1994).
   5
     Douglas (1998) estimates hazards for smoking initiation and quitting. While he implicitly considers be-
havioral dynamics by allowing for a non-monotonic hazard, his empirical implementation su ers from the same
data limitations as Chaloupka (1991) discussed in the text.
   6
     Because Chaloupka estimates least squares models of total smoking consumption which ignores the censored
nature of his dependent variable (and signi cant mass at zero consumption), modeling enhancements such as
separately estimating smoking participation and conditional consumption and using di erent techniques to
control for the endogeneity of past use may improve our understanding of individual smoking behavior.


                                                       3
between smoking history and current behavior, their results cannot be used to perform the dynamic
policy simulations which are a focus of our paper.7
       Tauras and Chaloupka (1999a and 1999b) and DeCicca et al. (1999) are the only authors who
use panel data on individuals. Tauras and Chaloupka (1999b) use longitudinal observations on young
adults to allow permanent unobserved heterogeneity to in uence the smoking decision (via individual
  xed e ects), but do not control for previous smoking behavior. Tauras and Chaloupka (1999a)
estimate smoking cessation hazards, but only consider the minority of individuals who are smoking
in 12th grade and do not fully control for di erences in previous smoking behavior such as smoking
intensity. DeCicca et al. (1999) study the smoking behavior of youth and estimate both cross-sectional
and longitudinal models. However, like Tauras and Chaloupka (1999a), they do not fully control for
di erences in previous smoking behavior.
       In general, the available estimates of the price sensitivity of individual smoking decisions su er
from two de ciencies. First, none of the estimates are based on a dynamic behavioral model using panel
data. That is, the current literature has not adequately considered previous behavior or has simply
included previous behavior as an exogenous explanatory variable. Our work distinguishes between the
immediate and long-run impact of a price change by correctly modeling the e ects of past behavior on
current and future decisions. Second, only three papers (Chaloupka and Grossman, 1996; DeCicca et
al., 1999; and Gruber, 2000) study the smoking behavior of youths prior to 12th grade. Each of these
studies examines youth from data sources that do not follow the same individual over time or, if panel
data are available, the authors do not examine the dynamic participation and consumption decisions
jointly.8 We improve upon these initial studies of youth behavior by modeling the endogeneity of past
use and generating both immediate and long-run elasticities that better predict the in uence of policy
changes on youth.
   7
     The implication of their demonstration, that past cigarette consumption signi cantly in uences current
behavior, can be veri ed and formally modeled in our work. Additionally, we improve the measurement of this
e ect by using individual observations from a nationally representative sample of youth over time. Gruber and
Zinman (2000) nd their result using a very select cross section of individuals (pregnant women) and aggregating
observations into cells.
   8
     These authors do consider the e ect of non-price tobacco control regulations such as restrictions on youth
access. In general, they nd that these have a small (and often insigni cant) impact on youth smoking. To
maintain focus, we study the price sensitivity of youth. In addition, the Synar Amendment which penalizes
states that do not enforce youth access laws was not enacted until after the last year of our sample (1992).




                                                      4
1.2 New Contributions
We provide a more re ned estimate of youth price sensitivity by making methodological contributions
which can all be extended to populations beyond the teens we consider here. Our rst contribu-
tion is to explicitly estimate the dynamic nature of smoking decisions. That is, based on a dynamic
theoretical model of optimizing behavior, we empirically evaluate how an individual's smoking his-
tory in uences his choices over time. The framework allows smokers with di erent levels of use and
non-smokers to have di erent price sensitivities, an important generalization given the possibility of
cigarette addiction and habit formation. Models that do not capture dynamic behavior provide esti-
mates which are dicult to interpret and cannot be used to accurately evaluate the e ect of a policy
(price) change. For example, if smokers and non-smokers have di erent price sensitivities and dif-
ferent baseline probabilities of smoking in the future, they will respond di erently to price increases.
A price increase can have a much larger aggregate e ect in the long run than in the short run by
in uencing the future composition of the population. By inducing individuals not to smoke today,
there will be more non-smokers in the future who may be more price sensitive. It is not possible to
assess the importance of such a feed-forward e ect without estimating a dynamic behavioral model.
Non-behavioral models estimate the average price e ect based on the current percentage of smokers
and non-smokers (i.e., the immediate e ect). To the extent that smokers are less price sensitive than
non-smokers, the non-behavioral models now in use will understate the long-run reduction in smokers
from a price increase.
       Second, we recognize that individual smoking behavior can be explained by both observed and
unobserved characteristics. The NELS:88 data allow us to control for many more observables than
are available in other datasets, and we nd dramatic di erences in the smoking behavior of observably
di erent youth using these data. For example, among kids who have dropped out of school after 8th or
10th grade, almost 50% smoke compared to only 17.5% of those (16 to 18 years old) who are in school.
More interestingly, only 8% of those who stay in school were smoking previously while over 32% of
those who eventually drop out were smokers. While being a dropout may in uence behavior (due to
a potentially di erent set of peers or responsibilities), it is possible that something unobserved about
these individuals has led them to have di erent schooling and smoking behavior. Similarly, although
it appears that youth smoking is a strong determinant of adult smoking, causality (or addiction) is not
obvious; there could be something unobserved that makes an individual likely to smoke both as a child

                                                   5
and as an adult. Therefore, we not only control for observed individual-speci c di erences, but also
any remaining unobserved di erences such as attitudes toward smoking and self-esteem. We show that
ignoring unobserved heterogeneity overstates the persistence of smoking behavior and understates the
price sensitivity of non-smokers.9


2 Dynamic Smoking Behavior
In our theoretical model of smoking behavior we consider a dynamic framework that accounts for
decisions made in the past as well as expectations of the future.10 There are several avenues through
which past smoking behavior might in uence current smoking decisions. First, current utility or pref-
erences might di er depending on whether one smoked previously and the amount smoked (addictive
or habitual e ects). Similarly, the utility (or disutility) of choosing not to smoke might be quite di er-
ent for heavy smokers versus light smokers and might depend on the length of time someone has been
smoking (withdrawal e ects). Second, current and past behavior are likely to in uence expectations
of what the future holds. For example, the probability of reduced health next period is higher for a
smoker than a non-smoker. Individuals may also make forecasts about pecuniary costs of smoking
in the future (i.e., prices of cigarettes next period) by using current and lagged prices to form these
expectations. Each of these aspects of the decision making problem rely on past behavior or previous
information.
      Let J de ne the set of smoking alternatives available in period t where j = 0 indicates no
smoking and j = 1; : : : ; J are increasing levels of smoking (e.g., the number of cigarettes smoked per
day). An indicator of the mutually exclusive smoking alternatives is djt where djt = 1 if alternative j
is chosen in period t and djt = 0 otherwise.11 Smoking behavior today depends on the current utility
   9
      We also account for the possibility that unobserved \social norms" within a state in uence both youth
smoking behavior and state tax rates. Ignoring these characteristics is clearly inappropriate since states with
less tolerant social norms (or strong anti-smoking sentiment) will have higher tax rates and (irrespective of the
tax rate) lower smoking rates. Without controls for this state-level heterogeneity the price elasticity will be
over-estimated since part of the measured price e ect re ects the social norm. That is, failing to control for
the potential endogeneity of tax policy produces a spurious negative correlation between prices and smoking
participation.
   10
      The model is general enough to apply to youths or adults with minor reinterpretations of variables. For
example, because the health e ects of smoking are likely to di er at di erent ages, measures of health could
be de ned to re ect health events relevant to di erent cohorts. We have suppressed individual (n) and state of
residence (s) subscripts throughout unless distinction is necessary.
   11
      Other important decisions (e.g., exercise, pregnancy, medical care consumption, and savings) may directly
or indirectly in uence smoking behavior. These are omitted from the theoretical model because our empirical

                                                       6
of each alternative as well as the expected future discounted value of all possible smoking alternatives
in the future. These values are likely to di er depending on a person's smoking behavior prior to the
current decision making period. We assume that previous behavior consists of one's smoking level last
period (dt;1 = (d0t;1 ; : : : ; dJt;1 )) and the total number of periods that the individual has smoked up
to period t (Dt ) where duration increases by one each period that the individual chooses to smoke.12
A vector of exogenous individual, social, and environmental variables is denoted Xt .
       The current period utility associated with health state ht during period t is U (ht ; ct ; dt ; zt ; Xt ; ut )
where ct is consumption of a composite commodity, dt is the vector of current smoking indicators,
zt = (dt;1 ; Dt ; Xt;1 ) is the vector of state variables upon entering period t, and ut is a vector of
period t utility shocks that depend on health and smoking behavior. The dependence of utility on the
observed smoking history is intended to capture the e ects of habit, tolerance, and withdrawal which
may be a function of the smoking history. For example, the utility of smoking today (or marginal
utility of an additional cigarette) is allowed to di er depending on whether the individual smoked last
period or not as well as his duration and past levels of smoking. Similarly, choosing not to smoke
may create disutility for someone who smoked last period and no disutility if he never smoked. This
disutility may decrease as the duration of cessation increases.13 We also admit the possibility that
permanent unobserved individual heterogeneity in uences smoking decisions by allowing correlation
in ut across time.
       Our policy variable of interest is the state-imposed tax rate (per unit) on cigarettes and is
denoted st . The pre-tax price of cigarettes (per unit), which includes federal taxes, is pst ; thus, the
consumer price of cigarettes in state s at time t is qst = pst + st . Composite consumption is de ned
by the per-period budget constraint such that ct = yt (ht ; Xt ) ; mt (ht ; zt ; Xt ) ; qst  j where yt is
income, mt is medical care expenditures, and j measures the quantity (units) of cigarettes consumed.
model does not include the joint estimation of these endogenous behaviors. While these additional behaviors are
determined simultaneously with smoking decisions, their omission does not in uence the relationship between
smoking and prices in the model. We do, however, jointly model the decision to drop out of school in the
empirical model and allow prices to di erently a ect the smoking behavior of dropouts and non-dropouts.
  12
     Other relevant variables describing an individual's smoking history include the number of attempts to quit
smoking and durations of cessation. The importance of particular variables describing one's history (i.e., their
in uence on utility or health transitions) is likely to di er as the individual ages. Because we focus on youth
(where attempts to quit smoking and duration of cessation are less variable) and because our data do not contain
information on attempts to quit, we limit the variables describing one's smoking history to previous intensity
and duration.
  13
     Such adjacent complementarity is discussed more fully in the rational addiction literature of Chaloupka
(1991) and Becker, Grossman, and Murphy (1994).


                                                         7
While employment and medical care consumption are not choice variables in this simple model, we
assume that health a ects income (either through its e ect on wages or its e ect on hours of work)
and medical care expenditures (either through price per service or the quantity of services consumed).
      Assuming that current period exogenous variables, cigarette prices, health, and utility shocks
are revealed prior to making smoking choices, the lifetime value of a particular smoking alternative j
in period t is
                  Vj (zt ; Xt ; qst; ht ; ut ) = U (ht ; ct ; dt ; zt ; Xt ; ut ) + V (zt+1 ; Xt+1 ); 8t (1)
where is the discount factor and V (zt+1 ; Xt+1 ) = Et maxj 2J [Vj (zt+1 ; Xt+1 ; qst+1 ; ht+1 ; ut+1 )] is the
period t expectation of the maximal value of lifetime utility at period t + 1 conditional on the updated
state.14 Optimal behavior in each period is characterized by the alternative that gives the highest
value of lifetime utility (current utility plus discounted expected future utility).
       Our general model of optimal behavior contains two important features | namely that cigarette
prices a ect smoking behavior and that previous smoking history in uences current smoking decisions.
The focus of this paper is the empirical work and thus the mathematical derivations of sucient
conditions for the following implications are not provided. First, prices, or cigarette taxes, in uence
smoking propensity.15 Second, our assumptions also allow previous smoking behavior to in uence
current smoking probabilities. That is, individuals who smoked last period are more likely to smoke
today than non-smokers or former smokers if a recent history of smoking increases the utility of smoking
today. Additionally, current smokers will continue to smoke if the addictive or habitual e ects outweigh
the withdrawal e ects. Finally, smokers and non-smokers have di erent price sensitivities. These
predictions are empirically testable by including previous smoking behavior (which is endogenous) in
the empirical speci cation. We detail an empirical approximation to the theoretical model in Section 4
after describing the data in the next section.
  14
     The expectation at t is over the distribution of all future unknowns such as cigarette prices, health, and
utility shocks. Additionally, income and medical care expenditures may not be known with perfect foresight.
Individuals use current and lagged information, summarized by the updated state vector zt+1 , to forecast these
future values.
   15
      A typical assumption is that prices negatively a ect smoking. However, a positive e ect is also possible
if there is a \forbidden fruit" e ect (i.e., a higher utility of smoking when price increases are interpreted as a
social distaste for smoking).




                                                        8
3 Description of the Data
The individual data used in estimation are from the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988
(NELS:88), a continuing study sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education's National Center for
Education Statistics. The study began in 1988 with the speci c purpose of collecting information on
educational, vocational, and personal development of a nationally representative sample of 8th graders
as they transition from middle school into high school, through high school, and into postsecondary
institutions and the work force. Approximately 24,500 8th graders in more than 1,000 public and
private schools in all 50 states participated in the rst wave of the study. In addition to the student
questionnaires, supplementary questionnaires were administered to the students' parents, teachers, and
school principals and provide a wealth of information on the early social environment of the students.
Through special agreement with the U.S. Department of Education, we obtained access to restricted-
use NELS:88 data that include geographic information. These data, supplemented with state-level
data (Tobacco Institute, 1997) and measures of in ation, allow us to determine the appropriate real
cigarette price and state tax rate for all individuals in each year.
       The rst follow-up, administered in the spring of 1990, includes responses from approximately
17,500 of the students from the rst wave, while the second follow-up, administered in the spring of
1992, includes approximately 16,500 students from the original cohort.16 One of the many unique
features of the NELS:88 data is that youth who leave high school prior to graduation continue to be
interviewed throughout the longitudinal study and are asked the same questions pertaining to smoking
behavior. It is therefore possible to examine the smoking behavior of dropouts who are not represented
in other national school-based surveys.
       The NELS:88 data contain information on the student's background, upbringing, early family
environment, early school environment, and other behaviors. Many variables that have been found
to be signi cant risk factors for smoking can be constructed from these surveys including school
performance, religious aliation, family structure and living arrangement, and parental education.
Since parents are surveyed in the base year and second follow-up, it is possible to obtain time-varying
information on family background and socioeconomic characteristics that the student would not be
as informed about. In the rst and second follow-up, school principals and teachers continue to be
  16
     A third follow-up was administered in 1994 but does not contain information on smoking behavior. A fourth
follow-up was administered in the spring of 1998, but will not likely be available until after 2000.


                                                      9
surveyed, making it possible to control for important school environmental characteristics as well. We
model the behavior of youths who are observed in each year (1988, 1990, and 1992) of the survey; we
do not model attrition from the full sample. We keep only those youth who were on grade during the
sample period or who were permanent dropouts (12,954 youth). We are forced to drop 2237 kids for
whom smoking behavior is unobserved. Because prices di er by state, another 270 are dropped if we
cannot identify the state in which they live or go to school, and 196 are dropped if they do not reside in
the same state in all three waves.17 After deleting 18 individuals for which other important variables
are missing, our sample consists of three years of observations on 4755 males and 5478 females.
       Information on smoking behavior is collected in each wave of the survey. In each year, youths
are asked, \How many cigarettes do you currently smoke in a day?" Responses are limited to the
following categories: do not smoke, smoke less than 1 cigarette a day, smoke 1 to 5 cigarettes, smoke
about a half pack (6-10), smoke more than half a pack but less than 2 packs (11-39), and smoke 2
packs or more (40+). Table 1 reveals that 4.6% of youths reported smoking in the 8th grade (1988),
while 22.7% of these same youths reported smoking in the second follow-up (1992). The dramatic
increase in smoking rates is not surprising given that smoking initiation typically occurs during the
late teens. We also form indicators of the quantity smoked conditional on being a smoker.18 Table 1
indicates that smokers appear to be smoking larger quantities over time. The summary statistics also
reveal that dropouts are more likely to smoke and to smoke heavily than those youth who remain in
school.
       The dependence of current smoking behavior on past consumption is described in Table 2.
Despite the increased proportion of smokers in 1990 and 1992, the proportion of non-smoking youth
who take up smoking is constant after 1988.19 Similarly, the proportion of light smokers (1-5 cigarettes
per day) who quit smoking is constant at 32%. However, the probability of quitting if one was a
moderate or heavy smoker decreases dramatically as these youth age. Smokers who continue to smoke
  17
     We do not have a state identi er for several dropouts in 1990. We retain the observation if the individual
resided in the same state observed in 1988 and 1992 and assume that this was their state of residence in 1990.
To be consistent with this assumption, we do not consider the behavior of any child who moves during the
1988-1992 period.
  18
     Because the response \smoke less than 1 cigarette a day" is available only in 1990, we group this outcome
with \smoke 1 to 5 cigarettes." Due to the small number of responses in the 40+ category, our top category is
de ned as \smoke more than half a pack."
  19
     Because very few children younger than age 14 smoke, because most individuals are age 14 in 8th grade,
and because our data do not indicate rst age smoking, we assume that our sample has experienced no smoking
prior to 8th grade.


                                                      10
also tend to migrate to higher levels of smoking over time. For example, one-third of previous heavy
smokers continue this behavior in 1990 while two-thirds of them continue to smoke heavily in 1992.
       The rich set of variables used to explain variations in individual smoking behavior are summa-
rized in Table 3. These include both stationary and time-varying variables describing characteristics
of the student, his family, and his school. Unfortunately the data do not provide any measures of
health. We considered using levels of activity (e.g., after school sports participation), which might be
compromised by the negative health e ects of smoking, as explanatory variables. For parsimony, we
do not model these endogenous and simultaneously determined variables, nor do we include them as
exogenous regressors.
       In order to estimate price e ects separate from state e ects, there must be variation in youth
smoking rates and cigarette prices across states and within states over time. Table 4 shows smoking
participation rates and real cigarette prices by state for each wave of the NELS:88 data. There is indeed
variation across states and within states in both of these measures. In 1988, smoking participation
levels range from 0% in Delaware, Maine, South Dakota, and Wyoming to 10.2% in Nebraska. By
1992, smoking participation rates had increased in every state but at very di erent rates. Oregon had
the lowest smoking participation rate (12.4%) while Idaho had the highest (29.5%). Real cigarette
prices are as high as $1.87 per pack in Alaska in 1992 and as low as $0.98 in Kentucky in 1988.20


4 Empirical Model
We take a linear approximation of the value functions in (1) to approximate the latent value of smoking
alternative j in period t, conditional on one's smoking behavior in the previous period (k). We
decompose the error component (ut ) into a permanent individual component () and an idiosyncratic,
i.i.d. component (t ). That is,
                              Vjkt = zt   1jk + Xt 2jk +     3jk qst + 1jk  + jkt                           (2)
where the 's are estimated factor loadings on the unobserved heterogeneity components.21
  20
     The variation in real cigarette prices across states over time is composed of variation in producer prices and
variation in state cigarette taxes. Although twenty states did not change their excise tax on cigarettes between
1988 and 1992, the remaining states did. Between 1988 and 1992, increases in state excise taxes on cigarettes
ranged from one cent in Arkansas and Oregon to 25 cents in California (33 cents in Washington, DC). During
this same period, cigarette tax levels range from 2 cents in North Carolina to 48 cents in Hawaii.
  21
     The contribution of permanent unobservables, 1jk , could be modeled as an individual xed e ect n .
As discussed in the next section, we treat the individual unobservables as random e ects having a discrete

                                                        11
      Our main concern in this paper is accurately measuring price sensitivity in order to evaluate
cigarette taxes as a policy tool. The price faced by a consumer is the sum of the manufacturer's price
of cigarettes and state cigarette taxes.22 If state cigarette taxes were random across states, then our
dynamic empirical model of smoking behavior would be complete. However, if observed or unobserved
social norms within a state in uence state tax-setting behavior and these same factors also in uence
youth smoking propensities but are omitted from the speci cation, then the coecient on price is likely
to be biased. Taxes might be high in one state because of underlying concern for health or they might
be low because of underlying support for smoking or tobacco production. These same sentiments may
impact individual smoking behavior. More speci cally, the state cigarette tax is correlated with part
of the error in (2). Some detailed evidence suggesting that cigarette taxes are not random is presented
in the Appendix. We can eliminate much of the bias in the estimated coecients on price by allowing
unobserved state heterogeneity to in uence smoking decisions. Thus, (2) is rewritten as

                           Vjkt = zt   1jk + Xt 2jk +     3 jk qst + 1jk  + s + jkt                       (3)

where s is a state xed e ect.23
       The model is dynamic because of the (testable) assumption that the probability of smoking today
depends on the smoking state occupied in the previous period, and because z contains other lagged
variables. Notice that future values of X do not in uence current smoking decisions in (2) and (3).
In contrast, rational addiction theory proposes that future cigarette prices a ect current smoking
behavior. While our theoretical model suggests that the current value of smoking today includes the
expected discounted value of all smoking alternatives in the future (which involves integration over the
expected price distribution), the approximation would contain future prices only if future prices were
distribution with estimated mass points  and estimated weights. Estimation of the random e ects in this
manner imposes no distributional assumptions on the unobservables and should improve eciency over a model
of individual xed e ects which would introduce 10,232 additional parameters to be estimated. Additionally, the
use of xed e ects in discrete dependent variable models is compromised without imposing strong assumptions
(Hsiao, 1986).
   22
      We assume that the manufacturer's price (which includes federal taxes in this analysis) varies randomly
across states. Variation in federal taxes are subsumed by year dummies in our estimates.
   23
      It is possible that the unobserved state heterogeneity (the social norm) is not permanent but varies over
time. Because prices (and taxes) are assumed to be constant within a state each year, it is not possible to
account for the variation in state unobservables over time with state-speci c time dummies and still measure
price e ects. The random e ects procedure that we use to model individual heterogeneity could be modi ed to
allow for time-varying state unobservables and still produce unbiased estimates of the price e ects. However, this
requires modeling tax-setting behavior within a state. Jointly estimating a set of equations that includes smoking
behavior, state tax-setting behavior, and the correlation between unobservables in uencing both individual
behavior and state taxes is reserved for future work.

                                                       12
observed with perfect foresight. Although knowledge of future cigarette prices is unlikely for long leads,
it is not unreasonable to assume that near future tax rates are announced prior to the change (Gruber
and Koszegi, 2000). We do not consider the e ect of such anticipated price changes because it would
be dicult to accurately account for the timing of these announcements relative to the date of the
reported smoking behavior in our data. Rather, we assume in the theory that individuals use current
and lagged prices and taxes to forecast future consumer cigarette prices. Additionally, while empirical
tests of the rational addiction model consider the in uence of future prices, most authors admit that
high multicollinearity between contemporaneous price and leads of price (as well as lags of price)
compromise their inclusion (Chaploupka, 1991). Having learned about the diculty of interpretation
from our own preliminary work and the work of other authors, we only include contemporaneous price.
Results that consider the e ects of lags and leads of price are available from the authors.
       The approximation to the value functions is used to form a set of jointly estimated equations
that summarize individual smoking behavior. Current smoking behavior is modeled in two parts: the
probability of smoking and the quantity of cigarettes smoked conditional on smoking. Undoubtedly
there is correlation between the error terms in these two equations. For example, individuals who
heavily discount the future may be more likely to smoke and, conditional on smoking, to smoke more.
We allow such permanent individual heterogeneity to in uence both equations. Rather than treating
dropout behavior as exogenous, we include an equation explaining the probability of leaving school
between observed waves in the data (`t = 1). We model the unobserved heterogeneity that in uences
the decision to drop out of school as well as smoking behavior. We also include in the smoking equation
a dummy variable indicating that an individual is no longer in school and interact this indicator with
the price variable.
       Assuming that the idiosyncratic components of the error terms (t ) are independently Extreme
value distributed, the equations are:

              p(d0t = 1j) = P1 exp(zt 10 + X1t 20 + 30 qst + 11  + 1s )                           (4)
                              j =0 exp(zt 1j + X1t 2j + 3j pt + 1j  + 1s )
                                    0            0          0      0       0




       p(djt = 1jd0t = 1; ) = PJ exp(zt 1j + X2t 2j + 3j qst + 21  + 2s ) ; j = 1; : : : ; J (5)
                                j =1 exp(zt 1j + X2t 2j + 3j qst + 2j  + 2s )
                   6

                                    0            0          0      0           0




     p(`t = 1j`t;1 = 0; ) = 1 +exp( X3t + 3)                                                       (6)
                                  exp(X3t + 0 )

                                                     13
The three equations of our empirical model are estimated jointly and are linked by dependence on
the common individual unobservables.24 We follow Heckman and Singer (1984) and Mroz (1999) and
treat the unobservables as random e ects which are integrated out of the model. That is, we assume
a discrete distribution of  and estimate the points of support of the distribution, the probability
weights on each point of support, and the factor loadings in each equation. This procedure addresses
the joint endogeneity of outcomes arising from common unobserved factors, but imposes no distribu-
tional assumption (such as joint normality) on the unobserved factors. Mroz shows there are strong
econometric advantages to using this approach rather than parametric random e ects techniques. The
estimated likelihood function for a sample of N individuals is
                                N (X
                                Y  M            Y
                                                T Y
                                                  1
                L(; ) =                  m             p(`nt = `j`nt;1 = 0; m )` p(d0nt = 1 j m )d0
                                                                                    nt                 nt         (7)
                               n=1 m=1          t=1 `=0
                                  2                                                    3(1;d0 ) 9
                                                                                                >
                                                          Y J                                   =nt

                                 4(1 ; p(d0nt = 1 j m )) p(djnt = 1 j d0t = 1; m )d 5 j
                                                                                         nt
                                                                                                >
                                                                                                ;
                                                                               6

                                                          j =1

where  denotes the estimated parameters of the model, including the points of support (m ) and their
factor loadings (), and the 's are the probability weights on the M points of support of the discrete
heterogeneity distribution. The parameters in this set of equations are identi ed by functional form,
covariance matrix restrictions, and exclusion restrictions. The dropout equation includes variables
indicating whether the youth has a sibling who dropped out of school and the percent of students
who drop out of one's school which are omitted from the smoking equations. We also eliminate the
contemporaneous school characteristics in the smoking decisions of dropouts.
  24
     The dependence of the probabilities on vectors of explanatory variables is omitted for convenience. We have
chosen to specify a multinomial logit model given the categorical data we have on smoking intensity (discussed in
Section 3) but linear regression techniques can be used if smoking consumption is continuous. The multinomial
logit speci cation is preferred over an ordered logit speci cation because it allows for di erent sensitivities to
prices (and other variables) by outcome. More formally, we can reject the ordered logit assumption of common
coecients across outcomes using a likelihood ratio test. Also, we do not report results from estimating separate
multinomial logit models conditional on smoking history (i.e., previous non-smoker or smoker), and hence, we
have dropped the k subscript on the estimated coecients. We do, however, interact these indicators with key
variables such as cigarette price to allow for di erent price sensitivities. See Subsection 5.1 for further discussion
of alternative model speci cations.




                                                             14
5 Estimation Results
5.1 Comparative Results
Before discussing the results from our preferred model that explicitly captures the dynamic in uences
of one's smoking history, we discuss results obtained from a typical speci cation found in the older
literature. We then make several additions to the simple model (some of which have been included in
the relevant literature) which help motivate our full model. We use the estimates from each speci ca-
tion to generate behavioral responses to price changes. These results are summarized in Table 5 which
presents the estimated behavioral change when cigarette prices are increased from 100 to 200 cents
in all years of the sample.25 The left panel displays the percentage point change in smoking behavior
under the two pricing policies, while the right panel lists the associated (arc) price elasticity.26
       The top rows of Table 5 display results from a typical model estimated in the literature that
includes few covariates, no observations on dropouts, and no state xed e ects (which we refer to as
Model 1). The rst column of each panel shows there are large reductions in smoking participation
from the price increase with an overall price elasticity of -1.01. The remaining three columns of each
panel show that, conditional on smoking, the price increase noticeably increases light smoking and
reduces moderate smoking intensity. Also, the participation reduction from the price increase falls over
time. The reduced price sensitivity of NELS:88 youth as they grow older could stem from behavioral
di erences related to the aging process or from some national trend in smoking behavior. In general,
these results are comparable to the behavioral responses for young adults typically found in the older
literature.
       To re ect some advantages of the NELS:88 data over other datasets used in the smoking liter-
ature, we modify Model 1 by adding additional individual, parental, and school characteristics and
including dropouts in the sample (Model 2). At this point, however, we do not include variables mea-
suring one's smoking history. These additions slightly reduce the participation response (the elasticity
is -0.85) and the conditional reduction in moderate and heavy smoking intensity. These results indicate
that better control for observable variables that are correlated with smoking behavior provide better
  25
     Real prices in the data range from 98 to 188 cents. As a robustness check, three other price changes were
considered: adding 1, 25, or 100 cents to the actual price in each year. The elasticities are similar to those in
Table 5 under these alternative price changes.
                                            h (outcomejqst2 );p(outcomejqst1 ) i h qst2 ;qst1 i
  26
     The arc elasticity is calculated as  = (pp(outcome jqst2 )+p(outcomejqst1 ))=2 = (qst2 +qst1 )=2 .


                                                       15
estimates of the price e ect by purging it of some omitted variable bias. This issue is a particularly
important problem for the majority of smoking results based on sparse sets of covariates or aggregated
individual observations.
       Adding state xed e ects to the speci cation dramatically changes the results (Model 3). We see
that there is no longer any signi cant e ect of prices on smoking participation (the elasticity is -0.04)
while there is a larger conditional reduction in heavy smoking. This suggests that there are state-
speci c factors which in uence both individual smoking behavior and cigarette price variation. This
is consistent with anti-smoking sentiment, for example, boosting prices (by increasing state cigarette
taxes) and independently reducing smoking rates. Failure to model such state speci c di erences
incorrectly attributes the negative e ect of anti-smoking sentiment to prices. The more negative price
elasticity in Model 2 relative to Model 3 is evidence of such a spurious negative correlation between
prices and smoking propensity.
       Finally, we investigate the role of previous smoking behavior by including exogenous indicators
of previous use, previous intensity, and smoking duration (Model 4).27 (Parameter estimates and
standard errors from this model are displayed in Appendix Table A1.) While Table 5 reveals that the
overall behavioral change remains roughly the same (as Model 3), Model 4 can be used to show that
various subgroups behave di erently. While a price increase has virtually no in uence on previous
non-smokers' participation, it increases previous smokers' participation. There are also di erences
based on the duration and intensity of previous smoking behavior which are not displayed. It must be
emphasized, however, that we cannot yet attribute di erences in the behavior of previous smokers and
non-smokers to addiction. Without modeling the endogeneity of past use it is not clear whether there
is an addictive e ect of smoking or if unobserved individual di erences explain persistent behavior.
We also include a dropout indicator and interact it with price. The results reveal that dropouts are
much less likely to smoke in response to a price increase and have a larger conditional reduction in
smoking intensity than do non-dropouts. Again, we cannot yet conclude that dropping out directly
in uences smoking since unobserved individual characteristics may in uence both leaving school and
smoking behavior causing the dropout e ect in the smoking equations to be biased. This possibility
motivates our modeling of dropout behavior in our preferred model discussed below.
  27
    In order to investigate price sensitivity variation over time we include interactions of price with several
dynamic variables including previous behavior and year indicators. In unreported speci cations, we also interact
price with the continuous age variable and found similar price sensitivities suggesting that elasticities di er by
year but not by age within a particular year or grade.

                                                       16
      Our preliminary results are roughly consistent with previous studies of teen smoking behavior.28
DeCicca et al. (1999), who also use NELS:88 data, nd that prices and taxes have a non-signi cant
(and sometimes positive) e ect on smoking initiation during high school. They also nd that the
price elasticity of smoking participation becomes less negative as the cohort ages. In contrast, Gruber
(2000) nds prices have a signi cant negative e ect on smoking participation and that this e ect is
more marked for older teens. In addition to obvious di erences in our datasets (i.e., di erent time
periods (1988-1992 vs. 1991-1997) and four years of data from a single cohort vs. cross-sections from
several cohorts), our di erent price sensitivity age pro les may result from sample selection. While
our dataset contains a nationally representative sample of all youth including dropouts, Gruber (2000)
mainly relies on datasets (Monitoring the Future (MTF) and the Youth Risk Behavior Risk Survey
(YRBS)) which omit certain states and dropouts.29 We estimated a smoking participation logit similar
to Gruber (our Model 1 with state xed e ects) and compared the results with and without these
omissions. In all cases, restrictions on the NELS:88 sample produced price elasticities which are
more positive for younger teens and more negative for older teens than those obtained using the full
sample of states.30 This suggests that much of the di erence between our results regarding smoking
participation elasticities over time (or as youth age) can be explained by the composition of states
or individuals used in each sample. While limited to one cohort, the NELS:88 data have the unique
  28
      Overall, these estimates give a price elasticity of totalPconsumption of -0.532. The predicted total number
of cigarettes consumed for any set of prices is [p(smoke) i p(ijsmoke)  (number of cigarettes in i)] where i
is a conditional smoking intensity category. We assigned the following number of cigarettes smoked to these
categories (which are reported as a range in the data): 3 for category 1 (1-5 cigarettes), 8 for category 2 (6-10
cigarettes), and 15 for category 3 (11+ cigarettes). Because this numerical assignment is ad hoc, we do not
report total consumption elasticities in the remainder of the paper.
   29
      The MTF sample of states (roughly 35 per year on average) was generously provided to us by MTF personnel
while the YRBS sample of states (roughly 31 per year on average) is listed in the Centers for Disease Control
(2000a and various years) and Kolbe et al. (1993).
   30
      For example, when we include all states the price elasticities for 8th, 10th and 12th grade are (-2.050,
0.911, and 1.202). However, when we only include individuals from states in the 1991 MTF (the rst year of
Gruber's sample), the price elasticities by grade are (-1.074, -1.987, and -0.790). We nd similar di erences
when dropouts are included, when the YRBS sample of states is used, or when various permutations of these
omissions are used. Because the MTF and YRBS samples of states di er over time and our NELS:88 data cover
a di erent period than Gruber's, we considered three subsets of states from each dataset: states present in the
  rst year of Gruber's sample, states present in all years of Gruber's sample, and states present in any year of
Gruber's sample. The patterns discussed in the text appear clearly in the rst two state subsets and to a lesser
degree in the last state subset. Because the MTF sample di ers by grade in certain years, we formed separate
grade-speci c subsets and estimated the equations separately by grade for our MTF sample and its full sample
comparison. In all cases we limited the non-price covariates to gender, race, age, and state xed e ects (year
dummies are included in the YRBS sample).



                                                       17
feature of providing a representative sample of youth from all 50 states which appears to generate
signi cantly di erent measures of price sensitivity.
       We also performed several robustness checks on our speci cations (and these results are available
upon request). First, we used state taxes in place of cigarette prices to control for the simultaneity of
prices and aggregate demand for cigarettes. The simulated behavioral changes are virtually identical
for smoking participation and conditional smoking intensity (there is a slightly greater reduction in
heavy smoking under taxes than prices).31 Second, we checked whether the results are sensitive to
the date of prices and taxes since NELS:88 individuals are surveyed on di erent dates. We considered
several monthly dates for taxes (which are available on a day-by-day basis) and several interpolated
monthly dates and averages for prices (which are surveyed once a year). Shifting these dates did not
alter the results signi cantly. Third, we estimated the smoking participation and intensity equations
separately by year and by previous smoking status. The price sensitivities were similar and thus we
report results from the model with fewer estimated parameters.


5.2 Results from the Preferred Model
Having motivated the importance of including both observed and unobserved individual heterogeneity,
allowing for unobserved state di erences, and modeling previous behavior, we now turn to the results
from our preferred model that incorporates these concerns (Model 5). We begin by discussing the
e ect of previous behavior on smoking decisions when permanent individual unobserved heterogeneity
is modeled. We then discuss di erences in the immediate and long-run e ects of previous smoking
behavior. Because subgroups have di erent price sensitivities we continue to interact price with the
smoking history variables and year indicators.
      If the smoking history variables re ect part of the permanent unobservable di erences among
youth, then the estimated coecients on the (assumed exogenous) behavioral variables and their
interactions are biased in Model 4. Model 5 controls for these unobserved di erences and the parameter
estimates for all variables are listed in Table 6.32 Comparing the estimates in this table with those
  31
     The simulations are based on a 25 cent increase in either prices or taxes. This value was selected to avoid
using out of sample values for taxes.
  32
     Results are reported from a model with three points of support in the heterogeneity distribution; four points
of supports did not provide signi cant improvement in the likelihood function. Individuals with unobserved
characteristics at the right of the distribution are more likely to smoke and more likely to drop out of school.
The estimated mass point values are 0.00, 0.72, and 1.00 with estimated weights of 0.24, 0.58, and 0.18.

                                                       18
in Appendix Table A1 (Model 4) we see that, together, the new parameter estimates (on smoking
history variables and their interactions with the price variable) do move in the expected direction.33
For example, these estimates imply that the arguments of the logit smoking probability increase by
1.74 if an individual smoked 6-10 cigarettes in the previous period (relative to not smoking) at a
price of 100 cents; the analogous increase using Model 4 is 2.28. This translates to 20 percentage
point (3.43 times) increase in the predicted smoking propensity using Model 5 and to a 37 percentage
point (4.59 times) increase in the predicted probability of smoking using Model 4. These substantial
di erences can be attributed to upwardly biased estimates in Model 4. While unobserved di erences
may drive certain individuals to smoke or not smoke in every period, Model 4 incorrectly incorporates
this e ect in the coecient on previous behavior. When this endogeneity of previous smoking behavior
is modeled, smoking history continues to have a signi cant (but smaller) e ect on current behavior.
We believe this to be among the rst direct evidence of smoking addiction (as opposed to simple
persistence which might be explained by both addiction and unobserved heterogeneity).
       In addition to reducing the e ect of previous smoking behavior, modeling unobserved individual
preferences for smoking changes the estimated price sensitivities. Here, we suspect that ignoring
unobserved heterogeneity makes both previous smokers and non-smokers appear less price sensitive
since it incorrectly attributes their unobserved di erences to the highly collinear previous smoking
behavior. The bias in the price interaction coecients is evident by comparing the reported price
elasticities in the top panel of Table 7 with those from Model 4 in Table 5. We see that the overall
participation price elasticities generated from a model without unobserved individual heterogeneity
are biased upwards. Those from the preferred model have an overall price elasticity of -0.24 compared
to -0.03 from Model 4. Elasticities by year also fall with a more negative sensitivity in 1988 and
a sign change in 1990. The sensitivity in 1992 continues to be positive, but is closer to zero. The
conditional smoking intensity price elasticities also change, with noticeably more negative values for
heavy smoking.
       The di erences in participation price sensitivities between previous smokers and previous non-
smokers becomes more apparent when unobserved heterogeneity is modeled. Non-smokers exhibit a
price elasticity of -0.29 (vs. -0.07 in Model 4) although smokers' elasticity remains unchanged (0.46
vs. 0.47). Similarly, because leaving school is modeled, the parameters on the dropout indicator and
  33
       The price interactions in Table 6 are jointly signi cant at the 5% level.


                                                          19
its interaction with price are now consistent. Relative to Model 4, the reduction in bias is re ected by
the changes in calculated price sensitivities of dropouts (-0.60 vs. -0.41) and non-dropouts (0.20 vs.
0.45).
       Having modeled the unobserved individual heterogeneity and obtained unbiased estimates of the
parameters we can now predict the behavior of individuals over time. Previous predictions of behavior
involved using the observed history of individuals in the sample. Calculations in this manner provide
an estimate of the immediate response to price changes (as in Table 5 and the top panel of Table 7).
However, the appropriate calculation requires simulating behavior of the sample in 1988 (where all
individuals were previously non-smokers) and updating their smoking histories using the simulated
behavior. Subsequently, behavior in 1990 is simulated using simulated 1988 behavior and histories
are updated. Finally, we simulate behavior for 1992 using the updated histories.34 This updating
procedure leads to di erent predictions because previous behavior in uences current decisions through
channels like addiction.
       The bottom panel of Table 7 describes the changes in behavior and elasticities when we use
the updating procedure. These changes now re ect long-run responses as opposed to immediate
responses to price changes. Relative to not updating (the top panel), the overall elasticity is more
negative (-0.29 vs. -0.24) as is the price elasticity in 1990 and 1992.35 The greatest changes are among
previous smokers who now have a much smaller, but still positive, price sensitivity (0.08 vs. 0.46).
Although not reported in the table, moderate and heavy previous smokers are now predicted to reduce
smoking participation in response to higher prices. We also observe larger price sensitivities in the
conditional level of smoking. In particular, using the updating procedure we observe more movement
from moderate to light smoking levels when prices increase. The price sensitivity of dropouts is
further enhanced. These simulations demonstrate that price changes modify behavior and in uence
subsequent smoking decisions of youth. Prices have a dynamic e ect as they prevent smoking today
which in turn makes teens more price sensitive and less likely to smoke in future periods.
  34
       Additional details on the updating procedure are available from the authors.
  35
       By construction, updating has no e ect on behavior in 1988, the rst year of the sample.




                                                       20
5.3 Policy Simulations
It is important to see whether our re ned estimates imply economically meaningful di erent responses
to policy changes. Although it is unlikely that cigarette taxes (or prices) would increase temporarily
and return to their previous level, we simulated this policy experiment in order to demonstrate the
e ect of a one-time tax increase on future behavior. Obviously any change in smoking behavior in
future years is the result of modi ed behavior in the year of the tax increase.36 We simulated a 100
cent increase in real prices in 1988, with prices held at their original 1990 and 1992 real levels. Relative
to behavior at original prices, there is a 2.30 percentage point drop in smoking participation rates in
1988. This decrease in smoking in 1988 results in a 1.05 percentage point decrease in smoking rates
in 1990 and a 0.69 percentage point decrease in 1992. Movement away from moderate and heavy
levels of smoking continues after the 1988 tax increase but the magnitude is much smaller. Also, there
is a decrease in the smoking participation rates among both non-smokers and smokers. Despite low
smoking rates among 8th graders (and hence, few individuals for whom the price increase will deter
smoking), the participation changes are large relative to their baseline levels. These results suggest
that price changes have important dynamic implications.
       We can also show the importance of modeling unobserved individual heterogeneity and account-
ing for the behavior modi cation associated with previous price changes by comparing the aggregate
smoking participation predictions of Models 3, 4, and 5 when various permanent increases in prices
occur. Table 8 displays the proportion of individuals who are predicted to smoke at the unchanged
original prices in the data and under various price scenarios. As seen in the left panel, the overall
smoking participation rates are larger in Models 3 and 4 than in Model 5 for each price change simu-
lation. Separated by year, we see that the probability of smoking is overestimated in Models 3 and 4
by as much as four percentage points.37 These results highlight the importance of modeling previous
behavior and allowing for behavioral modi cation through updating of the smoking history.
       These calculations also demonstrate that the role of updating is more important for larger price
changes than for smaller price changes. The substantial di erences between Model 5 and the other
  36
     Predictions of these future responses are not feasible without modeling behavior over time. Similarly, it is
necessary to update behavior in response to a price change because predictions based on actual behavior would
indicate no change in long-run behavior under this temporary increase.
  37
     The increased smoking response to higher prices in 1992 (in Model 5) and in 1990 and 1992 (in Models 3
and 4) is due to a positive yearprice interaction coecient. This estimated e ect might be an artifact of
national trends towards greater smoking permissiveness and not attributable simply to age or grade e ects.


                                                       21
speci cations as price changes increase are due to the discrete nature of smoking participation. A
large price increase (but not a small one) induces individuals to not smoke; and because non-smokers
are more price sensitive, there is a cumulative dynamic e ect. These results suggest that price (or
tax) increases have a very non-linear e ect in long-run behavior: high prices are much more powerful
detterents than low prices.
       The right panel of Table 8 demonstrates the degree of inaccuracy in the predictions of population
subgroups when previous behavior is not modeled. The most marked di erences are between previous
smokers and non-smokers. Model 3 simply relies on observed covariates other than previous behavior
to explain di erences between these groups. Model 4, on the other hand, overstates previous smokers'
smoking propensities since the coecient on previous behavior (assumed exogenous in this model)
is strongly correlated with unobserved heterogeneity and is therefore biased. Similarly, the smoking
participation of dropouts and non-dropouts is predicted with substantial error.
       Our nal experiment measures the pure e ect of previous behavior on smoking decisions. As
we have argued above, the parameters on the smoking history variables in Model 5 more precisely
re ect behavior modi cation (i.e., addiction) because there are controls for observed and unobserved
heterogeneity that in uence the smoking decisions. The estimates from Model 4 can only provide
the combined e ect of both addictive behavior and unobserved preferences. To measure these e ects,
we perform identical simulations and use the updating procedure (as opposed to observed previous
behavior) on both Models 4 and 5. In the simulations (with results displayed in Table 9), we force
all individuals in the sample to be non-smokers in 1988. We then update their history and simulate
behavior in 1990 and 1992. This procedure is repeated forcing all individuals to be heavy smokers in
1988 and simulating their behavior in 1990 and 1992. From Model 5, the pure e ect of smoking heavily
in 1988 as opposed to not smoking in 1988 is to increase participation rates by 33.2 percentage points
(47.15 - 13.95) in 1990 and by 20.6 percentage points in 1992 (42.33 - 21.74). That is, individuals who
smoke in 1988 are 3.4 times more likely to smoke in 1990 and twice as likely to smoke in 1992. The
smaller di erence in 1992 than 1990 re ects the fact that some individuals who were forced to smoke
in 1988, who otherwise would not have, will choose not to smoke in 1990 decreasing their probability
of smoking in 1992. Additionally, smoking in 1988 and 1990 increases the probability of smoking in
1992 by 46.8 percentage points.



                                                  22
      In Model 4, the e ect of previous behavior combines the pure e ect with unobserved hetero-
geneity and thus the simulation di erences are larger. Here we nd that individuals who smoked in
1988 as opposed to not smoking in 1988 are 5.1 times more likely to smoke in 1990 and 3.0 times
more likely to smoke in 1992. Smoking in 1988 and 1990 makes one 6.4 times more likely to smoke
in 1992. These results from both models provide clear evidence that smoking behavior persists. More
importantly, when we purge the estimated e ects of unobserved heterogeneity, there is still a sizable
e ect of previous behavior. The Model 5 estimates allow us to measure the magnitude of smoking
addiction exclusive of preferences.


6 Conclusion
This paper highlights the importance of explicitly taking endogenous smoking history and unobserved
individual heterogeneity into consideration when measuring the price sensitivity of youth smoking
decisions. By controlling for a wide range of observed and unobserved individual di erences, we are
able to show that behavior modi cation plays an important role in smoking persistence. Its role,
however, is overstated when the endogeneity of previous behavior is not considered. The paper also
demonstrates that price increases can in uence future behavior by reducing the current number of
smokers. We show that ignoring smoking dynamics can give misleading estimates of the aggregate
e ect of various cigarette tax increases. This bias is likely to be more severe over long time horizons
as tax increases produce a population with a larger proportion of more price sensitive non-smokers.
We also demonstrate that prices have a non-linear e ect on smoking behavior, with large increases
having a much stonger in uence than small increases (at least for younger teens).
      This dynamic framework can address questions of interest to policy-makers. For example, the
model can forecast the immediate response of youth smoking to federal cigarette tax increases as well
as predict how youth will be a ected in the long run. We also show how tax changes can in uence
current smokers and non-smokers di erently. The procedures we use can be extended to longer panels
or an older population to obtain better estimates of long-run e ects of tax increases and to determine
the importance of dynamics among adults (i.e., are adult smokers less price sensitive than adult
non-smokers?). With a more complete understanding of lifetime smoking dynamics, we will be able to
forecast how overall population smoking rates will vary in the short and long run in response to various

                                                  23
price changes. Investigating these extensions will help inform the current policy debate regarding the
appropriate level of future cigarette taxes and other smoking policies.




                                                 24
References
Becker, G., M. Grossman, and K. Murphy (1994). An Empirical Analysis of Cigarette Addiction.
American Economic Review, 84: 396-418.

Centers for Disease Control (1994). Surveillance for Selected Tobacco-Use Behaviors { U.S.,
1990-1994. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. U. S. Dept. of Health, Education, and
Welfare, vol. 43 No. SS-3.

Centers for Disease Control (2000a). YRBS: Youth97. CD-ROM.

Centers for Disease Control (2000b). Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System: Prevalence
Data. U. S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare.   www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/brfss/.

Centers for Disease Control (various years). Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: CDC
Surveillance Summaries. U. S. Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare.

Chaloupka, F. (1991). Rational Addictive Behavior and Cigarette Smoking. Journal of Political
Economy, 99: 722-742.

Chaloupka, F. and M. Grossman (1996). Price, Tobacco Control Policies and Youth Smoking.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5740.

Chaloupka, F. and K. Warner (forthcoming). The Economics of Smoking. In The Handbook of
Health Economics, J. Newhouse and A. Culyer, eds. North-Holland.

DeCicca, P., D. Kenkel, and A. Mathios (1999). Putting Out the Fires: Will Higher Taxes
Reduce Youth Smoking? Mimeo, Cornell University.

Douglas, S. (1998). The Duration of the Smoking Habit. Economic Inquiry, 36: 49-64.

Gruber, J. (2000). Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Prices and Policies. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 7506.

Gruber, J. and B. Ko szegi (2000). Is Addiction `Rational'? Theory and Evidence. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7507.

Gruber, J. and J. Zinman (2000). Youth Smoking in the U.S.: Evidence and Implications. In An
Economic Analysis of Risky Behavior Among Youth, J. Gruber, ed., NBER.

Heckman, J. and B. Singer (1984). A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional As-
sumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data. Econometrica, 52: 271-320.
                                               25
Hsiao, C. (1986) Anlaysis of Panel Data. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.

Kolbe, L., L. Kann, and J. Collins (1993). Overview of the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance
System. Public Health Reports, 108 (Supplement 1): 2-10.

Mroz, T. (1999). Discrete Factor Approximations in Simultaneous Equation Models: Estimating the
Impact of a Dummy Endogenous Variable on a Continuous Outcome. Journal of Econometrics, 92:
233-274.

Tauras, J. and F. Chaloupka (1999a). Determinants of Smoking Cessation: An Analysis of Young
Adult Men and Women. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7262.

Tauras, J. and F. Chaloupka (1999b). Price, Clean Indoor Air Laws, and Cigarette Smoking:
Evidence from Longitudinal Data for Youth Adults. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 6937.

Tobacco Institute (1997). The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation. vol. 32.




                                               26
Appendix
Cigarette Taxes and Prices Across States
       The following evidence suggests that cigarette taxes and prices in a state are not random.
Figure 1 depicts real state tax rates (denominated in 1984 cents per pack), real cigarette prices
(denominated in 1984 ten cents per pack), and smoking rates among individuals aged 18 or older.
The upper left hand panel shows the means of these variables across all states and the District of
Columbia over the period 1980 through 1997.38 Both the real tax rate (the solid line) and the real
price (the dashed line) follow the same general upward trend.39 Mean adult smoking rates tend to
trend downwards, the opposite pattern of tax rates and prices, though they are roughly level from
1992 through 1997. This pattern suggests that higher tax rates and prices tend to be associated with
lower smoking rates among adults.
       The story is more complicated at the state level. The remaining panels in Figure 1 plot real tax
rates, real prices, and smoking rates for Washington, California, and North Carolina. First, notice
that the ranking of states by tax rates is generally consistent: for all but a few years in the sample
Washington's tax rate exceeds California's tax rate which in turn exceeds North Carolina's tax rate.
This suggests that states have systematic di erences in their tax setting policies. Second, states
with higher tax rates also tend to have higher cigarette prices: Washington's cigarette price exceeds
California's cigarette price (except in the few years where California's tax rate is higher) and both
always exceed North Carolina's cigarette price. Third, the state plots also illustrate a key aspect of
tax-setting policies: tax rates tend to be constant over long periods and are occasionally punctuated
by sharp increases.40 For example, California's tax rate was only signi cantly adjusted once during
the sample period (the rate was tripled in 1989) while North Carolina's tax rate remains roughly
constant. This suggests a strong degree of hysteresis in tax policies. Finally, there is no longer a clear
negative relationship between adult smoking rates and cigarette prices or taxes. For example, during
the 1990s Washington had large tax rate and price increases but its smoking rate actually increased
slightly. Similarly, California's tax rate and price fell over the 1990s but its smoking rate declined.
  38
     State smoking rates are only available starting in 1984 (Centers for Disease Control, 1994).
  39
     The main divergence occurs in 1993 when prices fell while taxes continued to increase. The price drop
resulted from a sharp one time reduction in manufacturer prices which was instituted as a means of preventing
sales erosion to generic brands.
  40
     Recall that the plots describe real tax rates which take into account in ation; when nominal tax rates
remain constant, the real rates will decline.

                                                     27
          Figure 1: Smoking rates, Tax rates, and Cigarette prices
Sources: Centers for Disease Control (1994, 2000b) and Tobacco Institute (1997).

                                       28
                    Table 1: Smoking Behavior of the Sample

                               1988                     1990                1992
Variable                  SS          Prop         SS          Prop    SS          Prop

Full Sample
Smoke any                10233        0.046        10233       0.160   10233       0.227
Smoke 1-5 cigs/day         471        0.665         1635       0.621   2322        0.478
Smoke 6-10 cigs/day        471        0.172         1635       0.206   2322        0.261
Smoke 11+ cigs/day         471        0.163         1635       0.173   2322        0.261
Leave School             10233        0.026         9964       0.052
Non-dropouts
Smoke any                10233        0.046         9964       0.150   9441        0.204
Smoke 1-5 cigs/day         471        0.665         1499       0.660   1930        0.534
Smoke 6-10 cigs/day        471        0.172         1499       0.191   1930        0.247
Smoke 11+ cigs/day         471        0.163         1499       0.149   1930        0.219
Dropouts
Smoke any                                            269       0.506     792       0.495
Smoke 1-5 cigs/day                                   136       0.191     392       0.204
Smoke 6-10 cigs/day                                  136       0.368     392       0.327
Smoke 11+ cigs/day                                   136       0.441     392       0.469

Note: Prop measures proportion where the denominator is the full sample in the
      `smoke any' calculation, the number of smokers in the consumption level
      calculations, and the number still in school in the `leave school' calculation.
      These numbers are denoted SS.




                                              29
                     Table 2: Dynamic Smoking Transitions

                                          Cigarette Use (per day) in t
                                0 cigs         1-5 cigs       6-10 cigs   11+ cigs

                                                   t = 1988
Cigarette Use in t ; 2
0      cigs/day                  95.40            3.06            0.79        0.75
                                                   t = 1990
Cigarette Use in t ; 2
0      cigs/day                  86.63            9.24            2.28        1.84
1-5    cigs/day                  32.27           30.35           22.04       15.34
6-10   cigs/day                  19.75           11.11           34.57       34.57
11+    cigs/day                  31.17           12.99           20.78       35.06
Unconditional on prior use       84.02            9.93            3.28        2.77
                                                   t = 1992
Cigarette Use in t ; 2
0      cigs/day                  87.52            8.06            2.40        2.02
1-5    cigs/day                  32.19           34.94           20.67       12.20
6-10   cigs/day                   9.23           11.90           42.86       36.01
11+    cigs/day                   9.89            7.77           15.90       66.43
Unconditional on prior use       77.31           10.85            5.91        5.93




                                         30
                         Table 3: Descriptive Statistics of the Sample

                                             1988                1990                1992
Variable                              Mean      Std Dev   Mean      Std Dev   Mean      Std Dev

Student Characteristics
Non-time varying variables
   Female                              0.535      0.499
   Black                               0.087      0.281
   Hispanic                            0.116      0.320
   Other/Non-white                     0.082      0.275
   Baptist                             0.067      0.250
   No religion                         0.090      0.286
   Other/Non-Catholic                  0.542      0.498
   Religion missing                    0.019      0.137
   No. of older siblings               1.332      1.850
   Older siblings missing              0.112      0.315
   Sibling dropped out                 0.004      0.301
   Sibling dropped out missing         0.033      0.179
Time varying variables
   Previous smoker                     0              0   0.046       0.210   0.160       0.366
   Previous intensity = 6-10 cigs      0              0   0.008       0.088   0.033       0.178
   Previous intensity = 11+ cigs       0              0   0.007       0.086   0.028       0.164
   Duration smoking                    0              0   0.046       0.210   0.206       0.477
   Age as of January (in months) 166.557          6.594 190.557       6.594 214.557       6.594
   Age missing                     0.021          0.143   0.021       0.143   0.021       0.143
   Standardized test score        50.649         13.251 50.053       13.762 42.438       22.093
   Test score missing              0.030          0.170   0.038       0.190   0.187       0.390
   Dropout indicator                   0              0   0.026       0.160   0.077       0.267
   % in school who drop out            0              0   6.072       9.457   3.000       4.805
   % who drop out missing              0              0   0.099       0.298   0.156       0.363
School Characteristics
    Public school                      0.816      0.387   0.837       0.369   0.792       0.406
    Suburban school                    0.433      0.496   0.395       0.489   0.377       0.485
    Rural school                       0.323      0.468   0.315       0.465   0.296       0.457
    % on free lunch in school          0.213      0.217   0.159       0.195   0.165       0.196
    % on free lunch missing            0.005      0.068   0.092       0.289   0.070       0.255
    % with single parent in school     0.249      0.177   0.118       0.089   0.227       0.184
    % with single parent missing       0.037      0.188   0.157       0.363   0.112       0.315
    % Black in school                  0.098      0.186   0.095       0.182   0.085       0.170
    % Hispanic in school               0.088      0.197   0.084       0.182   0.078       0.178
    Racial composition missing         0.005      0.070   0.050       0.217   0.064       0.244




                                                31
              Table 3: Descriptive Statistics of the Sample | continued

                                            1988                1990                1992
Variable                             Mean      Std Dev   Mean      Std Dev   Mean      Std Dev

Household Characteristics
Non-time varying variables
   Guardian born before 1940          0.096      0.295
   Guardian born 1940-1955            0.790      0.407
   Guardian's age missing             0.030      0.170
   Parent's education                14.122      2.698
   Parent's education missing         0.006      0.076
   Parent's work                      0.964      0.187
   Parent's work missing              0.008      0.088
   Family socioeconomic status       -0.063      0.766
Time varying variables
   Live with mom and dad              0.706      0.456    0.639      0.480    0.575      0.494
   Live with mom only                 0.143      0.350    0.125      0.331    0.139      0.346
   Family composition missing         0.004      0.061    0.064      0.245    0.149      0.356
   Income <10K                        0.090      0.286    0.090      0.286    0.073      0.261
   Income 10K-25K                     0.230      0.421    0.230      0.421    0.190      0.392
   Income 25K-50K                     0.382      0.486    0.382      0.486    0.299      0.458
   Income missing                     0.087      0.283    0.087      0.283    0.153      0.360
Price Variables (adjusted for in ation)
    Cigarette Pricet (cents/pack) 124.460       10.633 138.795      13.198 161.155      15.310
    Sample size                      10,233              10,233              10,233




                                               32
                                      Table 4: Smoking Participation and Nominal Tax Rates by State

                Percent who smoke          Real Cigarette Price                      Percent who smoke          Real Cigarette Price
      State     1988 1990 1992             1988 1990 1992                   State    1988 1990 1992             1988 1990 1992

       AL        4.6   15.4    25.1        119.1   132.7   157.9            MT         2.6   15.8    21.1       120.1   133.9   153.5
       AK        0.0    8.3    29.2        130.6   162.4   187.8            NE        10.2   22.7    21.6       128.4   136.8   157.8
       AZ        8.7   19.4    35.0        118.2   124.2   155.6            NV         4.6   18.5    21.5       135.0   165.7   172.1
       AR        2.2   16.9    27.0        124.9   134.7   159.6            NH         3.4   20.7    31.0       118.2   129.7   152.4
       CA        2.6    9.1    14.3        122.3   156.3   185.1            NJ         3.3   11.2    18.8       137.3   142.4   174.8
       CO        3.6   13.1    17.9        120.8   142.4   148.0            NM         6.1   21.4    27.5       118.4   127.5   153.5
       CT        1.1    8.7    25.0        135.1   163.3   178.5            NY         3.6   14.8    22.3       131.1   159.7   181.4
       DE        0.0   13.0    34.8        124.2   133.6   166.7            NC         7.5   17.5    23.0       100.0   111.0   133.7
       FL        4.3   10.0    14.3        135.9   143.2   172.7            ND         1.2   12.0    20.5       128.4   137.7   159.6
       GA        1.2   13.6    17.9        113.7   126.2   144.0            OH         5.7   17.1    24.4       112.9   129.2   149.0
       HI        5.7   14.3    14.3        139.3   157.9   186.4            OK         5.5   14.4    26.7       127.7   139.4   157.6
       ID        8.1   24.4    39.5        126.9   134.8   149.0            OR         2.1    6.2    12.4       136.2   149.7   163.1




33
       IL        2.7   16.6    27.9        129.2   140.5   166.0            PA         5.1   21.2    26.0       116.9   127.6   161.8
       IN        4.1   17.0    23.2        113.8   124.8   144.3            RI         2.7   18.9    13.5       126.5   144.0   173.4
       IA        7.2   20.3    22.9        129.3   142.7   165.1            SC         5.4   19.1    19.5       104.0   119.4   137.0
       KS        2.6   15.8    20.2        129.0   139.1   158.9            SD         0.0   33.3    33.3       129.9   132.5   152.1
       KY        6.5   16.8    28.1         98.3   110.3   125.7            TN         5.2   15.5    19.8       116.7   128.8   143.9
       LA        9.0   19.4    23.7        125.4   136.8   162.9            TX         3.1   12.9    19.1       133.3   139.0   163.2
       ME        0.0    9.1    21.2        134.3   152.7   175.2            UT         2.5    8.9    15.2       128.0   144.9   145.2
       MD        3.7   13.9    24.1        113.7   125.5   146.3            VT         3.6   21.4    28.6       128.8   137.1   148.1
       MA        5.0   18.3    24.8        137.0   145.4   162.5            VA         7.3   17.6    22.7       106.3   122.7   138.2
       MI        7.5   22.0    28.6        127.3   137.3   161.9            WA         7.8   16.1    25.0       147.3   159.8   174.7
       MN        4.1   18.9    29.7        147.6   154.8   184.2            WV         9.1   22.7    27.3       127.3   136.3   139.2
       MS        2.3   14.8    15.9        127.7   133.5   147.4            WI         5.0   22.9    30.0       133.9   144.2   154.9
       MO        5.6   18.0    26.3        119.3   123.2   143.8            WY         0.0   15.9    20.5       117.6   123.5   136.1

     Note: The percent of observations who smoke in each year (1988, 1990, 1992) is measured using our selected sample
           from NELS:88 which follows the same individuals over time. Individuals are in 8th grade in 1988.
           Real cigarette prices (in cents) are composed of producer prices and tax rates in November of the previous year.
                Table 5: Measures of Behavioral Change from Preliminary Models

                          Percentage Point Di erence                        (Arc) Elasticity
   Price = 200              Conditional on Smoking                       Conditional on Smoking
       vs.          Smoke Smoke Smoke         Smoke              Smoke Smoke Smoke         Smoke
   Price = 100       any 1-5 cigs 6-10 cigs 11+ cigs              any 1-5 cigs 6-10 cigs 11+ cigs

Model 1
Overall                -6.6     17.2      -14.9         -2.3       -1.01     0.44      -1.11      -0.29
By Year: 1988          -4.0     31.4      -23.6         -7.8       -1.52     0.68      -2.45      -0.92
         1990         -10.1     16.8      -12.0         -4.8       -1.06     0.38      -1.01      -0.53
         1992          -5.8     14.1      -15.1          1.0       -0.42     0.42      -0.85       0.05
Model 2
Overall                -6.0     17.3      -13.4         -3.9       -0.85     0.63      -1.03      -0.21
By Year: 1988          -3.5     25.4      -21.7         -3.7       -1.32     0.59      -2.32      -0.40
         1990          -8.8     19.1      -14.1         -5.0       -0.87     0.57      -1.17      -0.35
         1992          -5.7     14.3      -11.1         -3.2       -0.35     0.67      -0.66      -0.07
Model 3
Overall                1.7      24.1      -10.0        -14.0       -0.04     0.85      -0.86      -0.98
By Year: 1988          -2.1     26.0      -18.1         -7.9       -0.76     0.60      -2.02      -0.86
         1990           1.3     25.7      -12.2        -13.6        0.15     0.74      -1.08      -1.23
         1992           6.0     22.5       -6.9        -15.6        0.49     0.98      -0.48      -0.83
Model 4
Overall                2.3      25.3       -9.4        -16.0       -0.03     0.83      -0.94      -1.26
By Year: 1988          -2.4     31.6      -18.7        -12.9       -0.89     0.70      -2.10      -1.48
         1990           1.2     29.3      -12.3        -17.1        0.10     0.82      -1.22      -1.63
         1992           8.0     21.2       -5.4        -15.8        0.70     0.86      -0.50      -0.96
Non-Smokers            0.9      27.0      -13.8        -13.2       -0.07     0.69      -1.35      -1.32
Smokers               20.8      22.4       -1.4        -20.9        0.47     1.07      -0.18      -1.17
Non-Dropouts            5.2     22.6      -10.7        -11.9        0.45     0.60      -0.96      -1.15
Dropouts               -2.3     33.9       -1.1        -32.7       -0.41     1.76      -0.35      -1.58

Note: Model 1 contains a sparse set of covariates and dropouts are omitted from the sample.
      Model 2 is identical to Model 1 but additional covariates are added and dropouts are included.
      Model 3 is identical to Model 2 but includes state xed e ects.
      Model 4 is identical to Model 3 but includes (exogenous) controls for previous behavior
              and interacts them with price.
      Non-smoker and smoker refer to previous behavior. Non-dropouts and dropouts are in 1990 & 1992.
                                                  34
                                                     Table 6: Parameter Estimates from Model 5

                                                     Smoke Any              Smoke 6-10 Cigs         Smoke >10 Cigs           Leave School

     Cig pricet                                    -0.007   ( 0.008)        -0.028   ( 0.013)   ** -0.028   ( 0.015)   *         -          -
     Cig pricet  Year 1990                         0.007   ( 0.006)         0.008   ( 0.010)       0.000   ( 0.012)             -          -
     Cig pricet  Year 1992                         0.012   ( 0.006)   **    0.014   ( 0.010)       0.010   ( 0.013)             -          -
     Cig pricet  Previous smoker                   0.011   ( 0.007)    *    0.006   ( 0.014)      -0.002   ( 0.015)             -          -
     Cig pricet  Previous intensity = 6-10 cigs    0.020   ( 0.008)   **    0.026   ( 0.011)   ** 0.024    ( 0.012)   **        -          -
     Cig pricet  Previous intensity = 11+ cigs     0.013   ( 0.009)         0.015   ( 0.014)       0.022   ( 0.014)             -          -
     Cig Pricet  Years smoking                    -0.006   ( 0.006)        -0.010   ( 0.013)      -0.009   ( 0.013)             -          -
     Cig pricet  Dropout                          -0.012   ( 0.006)   **   -0.016   ( 0.007)   ** -0.032   ( 0.008)   **        -          -
     Cig pricet  Female                           -0.001   ( 0.003)         0.003   ( 0.006)       0.008   ( 0.006)             -          -
     Previous smoker                               -0.048   ( 1.019)         0.077   ( 2.189)       0.604   ( 2.381)             -          -
     Previous intensity = 6-10 cigs                -2.058   ( 1.171)    *   -2.682   ( 1.636)      -2.165   ( 1.829)             -          -
     Previous intensity = 11+ cigs                 -1.690   ( 1.381)        -1.906   ( 2.178)      -1.603   ( 2.114)             -          -
     Duration smoking                               1.390   ( 0.966)         1.398   ( 2.003)       1.693   ( 2.148)             -          -




35
     Dropout indicator                              1.520   ( 0.924)    *    3.408   ( 1.136)   ** 5.432    ( 1.173)   **        -          -
     Female                                         0.135   ( 0.489)        -0.840   ( 0.938)      -1.837   ( 0.970)    *    0.237   ( 0.121)    *
     Black                                         -1.690   ( 0.139)   **   -1.711   ( 0.557)   ** -1.903   ( 0.700)   **   -1.618   ( 0.318)   **
     Hispanic                                      -0.353   ( 0.094)   **   -1.398   ( 0.306)   ** -1.464   ( 0.362)   **    0.157   ( 0.245)
     Other/Non-white                               -0.584   ( 0.108)   **   -0.268   ( 0.277)      -0.651   ( 0.391)    *   -0.815   ( 0.363)   **
     Age as of January (in months)                  0.009   ( 0.004)   **    0.002   ( 0.005)       0.007   ( 0.007)         0.101   ( 0.009)   **
     Age missing                                    1.672   ( 0.768)   **    0.667   ( 1.153)       0.706   ( 1.383)        19.089   ( 1.640)   **
     Standardized test score                        0.011   ( 0.030)        -0.086   ( 0.044)   ** -0.022   ( 0.049)        -0.163   ( 0.075)   **
     Test score2                                   -0.001   ( 0.000)    *    0.000   ( 0.001)       0.000   ( 0.001)         0.001   ( 0.001)
     Test score missing                            -0.690   ( 0.750)        -2.332   ( 1.056)   ** -0.651   ( 1.181)        -5.928   ( 1.822)   **
     Baptist                                       -0.019   ( 0.105)        -0.154   ( 0.326)      -0.061   ( 0.453)        -0.206   ( 0.602)
     No religion                                    0.387   ( 0.090)   **    0.288   ( 0.228)       0.649   ( 0.294)   **    1.015   ( 0.311)   **
     Other/Non-Catholic                             0.065   ( 0.059)         0.067   ( 0.167)       0.406   ( 0.216)    *    0.414   ( 0.251)    *
     Religion missing                               0.021   ( 0.183)         0.561   ( 0.625)       0.877   ( 0.713)         0.599   ( 0.783)
     No. of older siblings                          0.065   ( 0.014)   **    0.051   ( 0.027)    * 0.037    ( 0.032)        -0.065   ( 0.038)   *
     Older siblings missing                         0.125   ( 0.075)    *   -0.052   ( 0.155)       0.118   ( 0.179)         0.207   ( 0.184)
     Live with mom and dad                         -0.381   ( 0.064)   **   -0.392   ( 0.139)   ** -0.374   ( 0.171)   **   -0.787   ( 0.218)   **
     Live with mom only                            -0.096   ( 0.082)        -0.139   ( 0.190)      -0.265   ( 0.227)        -0.288   ( 0.255)
     Family composition missing                    -0.298   ( 0.099)   **   -0.123   ( 0.271)      -0.083   ( 0.324)         0.267   ( 0.494)
                                        Table 6: Parameter Estimates from Model 5 | continued

                                        Smoke Any             Smoke 6-10 Cigs         Smoke >10 Cigs          Leave School


     Family socioeconomic status       0.099   ( 0.087)       -0.300   ( 0.166) *     -0.010   ( 0.208)     -0.239 ( 0.193)
     Parent's education               -0.023   ( 0.026)        0.008   ( 0.042)       -0.089   ( 0.049) * -0.101 ( 0.050)     **
     Parent's education missing       -0.374   ( 0.800)       -0.204   ( 0.988)       -1.754   ( 1.043) * -0.653 ( 0.950)
     Income <10K                       0.057   ( 0.118)        0.021   ( 0.366)       -0.016   ( 0.477)      1.304 ( 0.398)   **
     Income 10K-25K                   -0.011   ( 0.082)       -0.083   ( 0.255)        0.052   ( 0.332)      1.093 ( 0.333)   **
     Income 25K-50K                    0.002   ( 0.064)        0.101   ( 0.192)        0.130   ( 0.244)      0.740 ( 0.308)   **
     Income missing                   -0.040   ( 0.095)        0.135   ( 0.300)        0.294   ( 0.356)      1.004 ( 0.398)   **
     Parent's work                    -0.213   ( 0.205)       -0.305   ( 0.334)       -0.285   ( 0.424)     -1.183 ( 0.313)   **
     Parent's work missing            -0.273   ( 0.726)        0.143   ( 0.854)        0.135   ( 0.931)     -2.269 ( 0.856)   **
     Guardian born before 1940        -0.208   ( 0.123) *      0.386   ( 0.331)        0.110   ( 0.380)     -0.354 ( 0.389)
     Guardian born 1940-1955          -0.124   ( 0.089)        0.208   ( 0.224)        0.174   ( 0.246)     -0.371 ( 0.240)
     Guardian's age missing           -0.143   ( 0.166)        0.101   ( 0.439)        0.211   ( 0.517)      0.142 ( 0.472)




36
     Public school                    -0.155   ( 0.090) *      0.153   ( 0.261)        0.054   ( 0.357)      1.556 ( 0.471)   **
     Suburban school                  -0.004   ( 0.080)        0.095   ( 0.209)       -0.185   ( 0.298)     -0.092 ( 0.184)
     Rural school                     -0.175   ( 0.092) *     -0.025   ( 0.229)       -0.053   ( 0.322)     -0.221 ( 0.189)
     % on free lunch in school         0.017   ( 0.215)        0.338   ( 0.543)       -0.306   ( 0.702)     -0.772 ( 0.426)    *
     % on free lunch missing          -0.076   ( 0.122)        0.185   ( 0.370)        0.234   ( 0.451)     -0.440 ( 0.323)
     % Hispanic in school             -0.567   ( 0.304) *      0.159   ( 0.619)       -0.946   ( 0.867)      0.358 ( 0.458)
     % Black in school                -0.173   ( 0.319)       -0.576   ( 0.773)        0.142   ( 0.865)      1.633 ( 0.479)   **
     Racial composition missing       -0.002   ( 0.146)        0.256   ( 0.466)        0.220   ( 0.608)      0.531 ( 0.482)
     % with single parent in school    0.097   ( 0.184)        0.265   ( 0.647)        0.026   ( 0.726)     -0.392 ( 0.601)
     % with single parent missing     -0.028   ( 0.088)        0.109   ( 0.234)       -0.200   ( 0.294)      0.063 ( 0.210)
     Year 1990                         0.334   ( 0.771)       -0.547   ( 1.302)        0.117   ( 1.570)     -0.353 ( 0.254)
     Year 1992                        -0.640   ( 0.794)       -1.023   ( 1.331)       -0.878   ( 1.613)          -        -
     Sibling dropped out                   -          -            -          -            -          -      0.537 ( 0.195)   **
     Sibling dropped out missing           -          -            -          -            -          -      4.815 ( 0.416)   **
     % in school who drop out              -          -            -          -            -          -      0.011 ( 0.007)
     % who drop out missing                -          -            -          -            -          -     -0.119 ( 0.467)
     Constant                         -4.974   ( 1.497) **     1.659   ( 2.135)       -2.862   ( 3.239)    -24.308 ( 3.613)   **
      (factor loading)                4.210   ( 0.823) **     3.151   ( 1.155) **     6.569   ( 1.803) ** 10.619 ( 2.940)    **

     Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. ** indicates joint signi cance at the 5% level; * 10% level.
           State xed e ects are also estimated.
                    Table 7: Measures of Behavioral Change from Model 5

                         Percentage Point Di erence                          (Arc) Elasticity
   Price = 200              Conditional on Smoking                        Conditional on Smoking
       vs.          Smoke Smoke Smoke         Smoke               Smoke Smoke Smoke         Smoke
   Price = 100       any 1-5 cigs 6-10 cigs 11+ cigs               any 1-5 cigs 6-10 cigs 11+ cigs


Calculations using observed previous behavior ! immediate response
Overall                0.8      25.2      -10.9        -14.4         -0.24    0.64      -1.28     -1.68
By Year: 1988         -2.7      25.7      -15.8         -9.9         -1.02    0.50      -2.37     -2.05
         1990         -0.7      27.3      -13.3        -14.0         -0.13    0.62      -1.62     -2.08
         1990          5.9      23.7       -8.2        -15.5          0.44    0.69      -0.82     -1.33
Non-Smokers           -0.3      25.0      -13.7        -11.4         -0.29    0.55      -1.68     -1.78
Smokers               16.5      25.6       -5.9        -19.7          0.46    0.83      -0.56     -1.50
Non-Dropouts           3.1      22.0      -11.0        -11.0          0.20    0.50      -1.23     -1.54
Dropouts              -3.3      38.4       -9.3        -29.1         -0.60    1.28      -1.03     -2.06


Calculations using updated behavior from dynamic simulations ! long-run response
Overall               -0.2      27.3      -12.6        -14.6         -0.29    0.65      -1.42     -1.76
By Year: 1988         -2.7      25.7      -15.8         -9.9         -1.02    0.50      -2.37     -2.05
         1990         -2.1      28.3      -14.6        -13.8         -0.19    0.61      -1.75     -2.13
         1990          4.2      26.8      -10.6        -16.2          0.34    0.71      -1.00     -1.44
Non-Smokers           -0.3      25.9      -13.1        -12.9         -0.32    0.58      -1.61     -1.84
Smokers                1.2      29.6      -11.9        -17.8          0.08    0.79      -1.10     -1.61
Non-Dropouts           1.9      22.9      -11.6        -11.3          0.13    0.51      -1.33     -1.59
Dropouts              -7.4      45.2      -15.7        -29.5         -0.75    1.26      -1.39     -2.27

Note: Our preferred model includes individual unobserved heterogeneity, endogenous controls for
      smoking history, and state xed e ects. Non-smoker and smoker refer to previous behavior.
      Non-dropouts and dropouts are in 1990 & 1992.




                                                  37
                     Table 8: Smoking Participation Predictions under Alternative Price Increases

                        Smoking Participation Rates                                 Smoking Participation Rates
     Price              Model 3 Model 4 Model 5                 Price              Model 3 Model 4 Model 5

     Overall                                                    Previous Non-Smokers
     Original price       14.42      14.42      14.50           Original price        13.26          9.96    9.87
     Price + 1 cent       14.44      14.45      14.50           Price + 1 cent        13.27          9.97    9.87
     Price + 25 cents     14.88      14.98      14.36           Price + 25 cents      13.65         10.23    9.78
     Price + 100 cent     16.58      16.82      14.14           Price + 100 cent      15.18         11.54    9.85
     Year 1988 (8th graders)                                    Previous Smokers
     Original price        4.60       4.60       4.58           Original price        30.26         74.98   37.56
     Price + 1 cent        4.58       4.58       4.55           Price + 1 cent        30.31         75.18   37.64




38
     Price + 25 cents      4.05       3.96       3.86           Price + 25 cents      31.53         79.51   39.01
     Price + 100 cent      2.76       2.52       2.28           Price + 100 cent      35.69         88.46   42.35
     Year 1990 (10th graders & dropouts)                        Non-Dropouts (1990 & 1992)
     Original price       15.98      15.98      15.93           Original price        17.67         17.67   18.94
     Price + 1 cent       15.99      15.99      15.92           Price + 1 cent        17.71         17.72   18.95
     Price + 25 cents     16.29      16.28      15.37           Price + 25 cents      18.73         18.95   19.27
     Price + 100 cent     17.31      17.11      13.76           Price + 100 cent      22.24         22.81   20.25
     Year 1992 (12th graders & dropouts)                        Dropouts (1990 & 1992)
     Original price       22.69      22.69      23.00           Original price        49.76         49.76   29.16
     Price + 1 cent       22.75      22.77      23.03           Price + 1 cent        49.73         49.72   29.01
     Price + 25 cents     24.29      24.69      23.84           Price + 25 cents      48.90         48.60   25.76
     Price + 100 cent     29.67      30.83      26.38           Price + 100 cent      46.32         45.14   16.80

     Note: Model 3 includes state xed e ects and no controls for previous behavior.
           Model 4 is identical to Model 3 but includes (exogenous) controls for previous behavior.
           Model 5 includes individual unobserved heterogeneity, endogenous controls for smoking history,
                and state xed e ects and these predictions are based on updating behavior.
Table 9: E ect of Previous Behavior on Predicted Smoking Participation Rates

                                                         1990    1992

       E ect of forced previous behavior using Model 5
       Forced to not smoke in 1988                       13.95   21.74
       Forced to smoke heavily in 1988                   47.15   42.33
       Forced to not smoke in 1988 and 1990                      14.94
       Forced to smoke heavily in 1988 and 1990                  61.73

       E ect of forced previous behavior using Model 4
       Forced to not smoke in 1988                       13.58   21.37
       Forced to smoke heavily in 1988                   69.90   64.26
       Forced to not smoke in 1988 and 1990                      13.31
       Forced to smoke heavily in 1988 and 1990                  85.51




                                         39
                                       Table A1: Parameter Estimates from Model 4

                                                     Smoke Any              Smoke 6-10 Cigs          Smoke >10 Cigs

     Cig pricet                                    -0.006   ( 0.007)        -0.024   ( 0.016)        -0.020   ( 0.015)
     Cig pricet  Year 1990                         0.007   ( 0.007)         0.007   ( 0.012)        -0.001   ( 0.010)
     Cig pricet  Year 1992                         0.013   ( 0.007)   *     0.013   ( 0.012)         0.008   ( 0.010)
     Cig pricet  Previous smoker                   0.010   ( 0.006)         0.005   ( 0.014)        -0.003   ( 0.014)
     Cig pricet  Previous intensity = 6-10 cigs    0.018   ( 0.008)   **    0.023   ( 0.011)   **    0.022   ( 0.012) *
     Cig pricet  Previous intensity = 11+ cigs     0.012   ( 0.010)         0.014   ( 0.015)         0.019   ( 0.014)
     Cig Pricet  Years smoking                    -0.005   ( 0.006)        -0.008   ( 0.013)        -0.007   ( 0.013)
     Cig pricet  Dropout                          -0.010   ( 0.006)    *   -0.013   ( 0.007)   *    -0.027   ( 0.007) **
     Cig pricet  Female                           -0.001   ( 0.003)         0.003   ( 0.006)         0.008   ( 0.007)
     Previous smoker                                0.288   ( 0.973)         0.203   ( 2.193)         0.813   ( 2.230)
     Previous intensity = 6-10 cigs                -1.715   ( 1.253)        -2.315   ( 1.684)        -1.741   ( 1.782)
     Previous intensity = 11+ cigs                 -1.216   ( 1.483)        -1.506   ( 2.258)        -0.822   ( 2.084)
     Duration smoking                               1.404   ( 0.971)         1.244   ( 2.011)         1.439   ( 2.004)




40
     Dropout indicator                              2.021   ( 0.887)   **    3.273   ( 1.069)   **    5.348   ( 1.069) **
     Female                                         0.063   ( 0.442)        -0.817   ( 0.955)        -1.877   ( 0.977) *
     Black                                         -1.473   ( 0.127)   **   -1.493   ( 0.809)    *   -1.470   ( 0.798) *
     Hispanic                                      -0.305   ( 0.086)   **   -1.340   ( 0.392)   **   -1.315   ( 0.442) **
     Other/Non-white                               -0.488   ( 0.100)   **   -0.182   ( 0.342)        -0.478   ( 0.525)
     Age as of January (in months)                  0.005   ( 0.003)        -0.001   ( 0.006)        -0.002   ( 0.006)
     Age missing                                    0.771   ( 0.688)        -0.098   ( 1.166)        -1.217   ( 1.251)
     Standardized test score                       -0.050   ( 0.054)         0.025   ( 0.024)        -0.072   ( 0.047)
     Test score2                                    0.000   ( 0.001)        -0.001   ( 0.000)   **    0.000   ( 0.001)
     Test score missing                            -2.910   ( 1.277)   **   -0.206   ( 0.612)        -1.891   ( 1.141) *
     Baptist                                       -0.006   ( 0.092)        -0.163   ( 0.373)        -0.060   ( 0.471)
     No religion                                    0.303   ( 0.075)   **    0.199   ( 0.251)         0.441   ( 0.269) *
     Other/Non-Catholic                             0.048   ( 0.051)         0.032   ( 0.184)         0.329   ( 0.200) *
     Religion missing                               0.021   ( 0.146)         0.454   ( 0.612)         0.661   ( 0.628)
     No. of older siblings                          0.052   ( 0.012)   **    0.040   ( 0.030)         0.008   ( 0.033)
     Older siblings missing                         0.102   ( 0.063)        -0.070   ( 0.165)         0.070   ( 0.170)
     Live with mom and dad                         -0.322   ( 0.054)   **   -0.340   ( 0.200)   *    -0.276   ( 0.229)
     Live with mom only                            -0.092   ( 0.072)        -0.124   ( 0.249)        -0.246   ( 0.282)
     Family composition missing                    -0.263   ( 0.088)   **   -0.101   ( 0.446)        -0.044   ( 0.500)
                         Table A1: Parameter Estimates from Model 4 | continued

                                        Smoke Any           Smoke 6-10 Cigs           Smoke >10 Cigs


     Parent's education               -0.020   ( 0.022)    0.017 ( 0.047)             -0.072   ( 0.050)
     Parent's education missing       -0.384   ( 0.706)   -0.073 ( 0.956)             -1.639   ( 0.985) *
     Income <10K                       0.058   ( 0.107)    0.017 ( 0.532)             -0.050   ( 0.584)
     Income 10K-25K                    0.005   ( 0.073)   -0.084 ( 0.367)              0.053   ( 0.380)
     Income 25K-50K                    0.001   ( 0.057)    0.095 ( 0.275)              0.129   ( 0.278)
     Income missing                   -0.048   ( 0.086)    0.107 ( 0.421)              0.242   ( 0.425)
     Parent's work                    -0.103   ( 0.213)   -0.236 ( 0.401)             -0.142   ( 0.468)
     Parent's work missing            -0.143   ( 0.937)    0.252 ( 0.823)              0.388   ( 0.907)
     Guardian born before 1940        -0.170   ( 0.098) * 0.391 ( 0.481)               0.168   ( 0.555)
     Guardian born 1940-1955          -0.087   ( 0.072)    0.215 ( 0.319)              0.211   ( 0.343)
     Guardian's age missing           -0.144   ( 0.139)    0.079 ( 0.729)              0.220   ( 0.709)
     Public school                    -0.141   ( 0.077) * 0.176 ( 0.303)               0.102   ( 0.343)




41
     Suburban school                   0.001   ( 0.078)    0.096 ( 0.223)             -0.163   ( 0.274)
     Rural school                     -0.143   ( 0.084) * -0.013 ( 0.234)             -0.022   ( 0.298)
     % on free lunch in school         0.012   ( 0.243)    0.325 ( 0.643)             -0.322   ( 0.654)
     % on free lunch missing          -0.071   ( 0.125)    0.185 ( 0.525)              0.247   ( 0.562)
     % Hispanic in school             -0.573   ( 0.419)    0.218 ( 0.750)             -0.799   ( 0.821)
     % Black in school                -0.144   ( 0.350)   -0.621 ( 0.781)              0.067   ( 0.796)
     Racial composition missing        0.007   ( 0.152)    0.248 ( 0.639)              0.197   ( 0.693)
     % with single parent in school    0.070   ( 0.180)    0.274 ( 0.818)              0.010   ( 0.799)
     % with single parent missing     -0.029   ( 0.082)    0.112 ( 0.336)             -0.199   ( 0.426)
     Year 1990                         0.169   ( 0.923)   -0.594 ( 1.436)              0.081   ( 1.216)
     Year 1992                        -0.889   ( 0.937)   -1.041 ( 1.429)             -0.807   ( 1.186)
     Constant                         -1.819   ( 1.131)    3.776 ( 2.499)              2.388   ( 2.831)

     Note: Huber standard errors with clustering on individuals are in parentheses.
           ** indicates joint signi cance at the 5% level; * 10% level.
           State xed e ects are also estimated.
