                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHAT EXPLAINS SKILL UPGRADING IN LESS
                               DEVELOPED COUNTRIES?


                                             Nina Pavcnik


                                         Working Paper 7846
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7846



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2000




I would like to thank Eric Edmonds, Gene Grossman, Peimy Goldberg, Bo Honore and the participants at
the international brownbag lunch at Dartmouth for many helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   2000 by Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
What Explains Skill Upgrading in Less Developed Countries?
Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 7846
August 2000
JELNo. F16, J31, 015

                                            ABSTRACT

    Although many developing countries have experienced growing income inequality and an increase
in the relative demand for skilled workers during the 1 980s, the sources of this trend remain a puzzle.
This paper examines whether investment and adoption of skill-biased technology have contributed to

within-industry skill upgrading using plant-level data from Chile. Using semiparametric and parametric
approaches, I investigate whether plant-level measures of capital and investment, the use of imported
materials, foreign technical assistance, and patented technology affect the relative demand for skilled
workers. I find positive relationship between these measures and skill upgrading. Capital deepening and
the adoption of skill biased technology therefore might contribute to the increased relative demand for
skilled workers within industries.


Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Rockefeller Hall 6106
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu
                     What explains skill upgrading in less developed countries?



                                           Nina Pavcnik
                                    Dartmouth College and NBER




                                               Abstract

Although many developing countries have experienced growing income inequality and an increase in the
relative demand for skilled workers during the 1980s, the sources of this trend remain a puzzle. This
paper examines whether investment and adoption of skill-biased technology have contributed to within-
industry skill upgrading using plant-level data from Chile. Using semiparametric and parametric
approaches, I investigate whether plant-level measures of capital and investment, the use of imported
materials, foreign technical assistance, and patented technology affect the relative demand for skilled
workers. I find positive relationship between these measures and skill upgrading. Capital deepening and
the adoption of skill biased technology therefore might contribute to the increased relative demand for
skilled workers within industries.

JEL Classification: F16, J31, 015
Keywords: Skill upgrading; Skill biased technology; Technology transfers
1. Introductions

        During the 1980s, many developing countries such as Chile, Mexico, Costa Rica, and Uruguay

experienced an increase in income inequality in favor of skilled workers and an increase in the relative

demand for skilled labor, i.e. skill upgrading (Robbins (1996)). Growing demand for skilled workers and

increased income inequality based on workers' skills present a particularly severe problem for societies

in developing countries: they precipitate the negative social consequences associated with higher initial

poverty levels and income disparities. Since little is known about the sources of skill upgrading in

developing countries, this paper investigates the relationship between growing demand for skilled labor,

investment, imported materials, and technology adoption using plant level data in Chile.

         This study is motivated by two issues. First, the relationship between skill upgrading and plant

investment, use of imported materials, and technology adoption may be important to understanding

growing income inequality in many less developed countries. Several well documented facts suggest that

less developed countries have experienced an upward shift in their relative demands for skilled workers.

First, income inequality between skilled and unskilled workers increased in countries such as Mexico,

Chile, and Costa Rica after trade liberalization (Harrison and Hanson (1995, 1999, 1999a), Revenga

(1997), Robbins (1995, 1996)). Second, most of the worker reallocation occurred within rather than

across industries (Harrison and Hanson (1995), Robbins (1995, 1996)). Moreover, the share of skilled

labor in total industry employment increased concurrently with an increase in the skill-premium

(Harrison and Hanson (1995), Robbins (1995, 1996)). These patterns cannot be explained by the

strengthening of product-level import competition from developed countries after trade liberalizations.1


  I would like to thank Eric Edmonds, Gene Grossman, Penny Goldberg, Bo Honore and the participants at the
international brownbag lunch at Dartmouth for many helpful comments.
1
  Increased exposure to trade from relatively skilled-labor abundant developed countries should, through product
demand changes, decrease relative wages of the skilled workers and lead to workers reallocation across industries.
Hanson and Harrison (1999a) provide an appealing product-market based explanation for the increased income
inequality in Mexico. They show that industries that employed unskilled labor relatively intensively had higher rates
of protection before trade liberalization. Therefore, by Stolper-Samuelson theorem, the decrease in price of the
goods that are relatively unskilled labor intensive, should lead to increased income inequality based on skills. This
explanations, however, still does not account for the lack of reallocation of labor across industries, and the
concurrent rise in skill premium and employment share of skilled workers.


                                                         2
Although these labor market changes have been well documented, only two studies reviewed later (on

Mexico) attempt to explain the sources of increased within industry relative demand for skilled workers

in less developed countries.

        A second motivation for my study is to explore whether skill upgrading that is related to plant

investment, use of imported materials, and technology adoption occurs in all plants within an industry or

whether it only occurs in a specific set of plants. The recent industrial organization literature emphasizes

the importance of plant heterogeneity within industries (Olley and Pakes (1996), Roberts and Tybout

(1996)). Yet, most studies on skill upgrading in developed countries rely on industry or individual

worker level data. They obtain a positive correlation between skill upgrading and various measures of

technology use, but they cannot distinguish whether skill upgrading is a general phenomena or whether it

takes place only in certain plants within an industry.2 On the other hand, a study by Doms, et. al. (1997)

based on U.S. plant level panel data finds no evidence that the adoption of new technology is skill-biased

after controlling for plant fixed effects. My plant level data presents a good setting to investigate the

sources of skill upgrading in the case of Chile. The data provide information on plant ownership

structure and workforce characteristics allowing me to control for plant-specific characteristics that could

be driving the cross-sectional correlation between skill upgrading and various technology measures.

        Growing income inequality in Chile has been documented before. Using household data from

1957 to 1992, Robbins (1995) shows first that, most of the growing income inequality between skill

groups stems from demand rather than supply shocks to the labor market and second, that increases in the

relative demand for skilled workers occurred within industries. He concludes that skill biased

technological change might explain the observed patterns. Unfortunately, household data do not provide

the direct measures of technology and detailed industry classification necessary to examine this issue


2
 Several studies on the United States obtain a positive link between skill upgrading and investment in R & D
(Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994), Bernard and Jones (1999), Machin and Van Reenen (1998)), the use of
computers at work (Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994), Autor, et. al. (1998)), exporting (Bernard and Jones
(1999)), and outsourcing (Feenstra and Hanson (1996)). Berman, Bound and Machin (1998) and Machin and Van
Reenen (1998) confirm these results for a large group of developed countries.


                                                      3
closer. I therefore use plant-level data to explore this demand shift further. The Chilean data provide

information on a plant's capital and investment, imported materials, foreign technical assistance, and the

use of patented technology, if these measures are associated with new technologies that are skill-biased,

they could contribute to the increasing demand for skilled workers.

         To address the topic, I first compare the distribution of the relative share of skilled workers

employed in plants with and without new investment, imported materials, and new technologies using a

semiparametric methodology developed by DiNardo, et. al. (1996). Working with the entire distribution

of the share of skilled workers in plants allows me to explore differences across plants that are not

apparent when focusing on means or medians. One can, for example, observe where in the distribution

of plants new investment and technology exert the biggest influence. Second, I consider skill upgrading

by deriving a plant's demand for skilled labor in the context of a cost function. Finally, I specify a

production function to derive the reduced form for relative plant-level employment and relate

employment to plant characteristics. th the parametric part of my analysis, I allow plants that invest or

use technology to employ a different mix of workers than plants that do not. A difficulty with the

interpretation of the results in skill upgrading literature is that the variables representing skill biased

technology could simply proxy for an omitted plant characteristic that affects relative demand for skilled

labor and a plant's choice of technology use. I exploit the available data to control for plant-specific

characteristics such as financial constraints and workforce composition other than skill that could affect

plant technology and hiring decisions but have not been explicitly considered in previous studies.

        thcreases in the relative demand for skilled workers could be driven by several factors. First,

firm demand for skilled workers might increase as a result of higher firm investment if capital and skilled

labor are complements. Firms could invest more into new machinery and equipment if increased foreign

competition forces them to improve their production process or they are able to import previously

unavailable machinery from abroad. For example, the imports of machinery and equipment rose from

US$267 to US$797 million from 1975 to 1981 after trade liberalization in Chile (Edwards and Edwards



                                                       4
(1987)). Second, increased income inequality in many developed countries may stem from skill-biased

technological change (Author and Katz (1998), Berman, Bound, and Machin (l998)). Adoption of skill-

biased technology could also explain the growing demand for skilled labor in developing countries.

Lower trade barriers expedite this process. Eaton and Kortum (1996, 1997) model how the benefits of

innovation spread from one country to another through diffusion of technology or through the exchange

of goods. They find that the impact of diffusion of knowledge on productivity depends on the proximity

of a country to the technology source, tariff levels, and the flexibility of the domestic labor force. if the

adoption of new technology requires relatively more skilled labor, technology adoption could explain the

increase in the relative demand for skilled workers within industries in developing countries.

         The existing studies of skill upgrading in less developed countries have mostly considered the

impact of foreign direct investment (FDI) as a channel for the spread of technology across countries.

Feenstra and Hanson (1997) and Hanson and Harrison (1999) find a positive link between FDI and skill

upgrading in Mexico. Yet, the evidence on the relationship between the adoption of new technology,

investment, or imported materials and skill upgrading independent of FDI is weaker. Hanson and

Harrison (1999) find that firms obtaining technology through licensing agreements and import materials

hire more skilled workers. However, Hanson and Harrison (1999) obtain a negative or insignificant

relationship for other measures of investment and technology change.

         th this study, I find a positive relationship between skill upgrading and imported materials,

foreign technical assistance, and patent use. Moreover, I find evidence of capital-skill complementarity:

the capital intensity of a plant is positively correlated with skill upgrading across all specifications. The

increasing average investment of Chilean manufacturing plants during my sample could partially explain

the growing demand for skilled labor in Chile. A positive correlation between other measures of

technology and skill upgrading is robust to controls for plant heterogeneity and plant random effects, but


  This literature continues to disagree whether the labor demand shifts that changed the structure of wages resulted
from the increased exposure to imports from developing countries, skill-biased technical change, or outsourcing.




                                                          5
the positive correlation becomes statistically insignificant when I account for unobserved plant

heterogeneity with plant fixed effects. This might suggest that only certain plants acquire technology

through patents, import materials, or use foreign technical assistance and these plants employ relatively

more skilled workers before and after the use of these measures of technology. Nevertheless, my results

continue to hold when I control for a plant's financial constraints and its workforce characteristics other

than skills. These variables are often mentioned as unobserved or omitted factors that could be driving

the cross-sectional correlations between technology use and skill upgrading in previous studies.

        The next section describes the country's background, data, and presents descriptive and

semiparametric evidence. Section 3 introduces a cost function approach to skill upgrading and discusses

the estimation results. Section 4 addresses skill upgrading using a production function framework and

discusses the estimation results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Country background, data and semiparametric evidence

2.1 Country background, data, and descriptive evidence

        Chile presents an interesting setting to study the relationship between skill upgrading, new

investment, and technology. As I show later, from 1979 to 1986 the share of skilled workers in total

manufacturing employment increased by 16.8%. At the same time, the skill premium (measured as the

ratio of average annual wage of skilled labor to average annual wage of unskilled labor) grew by 10.6%.

These increases followed a trade liberalization. Between 1974 to 1979 Chile eliminated most of its non-

tariff barriers and reduced tariff rates from more than 100% in 1974 to a uniform across industries 10%

ad valorem tariff in 1979 (Dornbusch, et. al. (1994)). Its commitment to free trade persisted during the

1980s, except for a transitory period of increased tariff protection starting in 1983 in response to the

1982-1983 recession. These temporary measures peaked in 1984, when tariffs increased uniformly to

35%. However, Chile did not introduce non-tariff barriers, and tariffs declined to a 20% ad-valorem

level in mid 1985 (UNCTAD, 1992). As a result of significant tariff reductions and elimination of non-


Katz and Autor (1998) provide an overview of the labor studies, while Slaughter (1998) summarizes the work that


                                                        6
tariff barriers to trade, the relative prices of imported technology decreased. The anecdotal evidence

suggests that many firms benefited from the ability to upgrade their machinery and intermediate materials

with purchases from abroad. Descriptive statistics presented at the end of this section based on the

Census of Manufacturers' support the anecdotal evidence.

         This paper draws on a census of Chilean manufacturing plants that employ ten or more workers.

The data were collected by Chile's National Institute of Statistics from 1979 to 1986. The data contain

observations on 4547 plants and a total of 26,513 plant-year observations. The unit of observation in the

data is a plant, not a firm. Over 90% of the plants, however, are single-plant firms. The data set, the

variable definitions, and the variable construction are described in detail in Liu (1993) and Tybout

(l996). Capital, investment, imported materials, value added, expenditures on patents and rights, and

the expenditure on foreign technical assistance are expressed in constant 1980 pesos. The census

distinguishes between production and nonproduction workers, and it additionally decomposes each of

these two categories into white-collar and blue-collar workers. I measure skilled (white-collar) and

unskilled (blue-collar) labor by the total number of employees in each skill group working in a plant.

The data do not provide information on hours worked. For every plant, I obtain a wage for skilled

(unskilled) workers by dividing the total wage bill for a given skill group by the number of employees in

that skill group.

         The data provide several plant-level variables to measure technology: imported materials,

expenditures on patent use and rights, and expenditures on foreign technical assistance. I depict these

variables in two ways. First, I create indicator variables for whether a plant receives foreign technical

assistance, pays for patent use, or imports a portion of its materials. Second, I express foreign technical


focuses on trade and product price related explanations.
 I use the records from 4547 plants after eliminating those with incomplete information. The capital variable was
initially constructed using a perpetual inventory method by Liu (1993) and is described in detail in Tybout (1996). I
have reconstructed the variable so that the capital stock at time t does not contain investment at time t. Since the
balance sheet information was only available for the plants in 1980 and 1981, capital measures are based on the book
value of capital in those two periods. In my capital variable, I use figures based on the 1981 book value of capital if




                                                          7
assistance cost as a share of value added, patent cost as a share of value added, and imported materials as

a share of total materials. The second definition controls for disparities in the use of the technology

measures across plants of different sizes. The findings in the paper are robust to both definitions of the

variables. Of course, these technology measures are not ideal. Nevertheless, they provide more insight

into the relationship between technology and skill upgrading than aggregate industry level data, since one

can observe specific technology that is used by workers in a given plant. Table 1 reports descriptive

statistics. Plants employ on average almost three times more unskilled than skilled workers, but the

wages of skilled workers are more than double those of unskilled workers. Plants also differ significantly

in their use of technology measures. Standard deviations are very high relative to the means of these

variables.

        Table 2 contains some descriptive statistics on employment and wages in Chilean manufacturing

plants. The plants underwent some significant changes from 1979 to 1986. The average share of skilled

workers in plant employment increased 16.8% and the average wagebill share of skilled workers grew

15%. At the same time, the skill premium (measured as the ratio of average annual wage of skilled

workers to average annual wage of unskilled workers) grew by 10.6%. The concurrent rise in the skill

premium and the relative employment of skilled workers is consistent with an upward shift in the relative

demand for skilled workers during the early 1980s in Chile. Table 3 reports whether this shift occurred

mostly within or between four digit ISIC industries.5 As is standard in the literature, the change in the

share of skilled workers in total employment (weighted by the share of industry employment in total

employment) AS can be decomposed into within and between industry shifts:

                                        = S — S = L ASE          + L AEs




both 1980 and 1981 are available. Otherwise, capital measure based on the 1980 book value of capital was used. I
experimented with several options and all capital measures are highly correlated.
 Four-digit ISIC industry classification yields 84 industry categories.


                                                        8
where     is the share of industry i's employment in total employment at time t,s is the share of skilled

workers in total employment in industry i, E =.5(E + E) , and        s =•5( + s). The first and second
term represent the shifts in the employment of skilled workers within and between industries,

respectively. A similar decomposition can be obtained for the wagebill share of skilled workers. The

decomposition results are reported in table 3. From 1979 to 1986 87% of the shift in the share of skilled

workers in total manufacturing employment occurred within industries. Similarly, when the

decomposition is based on the wagebill share of skilled workers, 64% of the shift occurred within

industries. These within industry shifts are consistent with capital-deepening and skill-biased

technological change. Have Chilean manufacturing plants invested more and used new technology?

Table 4 summarizes the use of various technology measures and investment. Between 1979 and 1986 an

increasing share of plants used foreign technical assistance, patents, and imported materials. The average

expenditure on foreign technical assistance and the use of imported materials rose in real terms. The

imported materials represented a growing proportion of total materials, and on average plants increased

their investments.

2.2 Technology and the distribution of the employment of skilled workers across plants

        Tables 2-4 provide suggestive evidence that Chile experienced skill upgrading at the same time

as plants invested more heavily, and increased the use of imported materials, patented technology, and

foreign technical assistance. That evidence relies on the means of these variables and might mask the

differences in the impact of technology variables on plants that employ different shares of skilled

workers. Recent industrial organization literature has revealed the importance of heterogeneity of plants

within narrowly defined industry groups. To explore this heterogeneity, I examine the distribution of

relative demand for skilled workers measured by the wagebill share of skilled workers across plants. I

investigate whether technology measures impact plants in the entire distribution of plants by the same

extent, or whether they exert bigger impact on plants in particular parts of the distribution. In order to do

so, I compare the distribution of wagebill share of skilled workers in plants that use imported materials



                                                     9
(or invest, receive foreign technical assistance, use patented technology) to the distribution of wagebill

share of skilled workers in plants that do not.

        Suppose that a vector of plant's characteristics x, its wagebill share of skilled workers s, and an

indicator for whether a plant uses technology T have a joint distribution F(s, x, T). The density of

relative demand for workers conditional on whether a plant uses a particular technology can be written as

(1)                      fT(s)=JdF(sxIT=J)f(sIT=J)
where j is one if plant uses technology T and 0 otherwise. This density can be estimated with a kernel

density function:


                                      fh =          K(     5t)1(T = I)


where h is the bandwidth, KQ is a kernel function, 10 is an indicator function whether a plant uses


technology T, and n1 is the number of plants that use technology T (n1 = L1(T = j)). Figure la shows


the kernel density of the logarithm of the wagebill share of skilled workers for plants that do and do not

use technology T. The indicator T is one if a plant invested, used imported materials, patented

technology, and received foreign technical assistance at least one year from 1979 to 1986 and zero

otherwise. The heterogeneity in the wagebill share of skilled labor across plants is striking. Moreover,

the density for the plants that use these technology measures lies to the right of the density for plants that

do not. This implies that the probability of observing a higher share of skilled workers (skill upgrading)

is greater for plants that invest, use imported materials, foreign technical assistance, and patented

technology. Figure 2 compares kernel densities for plants that do and do not use a particular technology

in their production process. For example, the indicator T is one if a plant uses imported materials at least

one year from 1979 to 1986 and zero otherwise(and similarly for other measures). The conclusions are

the same. The mass of density for the plants that use imported materials, make new investments, use




                                                      10
foreign technical assistance, or patents is to the right of the mass of density for the plants without the

respective measure.

          The above comparisons, however, ignore that plants that do or do not use technology might also

differ in other characteristics. The difference in density of wagebill share of skilled workers might either

be a result of the use of technology, or a result of the differing characteristics between the plants in the

two groups. For example, if plants that use imported materials are also more capital intensive, and

capital is complementary to skilled workers, I observe a difference in density of wagebill share of skilled

workers regardless of the use of imported materials. In order to separate the two effects, I need to obtain

the counterfactual distribution of the wagebill share of skilled workers for the plants that do not use

imported materials that would have prevailed if these plants had the same other observable characteristics

as the plants that use imported materials, if the difference between the counterfactual density of plants

without technology and the actual density of plants with technology persists, then the technology

measures seem to impact skill upgrading. Methodology proposed by DiNardo, et. al. (1996) enables such

a counterfactual comparison. The basic idea behind the creation of the counterfactual density for the

plants that do not use technology is to attach a greater importance (a larger weight) to plants without

technology that better match the characteristics of the plants with technology.

          Let f (si T = 0) be the density of the wagebill share of skilled workers for plants that do not use
technology T, but have the same characteristics x1 as the plants that use technology T. Using (1), this

yields:

                                   IT =0)
                                            =Lf( I x,T =0)dF(x IT =1)
                                          =Jf(s I x,T = O)W(x)dF(xI T = 0)

where ¶1'X (x)     dF(xIT= 1) is a reweighing function. Given an estimate of this reweighing function, I
                   dF(xIT=0)
can obtain the estimate of counterfactual density by rewriting a kernel density function as:




                                                       11
                                      s(s) = _LqJ (x)K(5                   )1(T = 0)
                                                 nh tE                 h

where n is the number of plants that do not use technology T. The reweighing function W weighs the

data by assigning a larger weight to plants that do not use technology T that better match the

characteristics of the plants that use technology T. DiNardo, et. al. (1996) show that an estimate of the

reweighing function can be obtained by applying Bayes rule to yield:


                                       'P (x)        dF(xIT=1)
                                         X   t
                                                     dF(xIT=O)
                                                 —   Pr(T=1Ix=x) Pr(T=O)
                                                     Pr(T=0Ix=x) Pr(T=1)
Pr(T= 1) is the unconditional probability that a plant uses technology T. I estimate Pr(T= 1 Ix=x) by a

Probit model with regressor vector x. I include the following plant characteristics as regressors: two-

digit ISIC industry indicators, area indicators, indicators for capital quartiles, indicators for value added

quartiles, and year indicators.

           Figure lb illustrates the counterfactual kernel density for the plants that do not use technology T

and the actual densities from Figure la.6 The counterfactual density lies between the actual density of

the plants without technology T and the actual density of the plants using technology T. This suggests

that part of the difference in the relative demand for skilled labor between the two types of plants stems

from variation in other plant characteristics across the two groups. The mass of the actual density for

plants that use technology measures is to the right of the counterfactual density even after controlling for

other observable plant characteristics. The difference between the two densities measures the impact of

investment and technology on skill upgrading. The impact is quite striking in the middle and upper part

of the distribution, but technology does not exert much impact in the plants with relatively low share of

skilled workers. Figure 3 depicts counterfactual densities for plants that do not use a particular

technology measure and suggests similar findings as Figure lb. The use of imported inputs and patented


6
    The technology indicator T is defined the same as for Figure la.


                                                           12
technology affects the whole distribution (except for the lowest tail). The effect of foreign technical

assistance is very noticeable in the part of the distribution of plants with shares of skilled workers higher

than .13 (ln(. 1 3)=-2), but is negligible in plants that employ lower shares of skilled workers. The impact

of new investment is pronounced mostly in plants in the middle section of the distribution, and

diminishes for higher shares of skilled workers. Overall, these results show that various technology

measures exert differential effect on skill upgrading over the distribution of plants.

         This methodology has two drawbacks that should be considered when interpreting the results.

First, it does not take into account the general equilibrium effects (or spillover effects) of the use of

foreign technical assistance, patents on relative demand for skilled labor. For example, use of foreign

technical assistance in a plant could increase demand for skilled labor in all plants if there exist

spillovers. Second, the methodology assumes that conditional on the observed characteristics, the

placement of imported materials (or investment, foreign technical assistance, patented technology) is

random across plants. I do not account for unobservable plant characteristics that might impact

placement of technology as well as skill upgrading. Plants that use imported materials could simply be

plants with some unobserved characteristic that leads them to hire more skilled workers, or they might

employ different type of workers than plants without imported materials. I address these concerns in the

next two sections of the paper when I approach the topic more parametrically.

3. Cost Function Analysis

        Previous section of the paper provided preliminary evidence on the positive relationship between

increased relative demand for skilled labor and various technology measures across the distribution of

plants. In this section, I address this topic parametrically by using a restricted variable translog cost

function approach, which provides a way to relate plant characteristics to a plant's relative demand for

skilled labor (skill upgrading).7 The use of translog cost function is very appealing because it provides a



' This approach has been used widely in recent studies of skill upgrading (Berman, Bound, Griliches (1994),
Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1997), Doms et. al (1997), Machin and VanReenen (1998) among others).


                                                        13
second order approximation to any cost function and it does not impose any restrictions on the

substitutability of various inputs. th particular, I consider a restricted variable cost function form:

        inC(ws,wu,Y,K,T)=ao+ainws+ainwu +aYinY+akinK+afT
                                         (in ws)(in wu) +     (in ws )2
                                +y(in wu)(in ws) +     y (in wu)2}
(2)
                                +.5 (y (in Y)2 +   y (in K)2 + yffT2)+ y(in Y)in(ws)
                                +y(in Y)(in wu) + y(in K)(in ws)+ Yku (in K)(in wu)
                                +yT(in ws) + yT(in wu) + y(in Y)T + Yk(in K)T

where C is a variable cost, ws and wu are wages of skilled and unskilled labor, respectively, Y is value

added, K is capital, and T stands for technology. This framework differs from the general cost function

specification because it assumes that capital and other technology measures Tare fixed while skilled and

unskilled labor are variable factors in the considered time period. Using cost minimization I obtain cost

share equations of variable inputs by partially differentiating (2) with respect to input prices.

After imposing homogeneity of degree one in prices to ensure that the cost function corresponds to some

well-behaved production function, the wagebill share equation for skilled labor can be written as:


        Shares = a+y
                          in(ws)       in(K)
                                             +yy in(Y)+J3Tech+E
                         in(w )        in(Y)

where the notation follows the previous notation in the paper. Technology term T is decomposed into

directly observed technology measures vector Tech, and an unobserved component .

        Estimation of the cost share equation relies on several assumptions. First, the previous literature

assumes that capital and value added can be treated as variables not affected by the current wagebill

share of skilled workers. th this paper, capital is constructed so that investment at time t does not enter

capital until t+ 1. Therefore, not only can I assume that the share of current skilled workers does not

affect the capital stock, but also capital is not affected by unobserved shocks that affect the wagebill




                                                      14
share of skilled workers.8 Moreover, value added is likely a function of the share of skilled workers

employed in a plant. To mitigate this problem, I also estimate the cost share equation using lagged value

added rather than the current value added.9 The findings are robust and similar in both cases.

Additionally, in section 4 of the paper I investigate skill upgrading based on a production function

approach that does not rely on the assumption that value added is unaffected by the share of the skilled in

the work force.

         Second, I include area, four-digit ISIC industry, and time indicators in the regressions. These

variables, for example, control for variation in the plant's wages based on area, industry, and time

specific shocks to the labor market. As previous studies in the literature I do not include direct measures

of plant level wages. The previous literature justifies the exclusion by the fact that most of the variation

in relative wages across plants is endogenous (related to the different skill mixes of workers across

plants).1° Time and area indicators also control for other unobserved shocks that are common for all

plants in a given year or area. The actual estimation equation for a plant i that belongs to industry j at

time t therefore becomes:


(3)      Share = a + Yk 1n(K1) + y 1n(1) + P Tech1 + 8Year + ØArea1 + Mnd1 +

where Year is a vector of year indicators, Area is an indicator that denotes the location of a plant, and md

is a four-digit ISIC industry indicator. In part of the estimation, I also allow the coefficients on the

capital to value added and value added to vary by industry. I do not impose constant returns to scale


8
  In this paper, I abstract from dynamic issues, in particular the issue of the exit of plants. Pavcnik (1999) shows that
many plants exited in Chile during this time period. In unreported regressions that estimate the above relationship, I
have included an indicator for plant exit. Conditional on other variables, the wagebill share of skilled workers is not
statistically significantly higher or lower for the plants that exit. However, if the probability of exit depends on
unobserved, skill biased shocks and is a function of a plant's capital, estimation based on surviving plants could lead
to a downward bias on the coefficient of capital. Therefore it would make it more difficult to find capital-skilled
labor complementarity.
  The regression results using current value added (tables 5, 6, 7) and lagged value added are similar. I therefore
focus on the results using current value added. Results from regressions using lagged value added are reported in the
appendix tables 3-6.
'°This treatment of wages is a shortcoming of the cost based approach to skill upgrading. In section 4, I derive a
reduced form for the relative plant-level employment of the skilled that does not suffer from this problem.


                                                           15
because value added enters in addition to the capital to value added ratio. If the coefficient on the value

added variable ç is not significantly different from zero, I fail to reject the constant returns to scale

hypothesis. if capital is complementary to skilled workers, the coefficient on the capital to value added

ratio Yk should be positive. If technology measures are skill biased, the components of the coefficient

vector /3 should be positive.

        Estimation results are reported in tables 5, 6, and 7. All regressions include four digit ISIC

industry indicators so that the coefficients on the variables are identified by the variation in independent

variables within industries.11 All standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity using Huber-White

correction. I perform the analysis with two dependent variables--the wagebill share of skilled workers

and the share of skilled workers in total plant employment. Because both yield similar results, I

concentrate my discussion on the wage bill regressions. The results for the regressions using the share of

skilled workers in total employment as dependent variable are reported in appendix tables 1 and 2. Table

5 reports regression results where technology variables are depicted as indicators for whether a plant

receives foreign technical assistance, pays for use of patented technology, or imports a portion of its

materials. Table 6 uses the alternative definition that is based on the expenditure on foreign technical

assistance (or patents) as a share of value added and the share of imported materials in total plant

materials. Since the results are similar in both cases, I focus my discussion on Table 5.

        As column 1 shows, I find evidence of skill upgrading related to investment and technology

measures. First, the coefficient on capital to value added ratio is positive and significantly different from

zero in all cases. This indicates that capital is complementary to skilled labor: within an industry,

holding other plant characteristics constant, plants that add additional capital also employ a higher share

of skilled workers. Second, plants using foreign technical assistance, patented technology, and imported

materials have a higher share of skilled workers in their wage bill: all the coefficients are positive and


  I have also performed the analysis for individual two digit ISIC industries separately (effectively allowing for a
different cost function for all industries). The findings were essentially the same as in the pooled results discussed
here.


                                                          16
significantly different from zero. Moreover, there is evidence of increasing returns to scale: the

coefficient on value added is positive.

        The estimation in table 7 allows the coefficients on the capital to value added ratio and value

added to vary by industry. As column 1 indicates, plants in all industries display capital-skill

complementarity and increasing returns to scale. Relative to food processing, capital-skill

complementarity is stronger in paper, glass, basic metals, and machinery industries, but is not statistically

different, for example, for plants in the textile industry. Allowing the coefficient on capital skill

complementarity to vary across industries does not affect the previous findings of skill upgrading related

to the use of foreign technical assistance, patented technology, and imported materials.12

        Unlike in industry-level studies, the impact of skill upgrading in this paper is not identified by

the differences in the use of imported materials, patented technology, or foreign technical assistance

across industries. Rather, it is identified by the differences in the use of imported materials, patented

technology, or foreign technical assistance between firms within an industry. Still, there are potentially

two problems with interpretation of my findings. First, as most plant-level data studies, I do not have

much information regarding the labor composition in each plant. Therefore, the coefficients on the

variables such as foreign technical assistance, patents, and imported materials could simply capture that

plants that use these measures employ a different mix of workers than those without them. Second, the

variables representing skill biased technology could simply proxy for an omitted plant characteristic that

affects relative demand for skilled labor and a plant's choice of technology use. For example, plants

might differ in their ability to finance new investments, foreign technical assistance, patented technology,

and imported materials. Their financial situation might also affect their ability to attract skilled workers.

        To capture the effect of omitted plant characteristic, I estimate equation (3) first, using plant

random effects, and second, using plant fixed effects.13 Equations such as (3) are often estimated in

difference form (first and long differences) in industry-level studies. Fixed effects estimation is in


121 have also   allowed for industry specific coefficients on the latter variables, but the results were not informative.


                                                             17
principle analogous to differencing the data (exactly the same with two time periods).14 It identifies the

impact of the variable of interest solely with the intertemporal variation in the variable within a plant. It

then eliminates the impact of any omitted time-invariant plant characteristics. Finding any correlation

between variables of interest with this methodology is highly unlikely. First, fixed effects estimation

exacerbates any measurement error problems and attenuates the coefficients on mismeasured variables

toward zero. It is therefore much more reliable with better measured variables. Second, since it relies on

within plant variation in a variable, it is more effective with a longer panel. Finally, most of the relevant

variation in technology variables and the wagebill share of skilled labor might actually occur across

rather than within plants in a given industry. My previous findings are robust to random effects

estimation reported in column 2 of table 5. Not surprisingly, as column 3 of table 5 indicates, most of the

coefficients become insignificantly different from zero in plant fixed effects estimation. Surprisingly, the

fixed effects estimates confirm capital skill complementarity. Overall, since the capital-skill

complementarity is based solely on the within plant variation, the above results suggests that plants that

invested during the 1980s increased their relative demand for skilled labor over time.

         It is impossible to identify whether the lack of correlation between skill upgrading and imported

materials, patented technology, and foreign technical assistance is driven by the actual lack of

relationship, the lack of within plant variation, or measurement error. The correlation between

technology variables and skill upgrading disappears also in studies using plant level data from the United

States sets (Doms et. al (1997)) if one relies only on within plant variation. Nevertheless, the lack of

significant correlation between skill upgrading and technology measures using fixed effects might also

suggest that only very particular plants decide to use imported materials, patented technology, or foreign

technical assistance. These are also the plants that in general employ relatively more skilled workers

before and after the adoption. These results suggest that future work should focus on trying to look


13
  The Hausman test rejects the hypothesis that the error is uncorrelated with the independent variables.
141 have estimated  (3) in first and long differences, but the exercise did not yield different conclusions from those in
the fixed effects estimation. Therefore, I focus on fixed effects results.


                                                           18
either at a longer time horizon or on finding instruments for the technology measures in order to solve the

measurement error problem. The latter is notoriously difficult.

        Given these caveats regarding fixed effects estimates, it might be attractive to consider

alternative ways of controlling for "unobserved" plant characteristics such as workforce composition and

financial situation. Chilean data decomposes skilled workers (white-collar) into administrators,

executives, and production workers, and unskilled workers (blue-collar) into production and

nonproduction workers. It also separates total plant employment by gender. th order to address the

problem of plants employing different types of workers, I include regressors that provide more

information on the composition of the workforce at the plant level. Column 4 of table 5presents the

results of a regression that controls for the share of skilled workers that are executives, the share of

skilled workers that are administrators, the share of female employees in total plant employment, and the

share of production workers in total plant employment. The magnitude of the coefficients on the

technology variables decreases, but their impact on skill upgrading remains statistically significant. The

coefficient on capital to output ratio is also reduced in magnitude, but remains highly significant.

        Similarly, I can control for the problem that a plant's financial situation might impact its

decisions to invest, import materials, use patented technology, or foreign technical assistance, as well as

its ability to attract skilled workers. A plant's ownership structure might be a good indicator of its

financial constraints. I control for a plant's financial situation by an indicator whether a plant is or

belongs to a corporation. Columns 5 and 6 of table S report the coefficients from regressions that control

for both worker characteristics and plant's ownership structure using OLS and random effects estimation,

respectively. Except for patents, the previous findings are robust to the inclusion of these controls. As

before, the inclusion of the corporation indicator diminishes the magnitude of all coefficients.

        The finding of positive relationship between skill upgrading and imported materials and foreign

technical assistance, after I account for various plant characteristics that were not controlled for in

previous studies, has two implications. Since the magnitudes of the coefficients measuring the impact of



                                                      19
various technology measures on skill upgrading decline, my results suggest that characteristics such as a

plants' financial constraints do account for part of cross-sectional correlation between skill upgrading

and technology use within an industry. They also provide several possible explanations for the

differences in the adoption of technology across plants within an industry that should continue to be

incorporated in future research.

4. Production function Analysis

        The cost function approach assumes that plants face exogenous factor prices and choose factor

quantities. th order to find links between plant level relative demand for skilled workers and plant level

measures of technology, I specify a production function and assume that plants hire inputs to maximize

profits. Suppose that output for plant i in industry j at time t can be written as:

(4)                          =

where Ls and Lu are skilled and unskilled employment, K is capital, Tech is a vector with variables that

indicate a plant's use of foreign technical assistance, imported materials, or patents, and Z is a vector of

characteristics such as a year indicator, industry indicator, and the location of a plant. Let us assume that

plants set workers' wages equal to their marginal revenue product of labor. This yields a factor demand

for skilled labor (leaving out many subscripts)


                        W               = fs =

and unskilled labor:


                          wu              =

where IY(w") and I](WS)represent labor supply for unskilled and skilled workers, respectively and Pj is

the price of product produced in industry j. By substituting in the relationship for the labor supply (for

example, an alternative wage in an industry and a region) and rearranging the equation, I obtain a reduced

form expression for the employment of the two skill groups:




                                                      20
                                      LS =
                                             f(K,altwu,altw,Tech;Z)*p1
                                      F' = fu(K,altwu,altw,T6th;Z)*pj

where altW and altW' are the alternative wage for skilled and unskilled workers, respectively. Log

linearizing the relationship yields the following reduced form for the ratio of skilled to unskilled workers

employed at a given plant:


(5)               1n() = y + ak 1n(K) + au 1n(alvj7) + a 1n(alvjts ) + $Tech + ØZ +
The coefficient on the capital ak shows the impact of capital on the ratio of employment of the skilled to

unskilled labor. If it is positive, it suggests that capital and skilled labor are complements. If the

components of coefficient vector /3 on technology measures are not significantly different from zero, the

evidence is consistent with foreign technical assistance, imported materials, and use of patented

technology affecting productivity of skilled and unskilled workers symmetrically (Hicks neutral

technology) or not impacting them at all. On the other hand, one could interpret a positive (negative)

coefficient /3 as consistent with these measures representing technological progress that is relatively skill

biased (unskilled biased).

         Tables 8 and 9 report the regression results of estimating equation (5). All regression

specifications control for four-digit ISIC industry, year, and area indicators.15 All the results confirm my

previous findings from the cost based approach. Capital is complementary to skilled labor in production

in all specifications of the regression. The use of foreign technical assistance, patented technology, and

imported materials is positively correlated with the relative employment of skilled workers. The

coefficients are still positive and significant when I control for worker characteristics, plant ownership,

and when I use plant random effects. As in the cost-function analysis, except for the capital-skilled labor


'5Ml regressions also include plant size indicators (plants are divided into four quartiles based on the size of their
labor force). I estimate (5) with and without inclusion of alternative wages. By construction (alternative wage is
defined as the mean wage in an industry in a given area excluding the wage of a firm in question), these wages are
highly correlated with the left hand side wage components from other firms and enter the equation significantly.




                                                           21
complementarity, my findings are not robust to the inclusion of plant fixed effects. Finally, table 10

reports the regression results of estimating (5) allowing for industry variation in the coefficient on

capital. Positive relationship between skill upgrading and foreign technical assistance, patents, and

imported materials continues to hold. Although all industries exhibit capital-skill complementarity, the

complementarity is more pronounced in paper, chemicals, glass, basic metals, and machinery than food

processing.

5. Conclusion

         This paper finds that the use of imported materials, foreign technical assistance, and patented

technology has contributed to skill upgrading in Chilean plants during the 1980s. Moreover, plants with

more capital employ relatively more skilled workers. Since average plant investment increased in

Chilean manufacturing plants during the 1980s, capital-deepening could additionally contribute to the

growing relative demand for skilled workers. The relationship between skill upgrading and investment,

the use of imported materials, and foreign technical assistance is likely to continue to be an important

topic. During the 1990s, an increasing number of developing countries embarked on trade liberalization

process and trade barriers between developed and developing countries declined after the Uruguay round

of GATT negotiations. These trade developments might encourage more technology transfers that favor

relatively skilled labor in less developed countries. Quantifying the impact of this additional technology

transfers remains a topic for future research.

         This paper complements the industry-level studies that cannot identify whether skill upgrading

related to technology use occurs in all plants within an industry or whether it is driven by a specific set of

firms. Semiparametric and parametric results suggest that plant heterogeneity is quite substantial. Like

in previous plant level analysis by Doms et.al. (1997) for the United States, the results for technology

measures other than capital are sensitive to the inclusion of plant fixed effects. The lack of significant

coefficients might be due simply to the fact that the fixed effects methodology relies on intertemporal


Their inclusion or exclusion does not affect the other coefficients in the regressions. I therefore only report the


                                                           22
variation within plants. Yet, even if we found a positive link between skill upgrading and technology

measures, this might not be a causal relationship, especially in the long run. A recent theoretical model

by Acemoglu (1999) shows that increased demand for skilled labor can induce more skill biased

technological change.

         Given the inherent problems with fixed effects estimation, plant-level data enable me to control

for part of the within industry plant heterogeneity by explicitly accounting for varying worker

characteristics and financial constraints across plants within an industry. With these controls, the

magnitude of the effects of technology variables on skill upgrading diminishes. However, the positive

relationship between skill upgrading and imported materials and foreign technical assistance persists.

This study thus illustrates that, to fully understand the process of technology adoption and how it relates

to skill upgrading in less developed countries, future work should continue to explore plant

characteristics such as financial constraints or managerial ability that affect a firm's ability to attract a

better workforce and adopt better technology from abroad.




regression results that include alternative wages as regressors.


                                                           23
                                             Bibliography
Acemoglu, Daron (1999). "Patterns of Skill Premia," NBER Working Paper 7018.

Autor, David H. et. al. (1998). "Computing inequality: Have computers changed the labor market?"
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, pp. 1169-1213.

Berman, Eli et.al. (1994). "Changes in the demand for skilled labor within U.S. manufacturing:
    Evidence from the annual survey of manufacturers," Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, pp. 367-
    397.

Berman, Eli et.al. (1998). "Implications of skill-biased technological changes: thternational Evidence,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, pp. 1245-1279.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1999). "Exporters, skill upgrading, and the wage gap,"
     Journal of International Economics 42, 3-3 1.

Bosworth, Berry, P. et. al. (1994). The Chilean Economy: Policy Lessons and Challenges. Washington
    D.C.: The Brookings thstitution.

Cragg, Michael, and Mario Epelbaum (1996). "Why has wage dispersion grown in Mexico? Is it the
     incidence of reforms or the growing demand for skills?" Journal of Development Economics 51,
     pp. 99-116.

DiNardo, John, et. al. (1996) "Labor market institutions and the distribution of wages, 1973-1992: A
     semiparametric approach," Econometrica 64, 1001-1044.

Doms, Mark et. al. (1997) "Workers, wages and technology," Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, pp.
    253-290.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, et. al. (1994). "Exchange Rate Policy and Trade Strategy," in Bosworth, Berry,
     et.al. (eds.) The Chilean Economy: Policy Lessons and Challenges. Washington D.C.: The
     Brookings Institution.

Eaton Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum (1996). "Trade in Ideas: Productivity and Patenting in the OECD,"
      Journal of International Economics 40, 25 1-278.

                                     (1997). "Technology and Bilateral Trade," NBER Working Paper
      6253.

Edwards, Sebastian, and Alejadra C. Edwards (1987). Monetarism and Liberalization. The Chilean
     Experiment. Ballinger. Cambridge, MA.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (1996). "Globalization, outsourcing and wage inequality,"
     NBER Working Paper 5424.

______________________________________ (1997). "Foreign direct investment and relative wages:
     Evidence from Mexico's maquiladoras," Journal of International Economics 42, pp. 37 1-393.

GATT (1991). Trade Policy Review. Chile. Volume 1,2. Geneva: GATT.


                                                   24
Hanson, Gordon, H. and Ann Harrison (1995). "Trade, technology and wage inequality," NBER Working
      Paper 5110.

________________________________ (1999). "Who gains        from trade reform? Some remaining
      puzzles," Journal of Development Economics 59, 125-154.

_____________________________          (1 999a). "Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality in Mexico,"
      thdustrial and Labor Relations Review 52, 27 1-288.

Harrison, Ann and Edward Leamer (1997). "Labor markets in developing countries: An agenda for
      research," Journal of Labor Economics 15, pp. S 1-19.

Inter-American Development Bank (1992). Economic Reforms in Ghile. Munoz, Oscar (ed.).
      Occasional Papers 7. Washington D.C.: 1DB.

Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor (1998). "Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
      thequality," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics.
      Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming.

Liu, Lili (1993). "Entry-exit, learning and productivity change: Evidence from Chile," Journal of
      Development Economics 42, 217-242.

Liu, Lili and James Tybout (1996). "Productivity Growth in Chile and Colombia: The Role of Entry, Exit
      and Learning," in Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout (eds.) Industrial Evolution in Developing
      Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Machin, Stephen and John Van Reenen (1998). "Technology and changes in skill structures: Evidence
     from seven OECD countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, pp. 1215-1244.

Olley, Steven G. and Ariel Pakes (1996). "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
      Equipment thdustry," Econometrica 64, pp. 1263-1297.

Pavcnik, Nina (1999). "Trade liberalization, exit and productivity improvements: Evidence from Chilean
     Plants," Dartmouth College, mimeo.

Revenga, Ana L. (1997). "Employment and wage effects of trade liberalization: The case of Mexican
     manufacturing," Journal of Labor Economics 15, pp. S20-43.

Robbins, Donald J. (1995). "Trade liberalization and earnings dispersion--Evidence from Chile,"
     Harvard University, mimeo.

_______________ (1996). "Evidence on Trade and Wages in the Developing World," OECD Technical
     Paper No. 119.

Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout (eds.) (1996). Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries.
     Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Slaughter, Matthew J. (1998). "What are the results of product-price studies and what can we learn from
     their differences?" NBER Working Paper 6591.


                                                   25
Tybout, James R. (1996). "Chile, 1979-1986: Trade Liberalization and Its Aftermath," in Roberts, Mark
     J. and James R. Tybout (eds.) Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford
     University Press.

UNCTAD (1989). Handbook of Trade Control Measures of Developing Countries: Supplement. New
   York: UN.

________ (1992). Trade Liberalization in Chile. Experiences and Prospects. Trade Policy Series No.1.
     New York: United Nations.




                                                 26
Figure 1--Kernel Densities of wagebill share of skilled workers
          Figure la                                                           Figure lb




    .4-



     0-                                                                  0-
                       -3               -2           -l   -.5-250                           -3               -2           -l   -.5-25 0
                      Ln(share of skilled workers)                                         Ln(share of skilled workers)




diamonds—plants without indicated technology;             pluses—plants with indicated technology;      solid line—reweighted density
Figure 2--Kernel densities of wagebill share of skilled workers
         Imported Materials Use                                                         New Investment




    .6
                                                                                 .4.

    .4

                                                                                 .2 -
    .2



     0                                                                            0-
                                  I           I                                                            I              I
                               -3             -2            -1     -.5-250                                -3              -2            -1   -.5-250
                             Ln(share of skilled workers)                                                Ln(share of skilled workers)
         Foreign Technical Assistance                                                   Patent Use
                                                                                 .6 -




    .6                                                                           .4 -


    .4

                                                                                 .2 -

    .2



     0                                                                            0-
                               -3             -2            -i     -.5-250                                -3              -2            -i   -.5-250
                             Ln(share of skilled workers)                                                Ln(share of skilled workers)




diamonds—plants without indicated technology;                    pluses—plants with indicated technology
Figure3-- Kernel densities of wagebill share of skilled workers
           Imported Materials Use                                                       New Investment


                                                                                   .6



    .6 -
                                                                                   .4


    .4.
                                                                                   .2
    .2 -



     0-                                                                            0
                                    I           I                                                          I              I
                                -3              -2            -1    -.5-250                               -3              -2            -1   -.5-.25 0
                               Ln(share of skilled workers)                                              Ln(share of skilled workers)
           Foreign Technical Assistance                                                 Patent Use




    .6



    .4



    .2



     0




diamonds—plants without indicated technology;                      pluses—plants with indicated technology;         solid line—reweighted density
                                      Table 1
                                Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                                   N         Mean            S.D.
Skilled Labor Wage                                    24,166          237             211
Unskilled Labor Wage                                  26,513             95            59
Skilled Workers                                       26,513             14            41
Unskilled Workers                                     26,513            41            86
Labor                                                 26,513            56           120
Capital                                               26,513        54,429       356,870
Investment                                            26,513         3,872        41,026
Value Added                                           26,513        53,504       350,451
Foreign Technical Assistance (FTA)                    26,513           295         3,647
Patent Use Cost                                       26,513            111        1,147
Imported Materials                                    26,513        16,771       223,482
Corporation Indicator                                 26,513           0.19         0.40
Executives                                            26,513              2            5
Administrators                                        26,513               8          24
Skilled Production Workers                            26,513              4            21
Production Workers                                    26,513             39            81
Number of Women in a Plant                            26,513             11            28
Note: Quantities in thousands of 1980 pesos. Skilled labor, unskilled labor and labor are
measured in number of employees. The variable labor, but not the other two, also includes
owners of a plant. There are only 24,166 observations on skilled wage because some plants
do not employ any skilled workers. Source: Census of Manufacturers, Chilean National
Instititue of Statistics.
                                                        Table 2
                                         Skilled-Unskilled Lab or Composition
                                                        (plant averages)
                                      Year           Skill premium         Share of skilled Share of skilled
                                                                            labor in plant   labor in plant
                                                                              wage bill       employment
                                                            (1)                  (2)              (3)
                               1979                        2.62                  .299                .184
                               1980                        2.51                  .293                .183
                               1981                        2.49                  .298                .185
                               1982                        2.59                  .330                .206
                               1983                        2.73                  .337                .208
                               1984                        2.78                  .340                .207
                               1985                        2.71                  .339                .208
                               1986                        2.89                  .345                .215

                               t-statistic               -2.3 10                -7.95 1             -8.247
                               p-value                    .011                   .000                .000
                               Note: The reported T-statistic is for the t-test of the equality of the mean in
                               1979 and 1986 for respective variables. The reported P value is for the
                               alternative hypotesis Ha: 1986>1979. All quantities are in thousands of
                               constant 1980 pesos. Labor variables are expressed in number of workers.
                               Skill premium is the ratio of skilled wage to unskilled wage. Reported
                               averages are simple (unweighted) means.




            Table 3--Within and Between Industry Relative Labor Shifts 1979-1986

                    Employment Share of Skilled Workers                           Wage Bill Share of Skilled Workers
                       Total             Within               Between                     Total          Within      Between
1979-86                 .016                 .015                  .002                   .053              .035         .018
Note: Definition of the decomposition is given on pages 8 and 9 of the paper. Decomposition is based on four digit ISIC
industry classification. Employment share of skilled workers is weighted by the share of a four-digit ISIC industry employment
in total employment in a given year. Wagebill share of skilled workers is weighted by the share of a four-digit ISIC industry
wage bill in total wage bill in a given year.
                                            Table 4--Technology Developments

Year          Plants that Plants that Plants with           Foreign Patent Cost           Imported   Imported Investment
              use foreign Use Patents Imported             technical  (mean)              Materials Materials as (mean)
               technical    (share)    Materials           assistance                      (mean)    a share of
              assistance                (share)               cost                                     Total
                (share)                                     (mean)                                   Materials
                                                                                                      (mean)
                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
1979                  .049           .724           .257             276            139      14,032            .081         3,161
1980                  .045           .711           .238             290             59      13,766            .080         3,850
1981                  .041           .756           .254             222            135      14,708            .086         3,896
1982                  .043           .731           .231             241            118      14,580            .079         4,752
1983                  .042           .780           .247             275            117      17,897            .087         3,757
1984                  .052           .790           .265             370            103      21,137            .095         2,666
1985                  .052           .812           .273             368            105      21,684            .093         3,481
1986                  .057           .830           .289             362            114      18,977            .098         5,642

t-statistic         -1.448       -10.094         -2.836          -.773           .609          -.925        -3.188         -2.966
p-value               .074          .000           .002           .220           .729           .178          .001           .002
Note: Quantities are in thousands or 1980 Pesos. The reported T-statistic is for a test of the equality of the mean in 1979 and 1986
for respective variables. Reported P value is for the alternative hypothesis that Ha: 1986>1979.
                                      Table 5--Skill upgrading Regressions
                          (dependent variable is share of skilled workers in wage bill)

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)

ln(capital/Value added)            .021 **         .027 **         .009 **         .014 **         .010 **         .016 **
                                  (.001)          (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
ln(Value added)                    .046 **         .035 **         .007 **         .030 **         .021 **         .019 **
                                  (.001)          (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
FTA Indicator                      .021 **         .009 **        -.003            .017 **         .007 *          .007 *
                                  (.005)          (.004)          (.005)          (.005)          (.004)          (.004)
Patent Indicator                   .016 **         .005 **         .002            .005 **         .003            .000
                                  (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)
Imported Materials                 .047 **         .014 **        -.003            .033 **         .023 **         .008 **
Indicator                         (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)
Share of Executives                                                               -.078 **        -.076 **        -.070 **
                                                                                  (.005)          (.005)          (.004)
Share of Administrators                                                           -.103 **        -.098 **        -.073 **
                                                                                  (.004)          (.004)          (.003)
Share of Women                                                                     .018 **         .023 **         .007
                                                                                  (.007)          (.007)          (.007)
Share of Production                                                               -.370 **        354 **          -.229 **
Workers                                                                           (.008)          (.008)          (.006)
Corporation Indicator                                                                              .081 **         .082 **
                                                                                                  (.003)          (.004)

Plant Indicators                     no              no             yes              no              no             no
Plant Randomn Effects                no             yes              no              no              no             yes
Industry Indicators                  yes            yes              no             yes             yes             yes
Area Indicators                      yes            yes              no             yes             yes             yes
Year Indicators                      yes            yes             yes             yes             yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                        .48             na             .80            .53              .54              na
                                                              *
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level,
respectively. FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in
total employment of skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N
is 26,513. N is 24,166 in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share
of administators in total employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change
significantly in columns 1-3 if they are estimated using only 24,166 observations.
                                        Table 6--Skill upgrading regressions
                            (dependent variable is share of skilled workers in wage bill)

                                      (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)

ln(capital/Value added)                .022 **        .027 **          .009 **         .015 **         .010 **         .016 **
                                     (.001)           (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
ln(Value added)                        .049 **        .035 **          .007 **         .032 **         .021 **         .019 **
                                     (.001)           (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
FTA Cost/Value Added                   .196 **        .051 *          -.004            .133 **         .094 *          .007
                                     (.063)           (.033)          (.028)          (.054)          (.046)          (.004)
Patent Cost/Value Added                .004 **        .002 **          .001 **         .002 **         .002 **         .000
                                     (.001)           (.001)          (.000)          (.001)          (.001)          (.002)
Imported Mat./Materials                .087 **        .034 **         -.001            .064 **         .049 **         .008 **
                                     (.007)           (.006)          (.007)          (.006)          (.006)          (.003)
Share of Executives                                                                   -.079 **        -.077 **        -.070 **
                                                                                      (.005)          (.005)          (.004)
Share of Administrators                                                               -.104 **        -.099    **     -.073 **
                                                                                      (.004)          (.004)          (.003)
Share of Women                                                                         .018 **         .022 **         .007
                                                                                      (.007)          (.007)          (.007)
ShareofProduction                                                                     -.372 **        354 **          -.229 **
Workers                                                                               (.008)          (.008)          (.006)
Corporation Indicator                                                                                  .082 **         .082 **
                                                                                                      (.003)          (.004)

Plant Indicators                         no              no             yes              no              no              no
Plant Randomn Effects                    no             yes              no              no              no             yes
Industry Indicators                     yes             yes              no             yes             yes             yes
Area Indicators                         yes             yes              no             yes             yes             yes
Year Indicators                         yes             yes             yes             yes             yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                           .48              na             .80             .53               .54             na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment of
skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N is 26,513. N is 24,166
in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share of administators in total
employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-3 if they are
estimated using only 24,166 observations.
       Table 7--Skill upgrading regressions with industry interactions
            (dependent variable is share of skilled workers in wage bill)

                                                (1)            (2)            (3)

ln(capital/Value Added)                       .017 **        .010 **         .014 **
                                              (.001)        (.001)          (.002)
ln(cap/Value Added)*textiles                  .003          - .004 *         .000
                                              (.002)        (.002)          (.003)
ln(cap/Value Added)*wood                      -.002         -.005 *         -.00 1
                                              (.003)        (.003)          (.003)
ln(cap/Value Added)*paper                     .008 *        - .002           .003
                                              (.005)        (.004)          (.005)
ln(cap/Value Added)*chemicals                 -.004         -.009 **        -.005
                                              (.003)        (.003)          (.003)
ln(cap/Value Added)*glass                     .011 **        .003            .006
                                              (.005)        (.005)          (.005)
ln(cap/Value Added) *basjc metals             .030 **        .022            .012 **
                                              (.005)        (.004)          (.005)
ln(cap/Value Added)*machinery                 .013 **        .006 **         .006    **
                                              (.003)        (.002)          (.003)
ln(cap/Value Added)*other manuf.              .028 **        .011            .014
                                              (.007)        (.007)          (.009)
ln(Value Added)                               .043 **        .020 **         .016    **
                                              (.002)        (.002)          (.002)
ln(Value Added)*textiles                      .003           .001            .003
                                              (.002)        (.002)          (.003)
ln(Value Added)*wood                          -.006 **      -.005 **        -.00 1
                                              (.003)        (.002)          (.003)
ln(Value Added)*paper                         .016 **        .004            .010 **
                                              (.004)        (.003)          (.004)
ln(Value Added)*chemicals                     .000          -.002            .003
                                              (.003)        (.003)          (.004)
ln(Value Added)*glass                         .014 **        .008 **         .011    **
                                              (.004)        (.004)          (.005)
ln(Value Added) *basjc metals                 .008 *         .008 **         .011    **
                                              (.004)        (.004)          (.005)
ln(Value Added)*machinery                     .012 **        .006 **         .005    *
                                              (.002)        (.002)          (.003)
ln(Value Added)*other manufacturing           .017 **        .006            .017
                                              (.007)        (.007)          (.010)

Note: This table continues on the next page
  Table 7 continued--Skill upgrading regressions with industry interactions
              (dependent variable is share of skilled workers in wage bill)

                                                         (1)              (2)              (3)


list of coefficient continued



FTA Indicator                                          .019 **           .006             .006
                                                      (.005)            (.005)           (.004)
Patent Indicator                                       .016 **           .003             .000
                                                      (.002)            (.002)           (.002)
Imported Material Indicator                            .045    **       .022 **           .008    **
                                                      (.003)            (.003)           (.003)

Plant Random Effects                                     no                no              yes
Industry Indicators                                     yes               yes              yes
Area Indicators                                         yes               yes              yes
Year Indicators                                         yes               yes              yes
R2 (adjusted)                                           .49               .54               na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * indicate significance at a 5% and
10% level, respectively. FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Regressions in column 2
and 3 also include the following unreported regressors: share of executives and share of
administrators in total employment of skilled workers, share of women and share of production
workers in total employment, and a corporation indicator. N is 26,513 in columns 1 and 2, and
24,166 in column 3. N is 24,166 in column 3 because we cannot define additional variables such
as share of executives and share of administators in total employment of skilled workers for plants
without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-2 if they are estimated
using only 24,166 observations.
                                     Table 8--Employment ratio regressions
                              (dependent variable is ln( skilled to unskilled labor))

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)

ln(capital)                        .091 **         .086 **         .029 **         .063 **        .050 **         .054 **
                                   (.004)         (.005)          (.008)          (.003)          (.003)         (.004)
FTA Indicator                      .187 **         .067 **         .012            .114 **        .086 **         .048 **
                                   (.021)         (.019)          (.022)          (.017)          (.017)         (.018)
Patent Indicator                   .067 **         .025 **         .016            .025 **        .019 *          .008
                                   (.011)         (.009)          (.010)          (.010)          (.010)         (.008)
ImportedMaterials                  .190 **         .052 **        -.011            .121 **        .091 **         .025 **
Indicator                          (.012)         (.011)          (.013)          (.011)          (.011)         (.010)
Share of Executives                                                               -.667 **       -.663 **        -.608 **
                                                                                  (.023)          (.023)         (.018)
Share of Administrators                                                           -.583 **       -.569 **        -.490 **
                                                                                  (.020)          (.020)         (.015)
Share of Woman                                                                     .026           .041            .020
                                                                                  (.029)          (.028)         (.030)
Share of Production                                                             -2.137 **       -2.092 **      -1.604 **
Workers                                                                           (.040)          (.040)         (.026)
Corporation Indicator                                                                             .216            .232 * *
                                                                                                  (.012)         (.018)

Plant Indicators                     no              no             yes              no              no            yes
Plant Random Effects                 no             yes              no              no              no            yes
Industry Indicators                 yes             yes              no             yes             yes            yes
Area Indicators                     yes             yes              no             yes             yes            yes
Year Indicators                     yes             yes             yes             yes             yes            yes
R2 (adjusted)                      .31             na             .71             .46             .47             na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
N is 24,166 because some firms do not report employing any skilled workers. FTA stands for foreign technical assistance.
Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment of skilled workers. Share of women and
production workers refers to their share in total employment. The regression also includes the following unreported
regressors: alternative wage for skilled workers, alternative wage for unskilled workers, plant size indicators based on the
quartiles of the employment distribution. The coefficients are available from author upon request.
                                       Table 9--Employment Ratio Regressions
                                 (dependent variable is ln(skilled to unskilled labor))

                                       (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)

ln(capital)                            .098 **          .087 **         .028 **         .066 **          .052 **         .055 **
                                      (.004)           (.005)          (.008)          (.003)           (.003)          (.004)
FTA Cost/Value Added                   .680 **          .207            .086            .419 **          •335 **         .134
                                      (.260)           (.141)          (.138)          (.172)           (.153)          (.132)
Patent Cost/Value Added                .009            .000            -.001           -.001            -.001           -.006
                                      (.006)           (.005)          (.005)          (.009)           (.009)          (.004)
ImportedMat./Materials                 .372 **          .108 **        -.029            .235 **          .186 **         .054 **
                                      (.027)           (.025)          (.027)          (.022)           (.022)          (.023)
Share of Executives                                                                    -.673 **         -.667 **        -.608 **
                                                                                       (.024)           (.023)          (.018)
Share of Administrators                                                                -.588 **         -.572 **        -.490 **
                                                                                       (.020)           (.020)          (.015)
Share of Woman                                                                          .024             .040            .020
                                                                                       (.029)           (.028)          (.030)
Share of Production                                                                   -2.153 **       -2.100 **       -1.606 **
Workers                                                                                (.040)           (.040)          (.026)
Corporation Indicator                                                                                    .227 **         .236 **
                                                                                                        (.012)          (.018)

Plant Indicators                         no               no             yes               no              no             yes
Plant Random Effects                     no              yes              no               no              no             yes
Industry Indicators                     yes              yes              no              yes             yes             yes
Area Indicators                         yes              yes              no              yes             yes             yes
Year Indicators                         yes              yes             yes              yes             yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                         .31              na                .71         .46           .47               na
                                                            *
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively. N is
24,166 because some firms do not report employing any skilled workers. FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share
of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment of skilled workers. Share of women and production
workers refers to their share in total employment. The regression also inculdes the following unreported regressors:
alternative wage for skilled workers, alternative wage for unskilled workers, plant size indicators based on the quartiles of the
employment distribution. The coefficients are available from author upon request.
  Table 10--Relative employment regressions with industry interactions
                (dependent variable is ln(skilled to unskilled labor)

                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)


ln(capital)
                                                  .072 **           .038 **          .041 **
                                                  (.005)           (.005)           (.007)
ln(capital)*textiles                             -.008              .005             .004
                                                  (.008)           (.007)           (.011)
ln(capital)*wood                                 -.014             -.007           -.002
                                                  (.010)           (.009)           (.013)
ln(capital)*paper                                 .072 **           .040 **          .037 **
                                                  (.013)           (.011)           (.016)
ln(capital)*chemicals                             .016 *            .000             .012
                                                  (.009)           (.008)           (.0 13)
ln(capital)*glass                                 .067 **           .033 **          .035 *
                                                  (.014)           (.012)           (.018)
ln(capital)*basic metals                          .079 **           .061 **          .051 **
                                                  (.015)           (.013)           (.019)
ln(capital)*machinery                             .061 **           .043 **          .035 **
                                                  (.009)           (.007)           (.011)
ln(capital)*other manufacturing                   .029              .008             .048
                                                  (.021)           (.017)           (.036)
FTA Indicator                                     .176 **           .083 **          .046 **
                                                  (.021)           (.017)           (.018)
Patent Indicator                                  .066 **           .019 **          .008
                                                  (.011)           (.010)           (.008)
Imported Materials Indicator                      .181 **           .086 **          .024 **
                                                  (.013)           (.011)           (.011)

Plant Random Effects                                 no              no               yes
Industry Indicators                                 yes              yes              yes
Area Indicators                                     yes              yes              yes
Year Indicators                                     yes              yes              yes
R2 (adjusted)                                    .31            .47                    na
                                                           *
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. **and indicate significance at a
5% and 10% level, respectively. N is 24,166 because some firms do not have any skilled
workers. FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. All specifications also includes
alternative wages and size distribution as regressors. Size indicators are based on quartiles
in the distribution of employment. Regression in column 2 and 3 also included the
following unreported regressors: share of executives and share of administrators in total
employment of skilled workers, share of women and share of production workers in total
employment, and corporation indicator. The coefficients are available from author upon
request.
                                  Appendix Table 1--Skill upgrading regressions
                             (dependent variable is employment share of skilled labor)

                                      (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)

ln(capital/Value added)                .010 **        .013 **          .004 **         .005 **         .003 **         .005 **
                                     (.001)           (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
ln(Value added)                        .018 **        .014 **          .000            .004 **         .001 **         .003 **
                                     (.001)           (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
FTA Indicator                          .026 **        .009 **          .001            .022 **         .019 **         .009 **
                                     (.004)           (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)
Patent Indicator                       .012 **        .005 **          .004 **         .002 *          .002            .001
                                     (.002)           (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
Imp. Materials Indicator               .025 **        .007 **         -.002            .014 **         .011 **         .003 *
                                     (.002)           (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)
Share of Executives                                                                   -.098 **        -.097 **        -.092 **
                                                                                      (.003)          (.003)          (.003)
Share of Administrators                                                               -.087 **        -.085 **        -.074 **
                                                                                      (.003)          (.003)          (.002)
Share of Women                                                                        -.001            .001            .000
                                                                                      (.004)          (.004)          (.005)
ShareofProduction                                                                     -.332 **        -.326 **        -.248 **
Workers                                                                               (.006)          (.006)          (.004)
Corporation Indicator                                                                                  .029            .032 **
                                                                                                      (.002)          (.003)

Plant Indicators                         no              no             yes              no              no               no
Plant Randomn Effects                    no             yes              no              no              no             yes
Industry Indicators                     yes             yes              no             yes             yes              yes
Area Indicators                         yes             yes              no             yes             yes              yes
Year Indicators                         yes             yes             yes             yes             yes              yes
R2 (adjusted)                           .36              na             .75             .48             .48               na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment of
skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N is 26,513. N is 24,166
in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share of administators in total
employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-3 if they are
estimated using only 24,166 observations.
                                Appendix Table 2--Skill upgrading regression
                            (dependent variable is employment share of skilled labor)

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)

ln(capital/Value add.)             .011 **         .013 **         .004 **         .005 **         .003 **         .006 **
                                  (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
ln(Value add.)                     .020 **         .014 **         .000            .005 **         .002 **         .003 **
                                  (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
FTA Cost/Value Ad.                 .122 **         .032            .002            .073 **         .059 **         .016
                                  (.038)          (.022)          (.023)          (.031)          (.028)          (.020)
Patent Cost/Value Ad.              .002 *          .000            .000            .000            .000           -.00 1
                                  (.001)          (.001)          (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)
Imp. Mat./Materials                .057 **         .016 **        -.006            .039 **         .034 **         .007 **
                                  (.005)          (.004)          (.005)          (.004)          (.004)          (.003)
Share of Executives                                                               -.098 **        -.098 **        -.092 **
                                                                                  (.003)          (.003)          (.003)
Share of Administrators                                                           -.088 **        -.086    **     -.075    **
                                                                                  (.003)          (.003)          (.002)
Share of Women                                                                    -.001            .001            .000
                                                                                  (.004)          (.004)          (.005)
Share of Production                                                               -.3 33 **       -.327 **        -.248 **
Workers                                                                           (.006)          (.006)          (.004)
Corporation Indicator                                                                              .030 **         .033 **
                                                                                                  (.002)          (.003)

Plant Indicators                     no              no             yes              no              no             no
Plant Randomn Effects                no             yes              no              no              no             yes
Industry Indicators                  yes            yes              no             yes             yes             yes
Area Indicators                      yes            yes              no             yes             yes             yes
Year Indicators                      yes            yes             yes             yes             yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                       .35             na              .75             .48             .48              na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis. ** and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level,
respectively. FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in
total employment of skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N
is 26,513. N is 24,166 in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share
of administators in total employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change
significantly in columns 1-3 if they are estimated using only 24,166 observations.
                Appendix Table 3--Skill upgrading regressions with lagged value added
                             (dependent variable is share of skilled labor in wage bill)

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

ln(capitalfLaggedVA)                 .021 **         .031 **        .008 **         .014 **         .009 **         .017 **
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.003)          (.001)          (.001)         (.001)
ln(LaggedVA)                         .047 **         .039 **        .008 **         .031 **         .022 **         .021 **
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.003)          (.001)          (.001)         (.001)
FTAlndicator                         .017 **         .009 *        -.003            .014 **         .005            .008 *
                                    (.005)          (.005)          (.006)          (.005)          (.005)         (.005)
Patent Indicator                     .017 **         .006 **        .002            .006 **         .004            .001
                                    (.003)          (.002)          (.002)          (.003)          (.003)         (.002)
ImportedMaterials                    .046 **         .013 **       -.004            .034 **         .024 **         .009 **
Indicator                           (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)         (.003)
Share of Executives                                                                -.076 **        -.076 **        -.072 **
                                                                                    (.005)          (.005)         (.005)
Share of Administrators                                                            -.101 **        -.096           -.073
                                                                                    (.004)          (.004)         (.004)
Share of Women                                                                      .018 **         .023 **         .010
                                                                                    (.008)          (.007)         (.008)
ShareofProduction                                                                  -.370 **        -.356 **        -.237 **
Workers                                                                             (.009)          (.009)         (.007)
Corporation Indicator                                                                               .079 **         .082 **
                                                                                                    (.003)         (.005)

Plant Indicators                       no              no             yes              no             no              no
Plant Randomn Effects                  no             yes              no              no             no             yes
Industry Indicators                   yes             yes              no             yes            yes             yes
Area Indicators                       yes             yes              no             yes            yes             yes
Year Indicators                       yes             yes             yes             yes            yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                          .49             na             .81             .54             .55             na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis.      and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment
of skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N is 21,966. N is
20,166 in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share of administators
in total employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-3 if
they are estimated using only 20,166 observations.
                Appendix Table 4--Skill upgrading regressions with lagged value added
                            (dependent variable is share of skilled labor in wage bill)

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

ln(capitalfLaggedVA)                 .022 **         .031 **        .008 **         .015 **         .009 **         .017 **
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.003)          (.001)          (.001)         (.001)
ln(LaggedVA)                         .050 **         .040 **        .008 **         .033 **         .022 **         .022 **
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.003)          (.001)          (.001)         (.001)
FTA Cost! LagVA.                     .000            .000           .000            .000           -.00 1           .000
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.000)          (.000)          (.000)         (.001)
PatentCostlLagVA                     .019 *          .004          -.003            .016 **         .011 **         .002
                                    (.010)          (.006)          (.003)          (.006)          (.005)         (.006)
Imported. MatiMaterials              .092 **         .036 **       -.002            .069 **         .056 **         .026 **
                                    (.007)          (.006)          (.007)          (.006)          (.006)         (.006)
Share of Executives                                                                -.078 **        -.076 **        -.072 **
                                                                                    (.005)          (.005)         (.005)
Share of Administrators                                                            -.102           -.097           -.073
                                                                                    (.004)          (.004)         (.004)
Share of Women                                                                      .017 **         .022 **         .010
                                                                                    (.008)          (.007)         (.008)
ShareofProduction                                                                  -.372 **        -.356 **        -.237 **
Workers                                                                             (.009)          (.009)         (.007)
Corporation Indicator                                                                               .081 **         .082 **
                                                                                                    (.003)         (.005)

Plant Indicators                       no              no             yes              no             no              no
Plant Randomn Effects                  no             yes              no              no             no             yes
Industry Indicators                   yes             yes              no             yes            yes             yes
Area Indicators                       yes             yes              no             yes            yes             yes
Year Indicators                       yes             yes             yes             yes            yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                          .49             na             .81             .54             .55             na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis.      and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment
of skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N is 21,966. N is
20,166 in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share of administators
in total employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-3 if
they are estimated using only 20,166 observations.
                Appendix Table 5--Skill upgrading regressions with lagged value added
                            (dependent variable is employment share of skilled labor)

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                                     .010 **         .015    **     .004 **         .004 **         .002 **         .005 **
ln(capitalfLaggedVA)
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)         (.001)
                                     .019 **         .016    **      .001           .005 **         .001            .004 **
ln(LaggedVA)
                                    (.001)          (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)         (.001)
FTAlndicator                         .027 **         .009    **    -.001            .023 **         .020 **         .009 **
                                    (.004)          (.003)          (.004)          (.003)          (.003)         (.003)
Patent Indicator                     .012 **         .005    **     .004 **         .002 **         .001            .001
                                    (.002)          (.001)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)         (.001)
ImportedMaterials                    .025 **         .007    **    -.003            .015 **         .011 **         .003 *
Indicator                           (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)          (.002)         (.002)
Share of Executives                                                                -.099 **        -.099 **        -.096 **
                                                                                    (.004)          (.004)         (.003)
Share of Administrators                                                            -.087 **        -.085 **        -.076 **
                                                                                    (.003)          (.003)         (.002)
Share of Women                                                                      .000            .002            .004
                                                                                    (.005)          (.005)         (.005)
ShareofProduction                                                                  -.336     **    -.331 **        -.259 **
Workers                                                                             (.007)          (.007)         (.004)
Corporation Indicator                                                                               .029     **     .032 **
                                                                                                    (.002)         (.003)

Plant Indicators                       no              no             yes              no             no              no
Plant Randomn Effects                  no             yes              no              no             no             yes
Industry Indicators                   yes             yes              no             yes            yes             yes
Area Indicators                       yes             yes              no             yes            yes             yes
Year Indicators                       yes             yes             yes             yes            yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                         .36              na             .76             .48            .49              na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis.      and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment
of skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N is 21,966. N is
20,166 in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share of administators
in total employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-3 if
they are estimated using only 20,166 observations.
                 Appendix Table 6--Skill upgrading regressions with lagged value added
                             (dependent variable is employment share of skilled labor)

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

ln(capital/LaggedVA)                   .011 **         .015 **         .004 **         .005 **         .002 **         .005 **
                                       (.001)         (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
ln(LaggedVA)                           .021 **         .017 **         .001            .006 **         .002 **         .004 **
                                       (.001)         (.001)          (.002)          (.001)          (.001)          (.001)
FTAC05tJLagVA.                         .000            .000            .000           -.001 **        -.001 **         .000
                                       (.000)         (.001)          (.000)          (.000)          (.000)          (.001)
Patent Cost/Lag VA                     .013     **     .004            .001            .010 **         .008 **         .002
                                       (.006)         (.004)          (.003)          (.003)          (.003)          (.004)
Imp. Mat./Materials                    .058 **         .014 **        -.011 *          .040 **         .035 **         .006 *
                                       (.005)         (.004)          (.005)          (.004)          (.004)          (.004)
Share of Executives                                                                   -.100    **     -.100 **        -.096 **
                                                                                      (.004)          (.004)          (.003)
Share of Administrators                                                               -.087           -.086           -.076
                                                                                      (.003)          (.003)          (.002)
Share of Women                                                                         .000            .002            .004
                                                                                      (.005)          (.005)          (.005)
ShareofProduction                                                                     337 **          -.331 **        -.259 **
Workers                                                                               (.007)          (.007)          (.004)
Corporation   Indicator                                                                                .030 **         .032 **
                                                                                                      (.002)          (.003)

Plant Indicators                         yes             no             yes              no              no              no
Plant Randomn Effects                    no              yes             no              no              no             yes
Industry Indicators                      yes             yes             no             yes             yes             yes
Area Indicators                          yes             yes             no             yes             yes             yes
Year Indicators                          yes             yes            yes             yes             yes             yes
R2 (adjusted)                            .35             na              .76            .48             .49              na
Note: Huber-White standard errors are in parenthesis.     and * indicate significance at a 5% and 10% level, respectively.
FTA stands for foreign technical assistance. Share of executives and administrators refers to their share in total employment of
skilled workers. Share of women and production workers refers to their share in total employment. N is 21,966. N is 20,166
in columns 3-5 because we cannot define additional variables such as share of executives and share of administators in total
employment of skilled workers for plants without skilled workers. No findings change significantly in columns 1-3 if they are
estimated using only 20,166 observations.
