                                (  )   




                                                
                                                 


                                            
                                             
                                              !"""#$


                                         $%&'#$*+,-
                                 ""'.//0001#$$&/''#$/0*+,-



                            (  2                       
                                  -3,32!#"" ##
                                    41$ &#52 36-7+
                                          &"6333




                     
                     
    !"# "  $ % &' 
( ))*+,-+./0  (       1      
  &2)'    (      3     

4-000  1 5%  5   (      3 5
 3     5 6   3       5  4
 5    
##"$" '"'$"#8#9$#"##"$!"
5 5 !"""#$
( $%&'#$*+,-
  &"6333
-35-:57- 76

                                                     

          ''#$4""# 1;"#1""8 99#$#!#"$" '!44#$!8<""$"#&#
1#$# !$ 99#$#"& "#!8&;#!"$'#!9!88;50##8"#"#! " #$
0!"$" '"$#$"#$$#"$""$&'$ !"4$%#"!4'#""0"
4$##"18# 9$4=!4;$#9"##8#!"$! "$;>''# "!'#$"
0""##!41#"=#"#$"$&8!#&5"$"#&!88!#$"$&"!?"1#$#
"#'$4!#"!8 "$;>8#"#9$4#$"$"#&;!88#&#!41#"4$%#"'0#$5"#
8""#$"$"#&;"# "$#9$!#!$$#"4$%#""$!"$# &"#1##9"9!'#$"!8 #
9$#"88&"#!"9!4'#"""#'$ !"4$%#"  & '8!"##"4#"%
#"54'#$9#!""#@4$%#"9$ #A4;8# "!4'#""#1#$"#'$ !"4$%#"
'#!9!88;59"#"$!"!"91$&&$#&$!41#"$#8%#8;"#B'$'$"# #
9$4"$" '"$5"#'$ !"4$%#"!4'#""4$#8%#8;#"#""## #&
#8 "#"9"#!44#$!8<""$"#&#9#$-33"$" '"$$'$!'8
$1"9 &$#"""#'$118";9!'#$"!$#&"#"$C!"$8#$
"#88#!"8 '$'#$"; $&"5 !" 0" #"$# !'"8" =0! $# !# "#$ "$!"8
1$&& !">5    "# $#8"# !" 9 !"$8 9 '#!8<#  !4'8#4#"$; #"  $
!!8"""#'$'#";9$'$ !4'#""#1##9"9$4"$" '"$$#98#!"#$8#$
4$%#"98$#5"#@4$%#"9$ #A

                                                   !"""#$
  #$";92#81$#                  2 8!8                 2 8!8
633#!#"#$"$##"                      ,32#4$8$#                 ,32#4$8$#
$8"573,7                         41$ &#52 36-:6              41$ &#52 36-:6
                                        D4"#                        (
D414#81#                                                    "#$D4"# 
                                                                                          1




I.     Introduction

       Since the early 1990s, there has been an explosion in the level of investment

funding provided to technology-oriented start-up firms in the United States.            For

example, venture capitalists invested at least $12.5 billion in 1998 in the United States –

up over five-fold from 1991 (VentureOne, 2000; Rausch, 1998) – and venture-backed

firms are now estimated to account for 15% of all domestic industrial innovation (Kortum

and Lerner, 1999). Not surprisingly, there is considerable popular and academic interest

in the potential implications of this surge in the rate of R&D investment in small,

entrepreneurial firms (Gompers and Lerner, 1999; Kortum and Lerner, 1999;

Christensen, 1997; Strasser, 1999).

       One of the key issues raised by the dramatic rise in venture financing is the

impact that the creation of these new firms will have on the dynamics of industrial

organization in high-technology industries.     In this paper, we address this issue by

identifying the conditions under which the commercialization strategy chosen by a start-

up firm tends to reinforce (or, alternatively, overturn) incumbent market power.

Specifically, we provide empirical evidence that whether start-ups compete or cooperate

with established firms depends on more fundamental economic factors which shape both

the value of cooperation relative to competition and the transactional costs of bargaining.

       Our approach builds upon two competing perspectives on the product market

consequences of start-up innovation. On the one hand, many analysts suggest that

entrepreneurial activity ushers in systematic industrial restructuring in many high-

technology industries – newly financed companies compete with and then ultimately
                                                                                       2


overturn the market power of established firms (Foster, 1986; Hobijn and Jovanovic,

1999; Christensen, 1997). According to this perspective, the small-firm R&D financing

boom is accelerating the “gale of creative destruction,” the process by which new firms

leverage the innovative process to replace established firms within specific industrial

sectors (Schumpeter, 1943). In effect, proponents of this perspective are suggesting that

because venture capital (and other financing institutions such as the provision of

government subsidies to technology-oriented firms) have overcome (or at least

substantially alleviated) the liquidity and incentive dilemmas which have traditionally

limited the level of innovative activity by small firms, the rise of small firm R&D

financing will be associated with systematic pro-competitive consequences.

       However, both economic theory as well as a slightly more detailed recounting of

the facts associated with venture-backed firms suggests that the link between entrant

innovative activity and changes in market leadership may be more nuanced than

commonly assumed. Conditional on developing a prototype of a new technology, a start-

up firm may calculate that greater profits may be earned (in expectation) through

cooperation with established firms (either through licensing, joint venture, or outright

acquisition of the potential entrant by the incumbent) rather than through product market

competition with these same firms (Salant, 1984; Gallini and Winter, 1985; Anton and

Yao, 1995; Gans and Stern, 2000a). In such a case, innovation-oriented start-up firms

serve as upstream suppliers of technology to established firms rather than potential

sources of disruption to current market structure.

       Indeed, in the absence of significant imperfections which make a bargaining

agreement between start-up and incumbent infeasible, these economic actors share two
                                                                                                          3


distinct gains from trade with each other: (1) the preservation of current market power

within the industry and (2) the opportunity to avoid investment in duplicative

commercialization assets, such as those which might be associated with distribution,

manufacturing, or the establishment of a reputation for quality.                            As long as

commercialization does not involve substantial diseconomies of scale or scope,

observations of competition in the product market as the result of innovation by a start-up

firm reflect a prior market imperfection – in the “market for ideas.” If an ideas market

functions well, this allows incumbents to contract for innovations from upstream start-ups

and so forestall the competitive impact associated with entry.

        Of course, these theoretical concerns would be of only limited interest if, in

reality, start-up innovators exclusively chose to earn their returns through product market

competition.1 However, even a sector-level examination of commercialization strategy

patterns suggests important heterogeneity. For example, in biotechnology, some form of

cooperation is the norm (whether through licensing, strategic alliances or outright

acquisition), while in some areas of electronics, such as the disk drive sector, start-up

firms consistently earn their returns through direct participation in the product market

(Orsenegio, 1989; Lerner and Merges, 1998; Christensen, 1997).

        Motivated by this observed variation in entrant commercialization strategy, this

paper focuses on the economic drivers of the commercialization path of research-oriented

start-up firms. In particular, we document the linkage between small firm R&D and



1
 Indeed, while the earliest empirical studies of the sources of returns from innovation typically found that
“cooperation” (as proxied by technology licensing) was associated with modest revenues (Scherer, 1965;
Caves, Crookwell, and Killing, 1983), more recent analyses have noted that (a) cooperation can take
numerous forms, from licensing to strategic alliances to outright acquisition) and that (b) an increasing
share of start-up returns seem to be associated with such strategies (US DOJ Licensing Guidelines, 1995;
Arora, 1995; Chesbrough and Teece, 1998; VentureOne, 1999).
                                                                                          4


creative destruction by explicitly examining the strategic choices made by start-up firms

after they have developed a prototype technology.

       Our analysis begins with a simple theoretical model of the commercialization

decision of start-up firms.     While both incumbents and innovator start-ups have

incentives to avoid head-to-head competition or duplication of sunk investments, several

factors may affect the probability of cooperation by introducing bargaining imperfections

or changing the economies to cooperation.

       First, a principal benefit from cooperation is the ability of start-up innovators to

exploit “complementary assets” held by incumbent firms, such as through their control

over distribution channels, regulatory or manufacturing expertise, or brand-name

recognition (Teece, 1986). While avoiding duplication of these sunk assets will be

important in fostering cooperation in some environments (such as when biotechnology

firms are able to exploit the regulatory expertise of established pharmaceutical

companies), incumbent-held assets will confer minimal value to start-up innovators in

other settings (for example, when the start-up innovator has developed an incompatible

technology). Whereas previous researchers have focused on how asymmetries in sunk

assets affect the distribution of returns from innovation (Teece, 1986; Bresnahan, Stern,

and Trajtenberg, 1997), our model suggests that such differences may also drive

commercialization strategy: as the relative “cost” of competing increase, entrants will

tend to forgo competition and instead earn their returns through the market for ideas.

       Second, identifying and contracting with incumbent commercialization partners

may involve “search” or transactional costs. Even when intellectual property (IP) rights

are well defined, there may be uncertainty about the value (or other characteristics) of the
                                                                                                         5


start-up technology; such disagreements necessitate detailed bargaining between the

parties about royalty rates and other contingent contracting provisions (Fosfuri, Arora,

and Gambardella, 1999). In this case, the presence of bargaining “intermediaries” (such

as venture capitalists or specialized legal counsel) may substantially reduce the cost of

forging an agreement between the two parties (Fosfuri, Arora, and Gambardella, 1999;

Burt, 2000).       Accordingly, as bargaining costs decrease, the relative returns to

cooperation increase.

        Finally, there is a contracting hazard inherent in the nature of the innovative

process: bargaining between entrant and incumbent requires the start-up to disclose the

idea to the established firm (Arrow, 1962). In the absence of complete IP protection, the

established firm may be able to expropriate the economic value of the entrant’s invention

through imitation.2 This disclosure hazard will be particularly salient when IP rights are

weak and so disclosed information substantially reduces the cost of imitation by the

incumbent (Merges and Nelson, 1991; Anton and Yao, 1994). In such a case, a start-up

innovator may choose to earn the rents on its innovation through the product market in

order to avoid disclosing technical information to the incumbent.3 Or, stated another

way, while IP likely increases the absolute returns to innovation regardless of

commercialization strategy, IP also increases the relative returns to cooperation in many

cases, precisely because it reduces the hazard of expropriation.

        The main contribution of this paper is to evaluate empirically whether

environments that differ along each of these dimensions – complementary assets, the cost

2
  Of course, if the start-up innovator’s technology builds upon the inventions of the incumbent, an optimal
IP regime would compensate the incumbent for part of the value generated by the follow-on innovator’s
technology (Scotchmer, 1991; Green and Scotchmer, 1995).
                                                                                                       6


of contracting, and the strength of intellectual property – are associated with substantially

different start-up innovator commercialization patterns.                Perhaps surprisingly, little

empirical work has been devoted to this topic. By and large, prior analyses of the

relationship between start-up and established firms have tended to focus on the relative

incentives to innovate in the first place, under the assumption that innovation by a start-

up will be followed by product market competition with more established firms.4 As

well, several analyses have examined the form of cooperation between smaller research-

oriented firms and larger more established firms without considering the potential for

product market entry.5 By relating the choice between cooperation and competition to

the firm’s economic environment, our analysis suggests that the competitive

consequences of start-up innovation are endogenous.                    Specifically, the industrial

organization consequences of the small-firm R&D financing boom depend on factors

such as the strength of intellectual property and the availability of venture capital, which

are themselves determined, at least in part, by various aspects of public policy.

        We investigate the determinants of the commercialization path of a group of 118

small research-oriented firms, split almost equally between enterprises funded by venture

capital and the US Federal government through the Small Business Innovation Research

Program. We analyze three main hypotheses derived from our theoretical model. First,

we consider whether innovations that receive some formal IP protection (e.g., a patent)

are associated with higher levels of cooperative activity. Second, we examine whether

3
  Anton and Yao (1995) were the first to explicitly evaluate how the disclosure problem and the potential
for expropriation impact the bargaining equilibrium between an incumbent and a potential start-up.
4
  The literature on R&D and product market competition between incumbents and start-up firms is too
large to be summarized here, but see, for example, Schumpeter, 1943; Scherer, 1965; Gilbert and Newbery,
1982; Reinganum, 1983; Kamien and Schwartz, 1982; Cohen and Levin, 1989; Scotchmer, 1991; Scherer,
1992; Henderson, 1993; Cockburn and Henderson, 1994; Lerner, 1997; and Christensen, 1997.
                                                                                                    7


start-up innovators who have access to control over downstream complementary product

market assets (e.g., distribution channels or manufacturing capability) are more likely to

vertically integrate into the product market. Finally, we consider whether start-up firms

that have access to networks of contacts (e.g., through a relationship with a venture

capitalist) are more likely to be able to contract with potential commercialization partners

as the result of lower “search costs.”

        On their face, our empirical results are striking. Each of the above factors –

control over intellectual property, the attractiveness of control over complementary

assets, and association with venture capitalists – is associated with a significant effect on

the probability of cooperation by our sample of start-up innovators. For example, firms

that possess intellectual property are estimated to be 23% more likely than non-patent-

holders to cooperate as part of their commercialization strategy. Moreover, our empirical

findings are robust to the inclusion of a variety of controls and to focusing on within-

industry or cross-industry variation.

        While we emphasize that our results are robust in a purely statistical sense, we are

cautious about interpreting our results as a dispositive test of our theory of start-up

commercialization strategy. Our empirical measures are imperfect:                 even though we

include a large number of control variables, our results may be subject to bias. However,

the chief “candidate “ for bias – conflating strong intellectual property or association with

venture capitalists with “high-quality” projects – will likely generate bias in the opposite

direction of both our theory and empirical results. To see this more clearly, suppose that

control over IP (or association with venture capitalists) is simply proxying for “high-


5
 See Salant, 1984; Katz and Shapiro, 1986; Pisano, 1990; Anton and Yao, 1995; Lerner and Merges, 1998;
and Gans and Stern, 2000a.
                                                                                                        8


quality” or “radical” projects. Under this scenario, most earlier research would suggest

that our measures of IP protection or lower bargaining costs would be associated with

higher rates of independent product market entry by technological innovators (Foster,

1986; Shan, 1990; Pisano, 1990), precisely the opposite of our theoretical predictions and

empirical findings. In other words, despite the relatively small size of our sample and our

imperfect ability to measure the precise concepts underlying the theoretical model, we are

able to demonstrate a fairly robust set of empirical findings which accord with a simple

but novel model of strategic interaction between start-up innovators and incumbent firms

in high-technology industries.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the next section motivates the

study by highlighting the heterogeneity of cooperation across technological sectors. We

then develop a simple model exploring the economics of commercialization strategies.

After a brief review of our data, we present our principal empirical results in Section V.

A final section concludes.



II.     What is the Empirical Puzzle?

        Our analysis is motivated by a simple but important puzzle: start-up

commercialization strategy varies substantially across industrial sectors. On the one

hand, some research-intensive sectors are subject to a high rate of “creative destruction,”

whereby start-up innovation followed by product market entry serves as a key mechanism

by which incumbent market power is overturned.6 For example, in the hard disk drive


6
   While Schumpeter (1943) pioneered the study of the relationship between innovation and market
structure, it was not until more systematic empirical anlysis began in the 1960s that the ambiguous nature
of the relationship between innovation and market power became apparent (Scherer, 1965; Cohen and
                                                                                                         9


industry, each “generation” of technology (where a generation is defined according to

disk drive size) has been pioneered by an entrant firm (see Figure A, drawn from

Christensen, 1997); as well, the market leader associated with any one generation of

technology has not been the market leader in the immediately preceding generation of

technology.

        On the other hand, in other industrial sectors, a high rate of innovation by start-up

research-oriented firms is associated not with creative destruction but with the

reinforcement of incumbent market power. Consider the biotechnology industry. While

the radical technical and scientific breakthroughs promised by biotechnology were

heralded originally as a force for creative destruction (USOTA, 1984), market leadership

has remained relatively constant in the pharmaceutical industry over the past 25 years.

As suggested by Table 1, not one of the ten largest independent pharmaceutical firms in

1997 have their origins in biotechnology; indeed, seven of the top ten firms in 1997 were

among the top fifteen leaders by sales in 1973, and the remaining three – Abbott, Baxter,

and SmithKline Beecham – all have their origins in the traditional pharmaceutical

business and were well-established prior to the beginnings of the biotechnology

“revolution.”

        This is not to suggest that biotechnology products have not been commercialized.

Indeed, by 1997, over 55% of all new products approved by the FDA in the United States

are based, at least in part, on discoveries and drugs developed with the tools of

biotechnology (Bioworld, 1998). As well, the internal R&D departments of established

pharmaceutical firms do not make the initial discoveries of the vast majority of these


Levin, 1989). More recently, the majority of empirical work in this area has been undertaken by scholars in
the strategic management of technology and organizational sociology (Foster, 1986; Henderson and Clark,
                                                                                                        10


biotechnology products; instead, they represent the innovative outputs of research-

oriented biotechnology firms who chose to cooperate with at least one incumbent

pharmaceutical firm in the commercialization process (BioWorld, 1998).7                              This

commercialization pattern allows for a high rate of innovation by start-up firms alongside

stability in product market structure; incumbent firms avoid competition from potential

start-up firms by choosing to cooperate through one of a number of strategies, from

licensing to the formation of strategic alliances to outright acquisition of the start-up by

the incumbent firm. In other words, in contrast to the disk drive industry where start-up

innovators tend to earn their returns through competition in the product market,

biotechnology firms tend to earn their returns on innovation through the market for ideas.

        Our challenge is therefore to identify the key factors which differentiate these

sectors and evaluate whether those factors help explain start-up innovator

commercialization strategy patterns more generally. We do so by developing a simple

but illustrative model of commercialization strategy in which a small set of key factors –

incumbent sunk assets, search costs, and the intellectual property protection afforded the

start-up innovator – affect the relative attractiveness of cooperation versus competition.



III.    A Simple Model of Start-Up Commercialization Strategy

        In this section, we develop a theoretical model aimed at understanding the factors

that drive a cooperative as opposed to competitive commercialization choice by small



1990; Henderson, 1993; Christensen, 1997).
7
  While “…the [stock market capitalization] value of the biotech industry is about $77B, and the value of
Merck is $127B…[biotech has] 350 products in clinical trials whereas Merck has about 25…[At the same
time] the biotech companies have roughly 20 times more drugs [than Merck] in late-stage, Phase III trials.”
(BioWorld, 1998, p. 3).
                                                                                                            11


firms. We focus on whether a start-up innovator who has successfully developed a

potentially commercializable innovation cooperates or competes with a single

incumbent.8 Consider a start-up innovator, E, who has developed a commercializable

innovation.9 E then faces a choice of entering the product market by making those

investments itself – the competitive strategy – or ‘selling’ the innovation to a single

incumbent, I – the cooperative strategy. The sale of the innovation itself may occur

through a licensing agreement, a strategic alliance or outright acquisition of E’s assets by

I.   Of course, these strategies are themselves differentiated in terms of their impact on

future incentives to innovate and the locus of control over ultimate decisionmaking.

However, the key, common feature of these cooperative strategies is that, if an agreement

is reached, I is able to foreclose on direct competition with E in the product market,

thereby achieving the monopoly profits associated with control over the prices of both

old and new products.

         While E can exploit the innovation if it enters the product market, I can only

exploit the innovation if it contracts with E or it replicates the innovation after E’s

disclosures during negotiations. To denote the difference in payoffs associated with

incumbent control over the innovation, let a = 1 if the incumbent controls the innovation

(by contracting or replication) and 0 otherwise.

8
  While our model examines strategic interaction between a start-up innovator and a single incumbent, the
underlying economic forces are more general and apply to an environment where a start-up innovator
considers whether to enter the product market as an independent firm or whether to cooperate with one
among a number of established firms. A more inclusive theoretical treatment would consider the
possibility of non-exclusive cooperative behavior (e.g., through non-exclusive licensing), distinguish more
carefully between different types of cooperative strategies (e.g., the distinction between licensing, strategic
alliances, or outright acquisition), allow for imitation in the absence of negotiations, and consider the
conduct between competing firms in the case of product market entry. Our simpler approach highlights the
salient economic tradeoffs raised by the cooperation decision with unambiguous empirical predictions.
9
  A “commercializable” innovation is defined so that R&D has resolved all of the technical uncertainties
associated with the technology (i.e., there exists a working prototype technology) and so, with known
                                                                                                           12


         In Table 2, we define the joint profits of E and I under the two alternative

commercialization scenarios. Let π m (a ) equal the level of monopoly profits that arise if

I does not face product market competition from E; either because they cooperate or entry

is not profitable for E. π Ic (.) and π Ec (.) represents the profits under competition between

I and E, respectively. In addition, if E competes in the product market, E must invest K

in “duplicative” commercialization assets already possessed by the incumbent.

Investments which either firm must incur are incorporated into π m (1) .

         Table 2 distinguishes between environments by whether product market entry by

E is credible. When entry is not credible (that is, E’s payoff under competition are less

than K), then I continues to earn its pre-innovation monopoly profits ( π m (0) ) if a

cooperative outcome is not reached. On the other hand, if entry is credible, entry results

in duopoly (rather than monopoly) profits, the level and allocation of which depend on

whether I competes “head-to-head” with E through imitation of the innovation as the

result of disclosure during (failed) negotiations. Finally, if cooperation is achieved, the

joint profits are equal to π m (1) , the distribution of which depends on the relative

bargaining power of E and I. Let γ equal the fraction of π m (1) that E receives as the

result of a Nash bargaining equilibrium between E and I.


Efficient Bargaining Equilibrium

         Our analysis begins under a scenario of efficient bargaining conditions – that is,

so long as there are positive gains to trade between I and E, we assume that an agreement

is reached in equilibrium, and, moreover, E faces no risk in pursuing negotiations (we


additional investments on product market entry (e.g., to set up manufacturing or distribution facilities), the
                                                                                                          13


incorporate various bargaining imperfections below). In other words, E neither incurs

fixed costs to begin bargaining nor weakens its potential competitive position as the

result of disclosure during bargaining.

         Under conditions of efficient bargaining, a cooperative outcome will be chosen

whenever the industry profits from cooperation exceed those from competition, in which

case I must pay E at least the amount that E would earn under competition, π Ec (0) − K .

More precisely, we assume that E and I divide the surplus that remains after having

compensated E for forgoing this outside option.10

         In other words, in an environment where product market entry is not credible (i.e.,

π Ec (0) < K ), I continues to earn pre-innovation monopoly profits unless a cooperative

agreement is reached. As such, cooperation occurs only if π m (1) ≥ π m (0) (i.e., the

innovation adds value). On the other hand, when entry is credible (i.e., π Ec (0) ≥ K ),

cooperation ensures the continuation of monopoly profits, and so cooperation will be

chosen so long as π m (1) ≥ π Ec (0) + π Ic (0) − K . As long as monopoly profits exceeds the

sum of duopoly profits, this condition holds as long as K is not too negative (i.e., I does

not face too heavy a cost disadvantage in commercializing the technology).11

         In sum, under efficient bargaining, there may be considerable gains from trade as

the result of the preservation of monopoly profits and the avoidance of duplicative sunk



technology could be introduced into the product market.
10
   While it is possible to provide a full characterization of how the nature of bargaining affect the precise
“price” at which cooperation takes place (see Gans and Stern (2000a)), the overall finding is that
cooperation takes place when bargaining is efficient and industry profits are higher by the avoidance of
competition is independent of the specific bargaining protocol.
11
   It is important to note that cooperation is therefore the equilibrium under the assumptions of the
traditional R&D strategic investment literature (Gilbert and Newbery, 1983; Reinganum, 1983; 1989). In
other words, most prior theoretical work has simply assumed competition as an outcome rather than
identifying the economic foundations of competition over cooperation.
                                                                                             14


cost investment.      With this in mind, we now incorporate two key bargaining

imperfections arising from “search” costs prior to bargaining and the potential for

expropriation during negotiations.


Search Costs

       Even if IP rights are well defined, bargaining over “ideas” may involve search and

transactional costs, c, borne by the entrant, which may reduce the gains from pursuing

cooperation. For example, I and E may disagree about the commercial value of an

innovation.    Alternatively, E may have to incur substantial costs in locating and

identifying the “best” potential partner. In many industries, the competencies and costs

of different incumbents may not be observable and so E may have to exert effort in

searching for a suitable partner.

       Since c is a sunk cost, it will not be recoverable during negotiations with I.

Consequently, even if negotiations after search proceed “smoothly,” E accounts for this

sunk cost (rather than the pure gains from cooperation) when choosing its optimal

strategy. If entry is not credible, E receives 0 if no agreement is reached while I

continues to earn its pre-innovation monopoly profits. In this case, E expects to earn

γ (π m (1) − π m (0) ) through bargaining and so will choose to cooperate so long as

γ (π m (1) − π m (0) ) > c . On the other hand, if entry is credible, E earns π Ec (0) − K under

competition while I’s profits are equal to π Ic (0) . This threat of competition affects the

outside options of both parties in bargaining. Under Nash bargaining, the equilbrium
                                                                                                                    15


alloation to E will simply be equal to the outside option of E plus E’s share of the gains

from cooperation:12

            π Ec (0) − K + γ (π m (1) − (π Ic (0) + π Ec (0) − K ) ) = γ (π m (1) − π Ic (0) ) + (1 − γ )(π Ec (0) − K )


           Thus, E cooperates so long as γ (π m (1) − (π Ic (0) + π Ec (0) − K ) ) ≥ c , suggesting that

the probability of cooperation is declining in the expected search costs of the start-up

innovator.


Disclosure and Expropriation

           Perhaps a more fundamental source of bargaining imperfections in the context of

R&D licensing arises from the disclosure problem. As first articulated by Arrow (1962),

the problem with a “market for ideas” is that while the value of an idea to a buyer cannot

be known without the idea being disclosed, disclosure itself precludes the buyer from

being required to pay for it. In the context of start-up innovator negotiations with I, when

IP rights are weak, E realizes that by disclosing the nature of the innovation during

negotiations, it risks expropriation by I.

           However, as first suggested by Anton and Yao (1994), expropriation may be

partially mitigated by E’s credible threat to compete with I in the product market. Since

start-up innovators are able to reduce incumbent rents even in the absence of IP rights,

potential entrants may receive rents from cooperating because of their threat to compete.

           We incorporate the impact of expropriation and its interaction with potential

product market competition by assuming that, when E negotiates with I, I acquires the


12
     See Gans and Stern (2000a) for a detailed derivation of this bargaining solution.
                                                                                                    16


innovation with probability 1-θ. When copying occurs, I can exploit the innovation with

no payment. This lowers E’s bargaining power since I’s outside option has become more

attractive (π Ic (1) > π Ic (0)) , and because its own outside option has become less attractive

(π Ec (1) < π Ec (0)) . At the same time, with probability θ, bargaining occurs according to the

search cost equilibrium described above. Finally, it is important to recall that, if E

chooses to compete prior to bargaining at all, we assume that I cannot imitate the

innovation (i.e., I earns π Ic (0) ).

        E’s optimal commercialization strategy depends on its expected outside options

which depend on the credibility of product market entry. Three distinct cases arise,

depending on whether entry is credible ex ante (prior to bargaining with I) or ex post

(after bargagining and imitation by I) (see Table 3). In the first regime, the costs of

commercialization are sufficiently high so that ex ante entry is not credible. In this case,

ex post will also not be credible (i.e., π Ec (1) < π Ec (0) < K ), and so the only route by which

E can earn a return on their innovation is to incur the search cost c in exchange for an

expected return of θγ (π m (1) − π m (0) ) .

        Second, it is possible that while ex ante entry is credible, ex post entry is not

credible ( π Ec (0) ≥ K > π Ec (1) ). In this regime, E risks “losing” its outside option if it

attempts to cooperate with I but is expropriated (at which point entry becomes non-

credible). As such, E’s expected benefits from pursuing a cooperative strategy are equal

to θ (γ (π m (1) − π Ic (0) ) + (1 − γ )(π Ec (0) − K )) − c which will be weighed against the benefits

from competing in the product market, π Ec (0) − K .
                                                                                                      17



       Finally, if ex post entry is credible ( π Ec (1) ≥ K ), E is able to credibly reduce I’s

monopoly rents under expropriation. Thus, E will be able to earn a cooperative return

from I even when its innovation has been disclosed (Anton and Yao, 1995). Of course,

as E’s outside option is reduced and the post-disclosure bargaining surplus is smaller, this

share is reduced to:

       γ (π m (1) − θπ Ic (0) − (1 − θ )π Ic (1) ) + (1 − γ ) (θπ Ec (0) + (1 − θ )π Ec (1) − K ) .

       In summary, when choosing its commercialization strategy, E will account for its

share of the gains from avoiding competition and duplicative investment, while balancing

these benefits with the costs of search and the potential losses in bargaining due to the

disclosure hazard. The size of each of these effects depends critically upon the credibility

of entry by E, both prior to bargaining as well as after an instance of expropriation (table

3 summarizes these equilibrium conditions).


Comparative Statics and Hypothesis Formulation

       This simple model holds several potentially testable insights about the

determinants of start-up commercialization strategy. First, strong intellectual property

rights provide protection for smaller firms against imitation and expropriation by

incumbents, hence raising the absolute level of their returns from innovation regardless of

whether they choose to compete or cooperate. However, commercialization strategy

depends on the relative returns to competition versus cooperation. In our model, the

strength of intellectual property rights are reflected in the levels of θ or γ, since the

former measures the probability that E avoids expropriation while the latter reflects the

ability of I to work-around E’s property protection and so reduce its bargaining power
                                                                                          18


(Gans and Stern, 2000a). As either θ or γ rises, the probability of cooperation rises, since

stronger intellectual property protection improves E’s ability to negotiate a larger share of

the surplus from cooperation and hence makes it worthwhile to search for incumbent

partners. Thus, strong intellectual property rights improve the returns from cooperation

with more established firms at a faster rate than the returns to competition. Second, as

the costs of searching for incumbent partners falls, E becomes more likely to pursue a

cooperative path. This is not surprising. Nonetheless, it does highlight the importance of

controlling for differences in search costs in any empirical analysis.          Finally, the

comparative static of commercialization strategy with respect to K is somewhat subtler.

While decreases in the marginal value associated with investing K will decrease the

probability of competition among those firms who successfully introduce a product

through competition or cooperation, increases in K also weaken the start-up innovator’s

bargaining position and so increases in K may result simply in non-commercialization of

the innovation (i.e., the project would be technically but not economically feasible).

However, within our empirical work, we condition our evaluation on a sample of firms

among whom all have chosen to commercialize their innovation: under this sampling

constraint, the return from cooperation rises at a slower rate than the return from

competition as K gets smaller.
                                                                                           19



IV.    Data


The Survey

       To evaluate whether the simple model of Section III helps explain start-up

innovator commercialization strategy, we require project-level commercialization

strategy and business environment data.       To do so, we developed and administered a

commercialization strategy to a sample of start-up innovators funded by two distinct

sources: the US Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) program and private venture

capital. By dividing the sample between SBIR-funded firms and those funded by venture

capital, we are able to incorporate variation in terms of the costs of identifying and

contracting with potential partners while preserving the ability to test comparative

statistics about the strength of intellectual property protection or the sunk costs associated

with commercialization. As well, to ensure comparability across the two samples, we

followed the procedure pursued by Lerner (1999) whereby we first collected a sample of

SBIR-funded projects and then developed the venture-backed sample by matching on two

characteristics: four digit SIC code and the firm sales level.

       Before describing the summary statistics from the survey, it is useful to first

describe some of the institutional detail associated with our two sources of data: SBIR-

funded project and VC-backed entrepreneurial firms. The SBIR program is administered

through the Small Business Association (SBA) and aimed at American firms with 500 or

fewer employees (USGAO, 1995).           Firms submit grant applications that are peer-

reviewed and awarded competitively according to three legislative goals: (a) to increase

the rate of commercialization of innovations derived from Federal research, (b) to
                                                                                                           20


enhance the “competitiveness” of small firms in technology-intensive industries, and (c)

to enhance the participation of small firms as well as women and minority-owned

businesses in the Federal contracting process (USGAO, 1995).13,14 Overall, once the

awards are granted, the SBIR is a very “hands-off” subsidy in that the government neither

takes over managerial control nor maintains an equity stake in funded organizations

(Wallsten, 1998; Lerner, 1999). As well, because the program is administered through all

Federal agencies who conduct R&D, the SBIR tends to fund small-firm R&D projects

across a wide array of industries, particularly as compared to the concentrated nature of

private venture financing (Gans and Stern, 2000b). However, to ensure comparability

across our two samples, however, we analyze a sample drawn from five high-technology

segments that have both SBIR as well as venture-backed firms.

         The SBIR program can be contrasted with private venture capital. In contrast to

the grants provided by the SBIR, VCs are allocated equity and managerial control in

exchange for start-up capital. In addition to their purely financial role, VCs are believed

to aid fledgling firms through providing superior management expertise to the firm as

well as offering the VC firm’s network of contacts and experience in corporate

governance (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992; Roberts, 1991). While prior research has

provided only limited direct empirical evidence of these non-investment roles for venture


13
   There are two rounds of potential awards. The maximum phase I award, earmarked for proof of concept
and idea development, is $100,000. For the period 1991-93, for all 11 participating federal agencies, the
average ratio of funded Phase I proposals to proposals received was 13.3% (USGAO, 1995). Phase II
awards are capped at $750,000 and is a grant for developing a technology and exploring its commercial
potential. Only those firms with a Phase I award are considered for a Phase II award.
14
   The rationale for the program appears to be two-fold. First, small, entrepreneurial firms are thought to be
highly productive in generating ideas and technical advances that become the basis for valuable innovations
(Acs and Audretsch, 1988; Aghion and Tirole, 1994). Second, technology development in these firms is
believed to generate positive externalities (Jaffe, 1986). Left on their own, these firms would likely under-
invest relative to the socially optimal level due to their inability to appropriate the full value of their
invention (Arrow, 1962).
                                                                                                     21


capitalists, both economists and organizational sociologists have increasingly explored

such effect in recent years (Stuart, et al. 1999; Gompers and Lerner, 1999). More

generally, while projects funded by the SBIR and VCs will differ in terms of the impact

that the funders will have on the operation and strategy of the firm, projects funded by

either source are comparable in several respects: the projects are selectively chosen,

funded enterprises are often technology-based, funded organizations tend to be quite

young, and the size of financing is comparable (by construction).


Data and Summary Statistics

        Our data collection efforts took place in two stages.                   First, we collected

information from a survey (Appendix C) administered to a sample of 100 SBIR-backed

companies between January and March, 1999. The sample was drawn from the top 200

SBIR award winners between 1990 and 1993. To be included in the sample, firms had to

have successfully commercialized an SBIR-funded project into the marketplace, either

independently or through partnerships or cooperative agreement. While this requirement

may have induced some degree of selectivity, this criterion was mostly in accord with our

sampling criteria (i.e., most firms fit the criteria). We then assembled and similarly

surveyed a sample of VC-funded companies in July, 1999, matched to the SBIR sample,

based on four-digit industrial code and each firm’s level of overall sales.15




15
  Companies were matched using a two-step procedure (following Lerner (1999)). First, we searched the
Venture Economics database (through Security Data Corporation’s Platinum Database) for candidate
venture-backed companies whose primary line of business matched the four-digit SIC codes for the sample
of SBIR-backed companies. We eliminated those companies that received SBIR funding (based on a
database publicly available through the SBA web site). Finally, we consulted the Corptech Directory of
Technology Companies (1998) to select only those firms within the four-digit SIC code that approximately
matched the sales revenue of the SBIR sample, and surveyed those firms.
                                                                                                        22


        The sample includes 55 VC-backed projects and 86 SBIR-backed projects, for a

total of 141 projects whose primary focus is in one of five SIC codes.16 Two sectors are

drawn from projects at the four digit SIC level: biotechnology and pre-packaged

computer software. In addition, three sectors are drawn from projects at the two digit SIC

level: industrial machinery & equipment, electronic & electrical equipment, and

instruments (including medical devices).17                Because 23 observations are missing

information on complementary asset ratings, the final sample consists of 118

observations.

        At the firm level, we collected background information on the organization’s

employees and promotion policies; financial information about corporate ownership,

expenditures and revenues; and corporate governance issues. On the project level, each

company was asked to provide information on the commercialization and financing

history of the technology project, including revenues through sales and licensing of the

technology, the importance of the technology in achieving various goals of the firm, key

personnel involved in setting the commercialization strategy of the company, and

information about the commercialization strategy itself.18

        Tables 4 and 5 report variable definitions and summary statistics.                      Our key

dependent variable, COOPERATE, is a dummy variable equal to 1 if either the firm’s

revenues from the project are the result of licensing or intellectual property sales

16
   The overall response rate to the survey was approximately 50%. Firms contacted but not responding
seemed to be randomly mixed between firms not having a commercial product and those too busy or not
willing to respond. Within the organization, the respondent was typically one of the following individuals:
the director of R&D, the director of sales or marketing, or the CEO. Most of the surveys (approximately
75%) were filled out over the telephone, with the balance either faxed or mailed back.
17
   Analysis of a similar data set of 55 SBIR-backed firms matched with 55 comparable VC-backed firms
yield qualitatively the same results as those presented in this paper.
                                                                                                      23


revenues or if the firm has been acquired since the project’s development, and 0

otherwise. Within our sample of 118 projects, over one-third are commercialized through

a cooperative strategy.       However, as can be seen in Figure B, there is substantial

heterogeneity across sectors in terms of this probability – while the probability of

cooperation is more than 50% in biotechnology, only just over 20% of the projects are

commercialized via a COOPERATE strategy in Industrial Equipment.

        The main goal of our empirical exercise is to relate COOPERATE to variables

proxying for the salience of intellectual property protection, the role of sunk cost

asymmetries, and the costs of identifying and negotiating with potential partners. We

now review our variables for each of these concepts in turn.

        We measure the strength of intellectual property in several different ways across

the sample. In the majority of our analysis, we focus on whether the start-up innovator

has received at least one patent associated with the technology (PATENT

THRESHOLD). While the mean number of patents held by each firm is a little greater

than six (PATENTS), just less than two-thirds of the start-ups are associated with

PATENT THRESHOLD = 1.19                   In addition to these “objective” measures of the

association with intellectual property, we also exploit our survey to measure the

perceived strength of appropriability (in the spirit of Levin et al. (1987)). Specifically,

we asked each firm to rank several different appropriability strategies on a five-point

Likert scale. In this regard, we use each firm’s ranking of the importance of patents


18
    Whenever possible, we used publicly available databases to verify information from the survey
responders. For example, we verified the number of patents assigned to each organization through both the
US Patent and Trademark Office’s web site and the IBM patent database.
19
   While earlier analyses have used patents in a limited way to evaluate commercialization strategy
(Hellman and Puri (1998)), we interpret it according to a much more specific theory of how intellectual
property shapes start-up innovator commercialization strategy.
                                                                                        24


(PATENT LIKERT) as well as their maximal rating as to the importance of patent, patent

litigation threats, or trade secrecy (IP LIKERT MAX).

       To measure the relative investment costs that entrants face in acquiring

complementary assets needed to commercialize their innovation, we again relied on a

five point Likert scale. Executives from our sample companies were asked to rate the

importance of control over each of the following in earning returns from their innovation:

manufacturing, distribution channels, brand development, and servicing resources. We

use this set of questions as a measure of the feasibility of entrants to acquire or control

complementary assets necessary to exploit their invention, reasoning that executives

would rate individual complementary assets as high if he or she believed the asset was

obtainable at reasonable cost.

       In the empirical analysis, we use two measures of investment costs to acquire

complementary assets. CA LIKERT MAX is the maximum Likert score over a set of

complementary assets necessary to commercialize a given innovation, an indication of

whether any of the assets were important in earning returns from the technology-based

project. Since complementary assets comprise a network of investment choices, all of

which are important in the ultimate division of profits from innovation between entrants

and incumbents (Teece, 1986), we use a second measure of complementary assets. CA

LOW is a dummy variable set equal to one if CA LIKERT MAX is less than the

maximum possible value of five. CA LOW is therefore an indicator of high relative

investment cost for the entrant in acquiring the set of assets necessary to commercialize

its innovation, a condition satisfied for just less than a third of our sample.
                                                                                        25


       As suggested earlier, we selected our sample so that it was approximately equally

divided between SBIR-funded firms and VC-backed firms, thus allowing us to divide the

sample between firms who on average would face relatively high versus relatively low

costs in identifying and negotiating cooperative agreements with incumbent firms.

       In addition, we include several firm-level and technology-level variables into our

analysis. To control for differences across firms in their resources and capabilities, we

include a control variable for the firm’s initial size (a little over 25 employees on

average) and whether the founder of the firm has remained the CEO (this latter effect

captures the degree of agency in the firm in terms of the commercialization decision).

Finally, we respondents recorded the type of innovation in order to control for both the

innovation’s quality and the degree to which the innovation would be complementary to

the incumbent’s current product set or whether this was more naturally a competitive

product (e.g., almost 40% of the innovations were recorded as “novel systems”). With

this data overview in mind, we now turn to our analysis of how start-up

commercialization strategy is impacted by the economic environment.



V.     Empirical Results



Simple Correlations

       Our analysis begins in Tables 6 and 7 where we report the simple “pairwise”

conditional means relating the probability that COOP = 1 to our key variables. The

results are quite striking. For each of our measures of environmental variation in Table 6,

the probability of cooperation is increasing at least 70% as one moves from the lower to
                                                                                             26


higher conditional mean. As well, Table 7 presents how the probability of cooperation

varies with PATENT THRESHOLD and CA LOW. When both of these measures are

equal to zero, the probability of cooperation is less than 15%; this percentage jumps to

over 55% when both are equal to one. In other words, when there are fewer gains from

trade (the start-up innovator rates control over assets as critical for profitability) and there

are no well-defined intellectual property claims, then the probability of cooperation is

much smaller than when these conditions are both reversed. Of course, these simple

correlations are not in any sense dispositive, and so we now turn to a more systematic

regression analysis to evaluate the robustness of these results.


Regression Estimates

       Table 8 presents our core regression results, each of which is estimated using a

binary probit model where the dependent variable is the probability of cooperation.          In

(8-1) through (8-3) we simply evaluate the pairwise interactions between each of our core

measures and COOP; each is statistically significant and quantitatively important. As

well, our results remain robust along each dimension when we include multiple measures

as the same time, as we do in (8-4) through (8-6). For example, in our base regression

model (Equation 8-6), an individual change in the three (indicator) variables at the means

of the other independent variables changes the probability of cooperation 17.3% (VC),

18.4% (CA LOW), and 23% (PATENT THRESHOLD). In some sense, these “base”

models simply confirm our results from Tables 5 and 6 about the basic relationship in the

data between our core variables and COOP.

       The statistical significance of CA LOW and PATENT THRESHOLD is robust to

inclusion of a variety of control variables, a result demonstrated in Table 9. In this set of
                                                                                         27


regressions, however, the significance of VC is weakened, with p-values ranging from

11-18%.     For example, our results are robust (except for the significance of the VC

coefficient) to a regression that includes BASELINE EMPLOYEES as a control for the

size of the organization at the start of the project. As well, this regression suggests that

smaller organizations are more likely to choose to cooperate, perhaps in part due to

capital constraints. In addition, (9-2) includes the CEO FOUNDER variable as a control

for possible “founder” effects. There is evidence that firms headed by their founders may

disproportionately prefer to retain corporate control over the commercialization process

of their technology, even if it means (ex-post) less profits (Roberts, 1991). Finally, and

perhaps most importantly, (9-3) suggests that both our findings for intellectual property

and the role of sunk assets is robust to the inclusion of “industry” effects (for

biotechnology and electronics), suggesting that we are identified both off the cross-

industry and within-industry variation in our key measures.          As well, notice that

biotechnology firms in our sample are more likely to adopt a cooperator strategy in

commercializing their innovations, a result which is consistent with industry-level

analyses.

       We interpret these results as providing support for a model in which an ideas

market is enabled when a firm’s business environment offers a strong intellectual

property regime at the same time that entrant firms face high relative costs in acquiring

and controlling key complementary assets necessary for commercialization success. In

economic environments such as those often observed in the biotechnology industry,

where patents are relatively effective in protecting intellectual property (Levin, et al.,

1987) and firms face high relative investment costs (USOTA, 1984), firms tend to earn
                                                                                                       28


their returns from innovation through the ideas market, acting as an upstream supplier of

“technology” rather than as a horizontal innovation-oriented competitor.

        In contrast, when investment costs for the entrant are relatively low and the

technological innovation is not protected by patents, as in our stylized example of the

disk drive industry, we predict that the severe disclosure threat along with the relative

high level of incompatibility between “generations” of technology forecloses the ideas

market for entrants, who instead commercialize their innovations through product market

competition; it is this market failure which then spurs the gale of creative destruction.


Alternative Measures and Additional Controls20

        In Table 10, we explore the robustness of our core results to different measures of

complementary assets and intellectual property protection. In (10-1) through (10-3), we

experiment with alternative measures of strength in the intellectual property regime.

(PATENTS, PATENT LIKERT and IP LIKERT MAX).                               Each remains statistically

significant and quantitatively important.            While both PATENT THRESHOLD and

PATENT LIKERT each have their own interpretational problems (e.g., PATENT

THRESHOLD might be proxying for quality while it is difficult to ensure comparability

from survey responses of this type), the robust relationship between each and COOP

provides limited supporting evidence for one of our key hypotheses: stronger intellectual




20
   In addition to the tables reviewed in this section, Appendix A presents a single regression which
simultaneously includes all of the control regressors discussed in this section, as well as several other
variables which we experimented with extensively (and consistently found robustness to). Specifically,
Appendix A includes controls for initial firm size, industrial sector, whether the CEO is the founder, the
“type” of innovation, the composition of the firm’s workforce in terms of the share of employees who have
technical training or hold a PhD, the length of development and the year of commercialization, the
customer type, and the manufacturing process associated with the technology.
                                                                                                  29


property protection is associated with higher rather than lower levels of cooperation

between incumbents and start-up innovator entrants.

        These core results are also robust to an alternate measure of the complementary

asset regime. CA LIKERT MAX, the maximum over the set of survey-collected Likert

measures of the importance of complementary assets in earning returns from the firm’s

innovation, is also significant.21 Indeed, (10-5) shows that this variable is robust to

industry and firm size effects. CA LIKERT MAX indicates that if any of the set of

complementary assets is relatively costly for the entrant to acquire, the entrant is more

likely to take a cooperative strategy, a result consistent with our preferred measure of

complementary asset, CA LOW.22 In addition, as previously mentioned, access to a

network of assets is often necessary for commercial success. Therefore, a better measure

of the complementary asset regime is the maximum value over the set of Likert ratings, a

measure of whether any complementary assets are important in earning returns from

commercializing an invention, and indeed, CA LIKERT MAX is significant in equation

B-1.

        In contrast to the systematic and robust results associated with intellectual

property and sunk assets, our measure of search costs for alliance opportunities for

entrants, VC, shows only weak robustness across different specifications, with p-values

ranging between 5% and 12.9% across different tables. The weakness of this result may

be an artifact of using the presence of venture capital financing as a measure of search

costs incurred by start-ups in locating and striking a deal with interested product market

21
  Recall that we interpret high ratings of the complementary asset variable as an indication that the
manager believes the asset is attainable at a “reasonable” cost.
                                                                                                        30


incumbents. Due to heterogeneity in the information intermediation role among venture

financiers, our measure of search costs is imperfect.

        Finally, in Table 11, we show that not only are our core results robust to the

inclusion of product characteristics, but these same features which are supposed to have

explanatory power in the context of alternative models do not seem to have an effect in

the data. Of course, we do not overemphasize such results as the type of innovation are

self-reported by the organization. That said, our results concerning the principal elements

of our theory (CA LOW, PATENT THRESHOLD, and VC) are indeed robust to the

inclusion of such technology-type indicators.



VI.     Conclusions

        Motivated by the substantial differences observed in start-up commercialization

strategies across different high-technology sectors, this paper developed and tested a

simple economic model identifying conditions under which start-up innovators earn their

returns on innovation through product market cooperation with more established firms as

opposed to competition with incumbents. The innovator’s commercialization strategy

choice weighs the competing benefits and costs of cooperation. While a cooperative

commercialization strategy forestalls the costs of competition in the product market and

avoids duplicative investment in sunk assets, imperfections in the “market for ideas” may

lead innovators to instead pursue a competitive strategy in the product market.

Specifically, if the transaction costs of bargaining with incumbents are high or if the


22
   As well, Appendix B shows that “individual” Likert ratings of the complementary asset regime are not
significant. This result should not be surprising, as the importance of particular complementary assets for
commercialization success vary (at least) across industries.
                                                                                          31


innovator faces expropriation in the context of bargaining, then product market

competition is more likely.

       We tested these hypotheses using a novel sample of the                        start-up

commercialization strategies of 118 companies. Overall, our empirical results provide

evidence for the three main hypotheses associated with our theory.             Perhaps most

strikingly, firms who control intellectual property or are associated with venture capital

financing are more likely to pursue a cooperative strategy. These results suggest that the

role of intellectual property or venture capital on the competitiveness of product markets

is somewhat more nuanced than assumed in many theoretical treatments. For example,

while most prior work has emphasized the fact that strong intellectual property position

increases the absolute returns to innovation, our evidence is consistent with a slightly

more refined position – increases in the strength of intellectual property increase the

relative returns to cooperation by facilitating the market for ideas.

       Similarly, while most analyses simply assume that technology-oriented venture

financing systematically spurs the “gale of creative destruction,” our results are consistent

with an alternative perspective.      Specifically, while venture financing is certainly

associated with certain “instances” of creative destruction, the focus by venture capitalists

on profit maximization and their ability to reduce the costs of identifying potential

partners increases the relative attractiveness of cooperation with more established firms

on average. More generally, our results suggest that the pro-competitive benefits from

start-up innovation reflect an earlier market failure – in the market for ideas.

       Our findings suggest several directions for future research on how the strategic

interaction between entrants and incumbents is mediated by the viability of the ideas
                                                                                                           32


market. First, we plan to deepen our understanding of the incentives associated with

alternative commercialization strategies by both entrants and incumbents in “mixed”

economic environments. For example, in environments where intellectual property is

weak and a dominant incumbent would prefer to take advantage of the R&D productivity

of smaller firms, it is possible that there exists a motive to develop a reputation for “non-

expropriation” in order to provide incentives for innovation and cooperation with more

established firms.23

           Second, we would like to evaluate the purely informational role played by venture

capitalists. Specifically, after controlling for the ability of venture capitalists to simply

identify “high-quality” projects, does association with a venture capitalist with greater

access to potential partners (e.g., through participation on boards of directors) increase

the performance and affect the commercialization strategy of start-up innovators?

           Finally, it is important to recall that our data is composed of a sample of

technologically successful start-up firms who made their initial investments during the

first half of the 1990s. In some sense, then, these firms are representative of a wave of

start-up investment that began during that time and has continued for at least a decade.

As well, these firms chose their commercialization strategy in response to a changing

environment that has tended to reinforce the strength of intellectual property and apply

intellectual property protection in areas that once were poorly served. While earlier

research has focused on the possibility that these two trends (venture financing and

increases in the strength of intellectual property) may be associated with an increase in

the economy wide rate of innovation or R&D productivity (Kortum and Lerner, 1999),

our results suggest that these institutional and environmental changes may also be

23
     Indeed, there is some evidence for such behavior by Intel in the microprocessor industry (Gawer, 2000).
                                                                                       33


associated with a shift in the nature of strategic interaction between start-up innovators

and established firms – from innovation competition to cooperation in the market for

ideas.
                                                                                     34




                                      References

Acs, Z.J. and D.B. Audretsch (1988), “Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An
      Empirical Analysis,” American Economic Review, Vol. 78, pp.678-690.

Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1994), “The Management of Innovation,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, Vol. 109, pp.1185-1210.

Anton, J.J. and D. Yao (1994), “Expropriation and Inventions: Appropriable Rents in the
       Absence of Property Rights,” American Economic Review, Vol. 84, pp.190-209.

Anton, J.J. and D. Yao (1995), “Start-ups, Spin-offs, and Internal Projects,” Journal of
       Law Economics & Organization, Vol. 11, pp.362-378.

Arora, A. (1995), “Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights and the
       Market for Know-How,” Economics of Innovation & New Technology, Vol. 4,
       pp.41-59.

Arrow, K.J. (1962), “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inventions,”
       in R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and
       Social Factors, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

BioWorld Publishing (1988), Biotechnology State of the Industry Report 1998, Atlanta,
     GA: BioWorld Publishing.

Bresnahan, T., Stern, S., and M. Trajtenberg (1997), Market Segmentation and the
      Sources of Rents from Innovation: Personal Computers in the late 1980s,” RAND
      Journal of Economics, Vol. 0, Special Issue, pp.17-44.

Burt, R. (2000), “The Network Structure of Social Capital,” forthcoming in R.I. Sutton
       and B.M. Staw (eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, Greenwich, CT: JAI
       Press.

Bygrave, W. and J. Timmons (1992), Venture Capital at the Crossroads, Boston, MA:
      Harvard Business School Press.

Caves, R., Crookell, H. and J.P. Killing (1983), “The Imperfect Market for Technology
       Licenses.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 45, pp.249-67.

Chesbrough, H. and D. Teece (1996), “When Is Virtual Virtuous: Organizing for
      Innovation,” Harvard Business Review, Vol. 74, pp.65-74.

Christensen, C.M. (1997), The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause
       Great Firms to Fail, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
                                                                                     35




Cockburn, I. and R. Henderson (1994), “Racing to Invest? The Dynamics of
      Competition in Ethical Drug Discovery.” Journal of Economics and Management
      Strategy, Vol. 3, pp.481-519.

Cohen, W. and R. Levin (1989), “Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market Structure,”
       in R. Schmalensee and R. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization,
       Vol. 2, Amsterdam: North Holland, pp.1059-1107.

Corporate Technology Information Services, Inc. (1998), Corptech Directory of
      Technology Companies, 13th Edition, Woburn, MA: Corporate Technology
      Information Services, Inc..

Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. (1998), Industry Reference Handbook: Pharmaceuticals, Detroit,
      MI: Gale Press.

Foster, R.N. (1986), Innovation: The Attacker’s Advantage, New York, NY: Summit
        Books.

Fosfuri, A., Arora, A., and A. Gambardella (1999), “Markets for Technology (Why do
       we see them, why don't we see more of them, and why should we care),”
       Universidad Carlos III, Working Paper No. 99-17(4).

Gallini, N. and R.A. Winter (1985), “Licensing in the Theory of Innovation,” RAND
        Journal of Economics, Vol. 16, pp.237-52.

Gans, J.S. and S. Stern (2000a), “Incumbency and R&D Incentives: Licensing the Gale of
       Creative Destruction,” forthcoming in the Journal of Economics and Management
       Strategy.

Gans, J.S. and Stern (2000b) “When does Funding Small Firms Bear Fruit? Evidence
       from the SBIR Program,” Working paper, MIT Sloan School of Management.

Gilbert, R. and D. Newbery (1982), “Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence of
        Monopoly,” American Economic Review, Vol. 72, pp.514-526.

Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (1999), The Venture Capital Cycle, Cambridge, MA: MIT
     Press.

Green, J. and S. Scotchmer (1995), “On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation,”
       RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 26, pp.20-33.

Hellman, T. and M. Puri (1998), “The Interaction between Product Market and Financing
      Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital,” Working Paper, Graduate School of
      Business, Stanford University.
                                                                                   36


Henderson, R. and K. Clark (1990), “Architectural Innovation: The Reconfiguration of
      Existing Product Technologies and the Failure of Established Firms,”
      Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 35, pp.9-30.

Henderson, R. (1993), “Underinvestment and Incompetence as Responses to Radical
      Innovation: Evidence from the Photolithographic Alignment Equipment
      Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 24, pp.248-270.

Hobijn, B. and B. Jovanovic (1999), “The Information Technology Revolution and the
       Stock Market: Preliminary Evidence,” Mimeo., New York University.

Jaffe, A. (1986), “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R & D: Evidence from
        Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, Vol. 76,
        pp.984-1001.

James, B. (1977), The Future of the Multinational Pharmaceutical Industry to 1990, New
       York, NY: John Wiley.

Kamien, M. and N. Schwartz (1982), Market Structure and Innovation, Cambridge, UK:
      Cambridge University Press.

Katz, M.L. and c. ShapirO (1987), “R&D Rivalry with Licensing or Imitation,” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 77, pp.402-420.

Kortum, S. and J. Lerner (1998), “Does Venture Capital Spur Innovation?” National
      Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 6846.

Lerner, J. (1997), “An Empirical Analysis of a Technology Race,” RAND Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 28, pp.228-247.

Lerner, J. and R. Merges (1998), “The Control of Strategic Alliances: An Empirical
       Analysis of the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol.
       46, pp.125-56.

Lerner, J. (1999), “The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Impact of the
       SBIR Program,” Journal of Business, Vol. 72, pp. 85-318.

Levin, R., Klevorick, A., Nelson, R. and S. Winter (1987), “Appropriating the Returns
       from Industrial R&D,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Merges, R. (1992), “Uncertainty and the Standard of Patentability.” High Technology
      Law Journal, Vol. 7, pp.1-70.

Merges, R. and R. Nelson (1990), “On the Complex Economics of Patent Scope.”
      Columbia Law Review, Vol. 90, pp.839-916.
                                                                                    37


Orsenegio, L. (1989), The Emergence of Biotechnology: Institutions and Markets in
      Industrial Innovation, New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.

Pisano, G.P. (1990), “The R&D Boundaries of the Firm: An Empirical Analysis,”
       Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 35, pp.153-176.

Pisano, G.P. (1991), “The Governance of Innovation: Vertical Integration and
       Collaborative Arrangements in the Biotechnology Industry,” Research Policy,
       Vol. 20, pp.237-249.

Rausch, L. (1998), “Venture Capital Investment Trends in the United States and Europe,”
      Issues Brief 99-303, Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.

Reinganum, J.F. (1983), “Uncertain Innovation and the Persistence of Monopoly,”
      American Economic Review, Vol. 73, pp.741-748.

Reinganum, J.F. (1989), “On the Timing of Innovation,” in R. Schmalansee and R.D.
      Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 1, Amsterdam: North
      Holland, pp.849-908.

Roberts, E. (1991), Entrepreneurs in High Technology: Lessons from MIT and Beyond,
       Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Salant, S. (1984), “Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence of Monopoly: Comment,”
        American Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp.247-250.

Scherer, F.M. (1965), “Firm Size, Market Structure, Opportunity, and the Output of
       Patented Inventions,” American Economic Review, Vol. 55, pp.1097-1125.

Scherer, F.M. (1992), “Schumpeter and Plausible Capitalism,” Journal of Economic
       Literature, Vol. 30, pp.1416-1433.

Schumpeter, J. (1943), Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York, NY: Harper &
     Row.

Scotchmer, S. (1991), “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and
      the Patent Law,” Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol.5, pp.29-41.

Shan, W. (1990), “An Empirical Analysis of Organizational Strategies Used by
      Entrepreneurial High Technology Firms,” Strategic Management Journal, Vol.
      11, pp.129-139.

Strasser, F.(1999), “The New Entrepreneurs,” Business Week, December 6.
                                                                                      38


Stuart, T., Hong, H. and R. Hybels (1999), “Interorganizational Endorsements and the
        Performance of Entrepreneurial Ventures,” Administrative Science Quarterly,
        Vol. 44, pp.315-349.

Teece, D. (1986), “Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for Integration,
       Collaboration, Licensing and Public Policy,” Research Policy, Vol. 15, pp.285-
       305.

U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (USOTA) (1984), Commercial
      Biotechnology: An International Analysis, Washington, D.C.: Government
      Printing Office.

U.S. Government Accounting Office (USGAO) (1995), Federal Research: Interim
      Report on the Small Business Innovation Research Program, Washington, D.C.:
      USGAO.

U.S. Department of Justice (USDOJ) (1995), Licensing Guidelines, Washington, D.C.:
      USDOJ.

VentureOne, Inc. (2000), Venture Edge. San Francisco, CA, VentureOne Press.

Wallsten, S. (1998), “Rethinking the Small Business Innovation Research Program,” in
       L. Branscomb and J. Keller (eds.), Investing in Innovation: Creating a Research
       and Innovation Program That Works, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                                                  39


                            TABLE 1
             PHARMACEUTICAL FIRM MARKET LEADERSHIP

   Sales Rank,           Company           Date Established         Sales Rank,
      1997                                                             1973
        1            Merck                   17th century                2
        2            Bristol-Myers           1887, 1856                  9
                     Squibb
        3            American Home               1926                   6
                     Products
        4            Pfizer                      1848                    7
        5            Abbott Labs                 1900                   21
        6            Eli Lilly                   1876                   11
        7            Warner Lambert              1852                    3
        8            Baxter                      1931                   79
        9            Schering-Plough             1851                   15
        10           SmithKline                  1830                   31
                     Beecham

Sources: Various corporate web sites; BioWorld 1998; Adams, 1977.
                                                                                                    40


                                   TABLE 2
                              INDUSTRY PAYOFFS


                                  Cooperate                               Compete
    Entry Credible
                                    π m (1)                         π Ec (a ) + π Ic (a) − K
     ( π Ec (a) ≥ K )
  Entry Not Credible
                                    π m (1)                                 π m (0)
     ( π Ec (a) < K )



                           TABLE 3
            COMMERCIALIZATION STRATEGY EQUILIBRIUM


    Credibility of Entry                                  Cooperate if
                                                    θγ (π m (1) − π m (0) ) ≥ c
 Ex Ante Entry Not Credible
           ( π Ec (0) < K )
Ex Ante Entry Credible But Ex                 θγ (π m (1) − π Ic (0) )
      Post not Credible
    ( π Ec (0) ≥ K > π Ec (1) )                ≥ c + (1 − θ (1 − γ ) ) (π Ec (0) − K )

    Ex Post Entry Credible        γ (π m (1) − θπ Ic (0) − (1 − θ )π Ic (1) )
        ( π Ec (1) ≥ K )          ≥ c + (1 − (1 − γ )θ )π Ec (0) − (1 − γ )(1 − θ )π Ec (1) − γ K
                                                                                  41


                                TABLE 4
                         VARIABLES & DEFINITIONS

     VARIABLE                   DEFINITION                        SOURCE
DEPENDENT VARIABLE: PROB. OF COOPERATION
COOPERATE      Dummy = 1 if project revenues include          MIT Survey
               licensing revenues, intellectual property
               sales, or merger and acquisition
APPROPRIABILITY MECHANISM VARIABLES
PATENTS        Number of project patents awarded since        MIT Survey,
               SBIR grant                                     USPTO
PATENT         Dummy = 1 if the project has been awarded      MIT Survey,
THRESHOLD      at least one patent                            USPTO
PATENT LIKERT  5-Point Likert scale rating of importance of   MIT Survey
               patents for appropriating returns
IP LIKERT MAX  Maximum over the set of 5-point Likert         MIT Survey
               measures for the importance of
               appropriability mechanisms in earning
               returns from this project.
COMPLEMENTARY ASSET VARIABLES
CA LIKERT      Maximum over the set of 5-point Likert         MIT Survey
MAX            measures for the importance of
               complementary assets in earning returns
               from this project.
CA LOW         Dummy = 1 if CA LIKERT MAX is less             MIT Survey
               than the maximum possible value of 5
FIRM-LEVEL VARIABLES
VC             Dummy = 1 if the project is funded primarily   MIT Survey,
               by venture capitalists                         Venture Economics
BASELINE       Number of employees at the start of the        MIT Survey
EMPLOYEES      project
CEO FOUNDER    Dummy = 1 if the current CEO is a founder      MIT Survey
               of the firm
PRODUCT-LEVEL VARIABLES
PRODUCT        Dummy = 1 if the project is rated by           MIT Survey
INNOVATION     respondent as a product innovation
PROCESS        Dummy = 1 if the project is rated by           MIT Survey
INNOVATION     respondent as a process innovation
STANDARD       Dummy = 1 if the project is rated by           MIT Survey
SYSTEM         respondent as innovation of novel
INNOVATION     components within a relatively standard
               system
NOVEL SYSTEM   Dummy = 1 if the project is rated by           MIT Survey
INNOVATION     respondent as innovation of a novel overall
               system
                                                           42


                          TABLE 5
                MEANS & STANDARD DEVIATIONS
                           (N = 118)

VARIABLE                              MEAN    STD. DEVIATION

DEPENDENT VARIABLE: PROB. OF COOPERATION
COOPERATE                             0.339        0.475
APPROPRIABILITY MECHANISM VARIABLES
PATENTS                               6.678       14.189
PATENT THRESHOLD                      0.653        0.478
PATENT LIKERT                         3.475        1.478
IP LIKERT MAX                         3.534        1.460
COMPLEMENTARY ASSET VARIABLES
CA LIKERT MAX                         4.627        0.596
CA LOW                                0.322        0.469
FIRM-LEVEL VARIABLES
VC                                    0.466        0.501
BASELINE EMPLOYEES                   25.481       43.662
CEO FOUNDER                           0.598        0.492
PRODUCT-LEVEL VARIABLES
PRODUCT INNOVATION                    0.678        0.469
PROCESS INNOVATION                    0.331        0.472
STANDARD SYSTEM                       0.263        0.442
INNOVATION
NOVEL SYSTEM                          0.373        0.486
INNOVATION
                                                                                  43




                              TABLE 6
                        PAIRWISE COOPERATION
                            CORRELATIONS

                  (Numbers in Cells Represent Probabilities)




              PATENT                    CA LOW                        VC
           THRESHOLD
           =0        =1              =0           =1           =0          =1

COOP = 1   0.21        0.38         0.27         0.47          0.25        0.44
                                                                                                                           44


                                                                                TABLE 7
                                                                   COOPERATION CONTINGENCY TABLE


                                                              Entrant’s Cost of Acquiring Necessary Complementary Assets
                                                                                       (CA LOW)

                                                                       Relatively Low                Relatively High
Number of Patents Associated with the
 Project (PATENT THRESHOLD)
                                        No patents




                                                                    Pr (Cooperate) = 0.143        Pr (Cooperate) = 0.308

                                                                          (N = 28)                      (N = 13)
                                        At least one patent




                                                                    Pr (Cooperate) = 0.346        Pr (Cooperate) = 0.560

                                                                          (N = 52)                      (N = 25)
                                                                                  45


                                     TABLE 8
                              BASELINE COOPERATION
                               PROBIT REGRESSIONS

                                   Dependent Variable = COOPERATE
                                         N = 118 Observations

                     (8-1)           (8-2)         (8-3)       (8-4)      (8-5)    (8-6)
                 Controlling for Controlling for Controlling   (7-1)      (7-2)    Base
                 CA LOW only PATENT               for VC     combined combined regression
                                 THRESHOLD         only      with (7-2) with (7-3) model
                                      only

CA LOW               0.532                                  0.552                 0.497
                    (0.253)                                (0.258)               (0.262)
PATENT                             0.646                    0.665      0.672      0.684
THRESHOLD                         (0.267)                  (0.271)    (0.270)    (0.273)
VC                                              0.502                  0.533      0.481
                                               (0.241)                (0.246)    (0.250)
CONSTANT            -0.598        -0.859       -0.662      -1.063     -1.136     -1.288
                    (0.150)       (0.224)      (0.171)     (0.250)    (0.263)    (0.280)

Log Likelihood     -73.340       -72.506      -73.376     -70.198    -70.138     -68.338
                                                                         46


                           TABLE 9
                    EXPLORING ROBUSTNESS
                   OF COOPERATION PROBITS

                              Dependent Variable = COOPERATE
                                     N = 118 observations

                              (9-1)         (9-2)             (9-3)
                               Base        (8-1) with    (8-1) with sector
                           regression control for CEO level controls
                         controlling for founder effects
                         initial number
                          of employees


CA LOW                        0.618         0.573             0.559
                             (0.273)       (0.277)           (0.282)
PATENT THRESHOLD              0.638         0.648             0.631
                             (0.278)       (0.290)           (0.282)
VC                            0.385         0.350             0.415
                             (0.257)       (0.259)           (0.263)
BASELINE EMPLOYEES            0.004         0.004             0.004
                             (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.003)
CEO FOUNDER                                -0.172
                                           (0.267)
BIOTECH                                                       0.658
                                                             (0.376)
ELECTRONICS                                                  -0.058
                                                             (0.306)
CONSTANT                     -2.154        -2.038            -2.068
                             (0.652)       (0.676)           (0.673)
Log Likelihood              -66.137       -64.985           -64.316
                                                                                          47


                                       TABLE 10
                           EXPLORING ALTERNATIVE MEASURES
                             OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY &
                               COMPLEMENTARY ASSETS

                                        Dependent Variable = COOPERATE
                                               N = 118 observations

                         (10-1)          (10-2)         (10-3)          (10-4)           (10-5)
                      Patent counts Likert rating of Exploring         Exploring       (9-4) with
                     as measure of       patent      maximum over maximum over        sector level
                     appropriability importance as likert ratings likert ratings of     controls
                         regime        measure of          of        complementary
                                     appropriability appropriability    assets
                                        regime


CA LOW                    0.532           1.452          1.441
                         (0.261)         (0.785)        (0.831)
CA LIKERT MAX                                                           -0.462           -0.430
                                                                        (0.220)          (0.229)
PATENTS                   0.018
                         (0.010)
PATENT                                                                   0.598            0.593
THRESHOLD                                                               (0.277)          (0.281)
PATENT LIKERT                             0.208
                                         (0.103)
IP LIKERT MAX                                            0.227
                                                        (0.107)
CA LOW *                                 -0.275
PATENT LIKERT                            (0.199)
CA LOW * IP LIKERT                                      -0.270
MAX                                                     (0.206)
VC                        0.385           0.487          0.490           0.391            0.422
                         (0.249)         (0.249)        (0.249)         (0.257)          (0.262)
BASELINE                                                                 0.004            0.004
EMPLOYEES                                                               (0.003)          (0.003)
BIOTECH                                                                                   0.667
                                                                                         (0.376)
ELECTRONICS                                                                              -0.089
                                                                                         (0.311)
CONSTANT                 -0.904          -1.537         -1.613           0.141            0.088
                         (0.198)         (0.420)        (0.437)         (1.059)          (1.158)
Log Likelihood          -69.785         -69.429        -69.208         -66.475          -64.519
                                                                          48


                             TABLE 11
                     EXPLORING TECHNOLOGICAL
                        INNOVATION EFFECTS


                                  Dependent Variable = COOPERATE
                                         N = 118 observations

                         (11-1)          (11-2)         (11-3)           (11-4)
                       Exploring       Exploring       Exploring       Exploring
                     importance of   importance of   importance of   importance of
                        product         process       component          radical
                      innovation      innovation      innovation       innovation


CA LOW                   0.492           0.501           0.481           0.491
                        (0.263)         (0.265)         (0.270)         (0.263)
PATENT THRESHOLD         0.683           0.684           0.669           0.693
                        (0.273)         (0.273)         (0.278)         (0.274)
VC                       0.480           0.477           0.482           0.476
                        (0.250)         (0.253)         (0.250)         (0.250)
PRODUCT INNOVATION      -0.052
                        (0.267)
PROCESS INNOVATION                      -0.023
                                        (0.274)
STANDARD SYSTEM                                          0.076
INNOVATION                                              (0.293)

NOVEL SYSTEM                                                            -0.089
INNOVATION                                                              (0.259)
CONSTANT                -1.250          -1.280          -1.293          -1.256
                        (0.340)         (0.295)         (0.280)         (0.294)
Log Likelihood         -68.319         -68.334         -68.305         -68.279
                                                                      49




Figure A. Leadership of Entrant Firms in the Hard Disk Drive Sector




      Source: Christensen (1997), p. 23.
                                                                                                                               50




                                                   Figure B: Probability of Cooperation by Industrial Segment



                             0.6




                             0.5




                             0.4
Probability of Cooperation




                             0.3




                             0.2




                             0.1




                              0
                                   Biotechnology      Industrial Equipment       Electronics        Instruments   Computer Software
                                                                             Industrial Segment
                                       
                                    
                                     
        
                                                             
                                                                  !"
                                                         
                                                                  ! 
                                                                
                                                                  !"
        #$
                                                        
                                                                  
                                                          
                                                                   
        !                                                
                                                                  
        !                           "     "         $
        #"                                                    
        #%&
                                                             ' 
                                                                  ('(
             %                                         $&
                                                                  &$
        ##&
                                                    
                                                                 & 
                                                       
                                                                 &
                                                 
                                                                  &&
                                                          &
                                                          &&
        &$%%#)
                                                         &$
                                                                 
                                                      '
                                                                  &
        ###$#)
                                                   
                                                                 '
          #                                            &
                                                                 &
        %$&
                                                     $
                                                                  $&
        $                                            
                                                                  $
        ($                                              &
                                                                  $ 
                                                            *!
                                                                 !
        )*+,-.+/))0                                          $ 

                                                                               53


                               APPENDIX B
                        INDIVIDUAL MEASURES OF
                        COMPLEMENTARY ASSETS

                                 Dependent Variable = COOPERATE
                                        N = 118 observations

                    (B-1)          (B-2)       (B-3)         (B-4)           (B-5)
                  Maximum Importance of Importance of Importance of Importance of
                  over CA      control over control over control over    control over
                 variables as manufacturing distribution  branding in      servicing
                  regressor     in earning  channels in earning returns resources in
                                  returns     earning                   earning returns
                                              returns

CA LIKERT MAX       -0.328
                    (0.202)
CA LIKERT                        -0.053
MANUFACTURING                    (0.092)
CA LIKERT                                       -0.071
DISTRIBUTION                                    (0.094)
CA LIKERT                                                      0.078
BRAND                                                         (0.093)
CA LIKERT                                                                    0.070
SERVICE                                                                     (0.100)
PATENT               0.651        0.679          0.676         0.656         0.695
THRESHOLD           (0.272)      (0.270)        (0.269)       (0.271)       (0.273)

VC                   0.497        0.518          0.506         0.516         0.524
                    (0.249)      (0.248)        (0.249)       (0.248)       (0.247)
CONSTANT             0.409       -0.930         -0.891        -1.371        -1.396
                    (0.982)      (0.440)        (0.412)       (0.399)       (0.458)
Log Likelihood     -68.824      -69.971        -69.851       -69.133       -69.889
                                                                                                    54




                        APPENDIX C: MIT SLOAN SCHOOL
                     COMMERCIALIZATION STRATEGIES SURVEY

            Principal Investigator: Professor Scott Stern, MIT Sloan School & NBER
               Researcher: David Hsu, MIT; Joshua Gans, University of Melbourne

The goal of this project is to evaluate how companies commercialize innovative new
technologies. We are exploring different commercialization strategies and how success at a
technical level affects firm strategy.

Enclosed is a survey, which asks you to describe the circumstances surrounding a specific
innovative project or initiative. We would like to focus on your firm’s involvement in its main
business area. Within that frame, please choose a research and/or development project which is
internally perceived as an important source of value for your firm. We would like you to choose
a project which provided direct financial returns for the firm, through direct sales, licensing
agreements, or in strengthening the bargaining position of the firm.

Once the project is chosen, the survey is divided into two parts:

        •       General background of your company
        •       Commercialization history of the innovation

Participation in this study is entirely voluntary, and you can decline to answer any questions or
decline further participation at any time. The survey should take no more than 25 minutes to
complete. Responses will be kept both confidential and anonymous. Please return this survey
and direct inquiries to:

Professor Scott Stern
MIT Sloan School
E52-554
Cambridge, MA 02142
TEL: 617-253-5219
FAX: 617-253-2660
e-mail: sstern@mit.edu

Thank you for your participation!
                                                                                               55


                                    MIT SLOAN SCHOOL
                            COMMERCIALIZATION STRATEGIES SURVEY

Name of Firm: __________________________________________________________________

Year Founded: 19____

Part I: Background Information

A. Employee Information

# of Employees:                         At the start of chosen project   ______________
                                        Currently                        ______________


What share of employees hold as their highest degree:    BA/BS           Master’s     Ph.D.
                                                         _____%                 _____%              _____%

What share of employees have backgrounds in:                             Engineering      Science
                                                                         _____%                     _____%

Is there a management track for technically trained employees?                    Yes               No
Are senior managers promoted from within the firm?                                Yes               No

Please rank the relative importance of the following factors in determining the promotion of scientists &
engineers (with 1 = most important – 4 = least important):
                                                                          Rank           Example
 External research reputation                                             _____          __2__
 Demonstrated contribution to R&D teams                                   _____          __3__
 Demonstrated contribution to cross-functional teams                      _____          __1__
 Management ability                                                       _____          __4__

B. Financial Information

What is the percentage of corporate ownership held by the following groups:

Public     Top Mgt.        Employees    Venture          “Angel”                 Other: ___________
                                        Capitalists      Investors
_____% _____%                _____%     _____%           _____%                           _____%

What mechanisms are used to fund new technology development or R&D projects (check all that apply):
 Internal Cash                Loans                         Contract Research               Equity
 Partnering w/ Suppliers      Partnering w/ Customers       Other: _____________________

What is the percentage of gross revenues devoted towards:

R&D                              New Product                             Marketing
                                 Development
_____%                             _____%                                _____%
                                                                                                    56


Total sales for your company:              When the project was initiated            $____________
                                           In 1998                                   $____________


C. Organizational Governance & Structure

# of Directors:                                                         ______________

What share of directors are:               Internal         External         Venture Capital Appointed
                                           _____%           _____%                  _____%

Which characteristics in the first column apply to the following executives?
                                                                                   R&D or Technology
                                           CEO              President                  Director
           Firm founder
           Promoted from within
           Hired externally
           Has run other companies

How many distinct products does your firm develop? _________

How many alliances has your company entered into with another firm?          _________

What were the nature of these alliances?           Research & Development            Product Development
           Manufacturing                           Sales/Marketing                   Distribution

Has your firm entered into any licensing deals?       Yes: licensed-out       Yes: licensed-in       No

If your firm has licensed-out, what were the total licensing revenues? 1998 $_______ Total $_______

           What were the terms?            Exclusive                 Non-Exclusive

           Who were the licensees? (mark all that apply)
                      Product Market Incumbents                      Product Market Entrants
                      Government Agencies                            Non-market agents (e.g., universities)


Part II: Commercialization History of Chosen Project

Name of technology/product:________________________________________________________________.
Brief description of the technology: ___________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________.

Was this technology originated from research and development performed at your firm?                 Yes      No

If the technology did not originate from your firm, where did it come from?          Licensed from parent firm
   Licensed from university         Licensed from corporate lab                      Other: _______________
                                                                                                    57


Number of patents issued directly related to this technology:          ______

Number of patents issued to your organization since founding:          ______

Please check the terms which best describe this technology:
                        Assembled                Non-Assembled

Please check the terms which best describe the innovation (check all that apply):
           Product Innovation
           Process Innovation
           Novel components within a relatively standard system
           Novel overall system

What year was the product’s first commercial introduction?             19______

Time from conception of technology to first prototype:                 _______ months

Time from prototype to first sale:                                     _______ months

Financing history of this project:

           Year                   Source                                                        Amount




For this project, what activities did the following actors facilitate?

                                           venture          angel                 other               legal
                                           capitalist       investor            board members        counsel
Locating key personnel such as
 managers and technologists
Locating sources of additional capital
Gaining access to critical technologies
Increasing the firm’s focus on a small
 number of projects, technologies,
 or markets
Locating and arranging introductions
 with potential alliance partners
Participating in discussions over licen-
  sing and commericalization strategies
Other (specify)
                                                                                                       58


What are the sources of revenue (on a percentage basis) associated with this technology?

                                                                             Intellectual Property
        Sales                    Licensing Revenue                                 Asset Sale
        _____%                   _____%                                               _____%

Share of revenues of this project from government contracts:                             _____%

What is the number of distinct customers for this project?:
           < 10              10 - 100              101 – 500                 > 500

Form of sales (check all that apply):
           made to order                  mass produced                      mass customized

Total sales of the product
        Sales attributable to this product in 1998?                                      $__________
        Sales attributable to this product since the inception of this project?          $__________

Has your firm been acquired since the development of this technology?                    Yes   No

        If so, by whom? _______________________________________________________

          Does the new firm (after the merger) have more than 500 employees?             Yes      No

          Why did your company decide to undergo an acquisition? _______________________

Has the product been substantially modified/upgraded since development of the first working
prototype?

  No     Yes; If yes, please describe the modifications: ________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________.

If this technology resulted in licensing revenues,
          What was the first year in which the technology was licensed?            19____
          What was the licensing revenue? 1998 $__________                   Total   $__________
          What were the terms?                      Exclusive                   Non-Exclusive
Were other technologies bundled in the license? Yes                             No

Who were the licensees? (mark all that apply)
               Product Market Incumbents                   Product Market Entrants
               Government Agencies                         Non-market agents (e.g., universities)

Why did your company decide to license-out this technology?____________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________.

Please rate the importance of the strategic goals this technology enabled for your company:

                                                                    LOW                    HIGH
Attraction of venture capital or outside funding                     N/A      1      2      3  4       5
                                                                                                 59


Attraction of scientists or other employees                        N/A     1    2       3   4    5
Enable further government grants                                   N/A     1    2       3   4    5
Provided visibility of the company to customers or suppliers       N/A     1    2       3   4    5
Was an important factor for the firm getting acquired              N/A     1    2       3   4    5

Who were the key personnel involved in formulating the commercialization strategy for this
product?
          CEO         Technology/R&D Manager                 Marketing and sales manager

 You mentioned before that the project’s first prototype was developed around 19__. From that
time onwards, your success with this technology likely depended, at least in part, on your control
of resources which were not directly linked to the technology itself and on your ability to protect
the innovation from imitation by others through intellectual property protection. Let’s first
consider how important your firm’s control over resources has been in earning profits from this
innovation. For each factor below, rate the importance over access and control of this resource on
a scale from 1 to 5. A rating of “5” would mean that control over this resource was critical for
earning profits from this innovation while a “1” would imply that control over this resource was
not important at all.

                                                          LOW                               HIGH
The capability to manufacture the product                 1   2           3         4       5
The principal distribution channels for the technology    1   2           3         4       5
The association of the technology with a well-known       1   2           3         4       5
 brand name or the development of a brand name
 for the product through marketing or advertising
Control over the sales force and servicing resources      1       2       3         4       5
 for this product or technology

Now, let’s turn to your ability to protect the innovation from imitation by others through
intellectual property protection. For each factor below, rate the effectiveness of each factor in
deterring imitation of the technology on a scale from 1 to 5. A rating of “5” would mean that this
factor was very effective in deterring imitation of the technology while a rating of “1” implies
that this factor had no impact on your ability to deter imitation.

                                                          LOW                               HIGH
Trade secrecy                                             1   2           3         4       5
Patents & copyright protection                            1   2           3         4       5
Active patent or copyright litigation                     1   2           3         4       5

What activities were involved in the process of commercializing this technology and deciding
how to earn returns from the innovation?
        Took an outside offer for purchasing the rights to the technology
        Shopped the technology around but was unable to sell a license to the technology
        Shopped the technology around and sold a license to the technology
        Did not shop the technology: Always had the intention of competing with the technology
        Other: __________________________________________
