                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              GOLD INTO BASE METALS:
                       PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH IN THE PEOPLE'S
                    REPUBLIC OF CHINA DURING THE REFORM PERIOD


                                             Aiwyn Young


                                         Working Paper 7856
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7856



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2000




I am grateful of Robert McCulloch for many useful conversations and to my colleagues at the CIAR for
helpful feedback. This research was supported by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

   2000 by Alwyn Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
Gold into Base Metals: Productivity Growth in the People's Republic of
China during the Reform Period
Alwyn Young
NBER Working Paper No. 7856
August 2000
JEL No. 04, P2

                                            ABSTRACT

        With minimal sleight of hand, it is possible to transform the recent growth experience of the
People's Republic of China from the extraordinary into the mundane. Systematic understatement of
inflation by enterprises accounts for 2.5% growth per annum in the non-agricultural economy during the

reform period (1978-1998). The usual suspects, i.e. rising participation rates, improvements in
educational attainment, and the transfer of labour out of agriculture, account for most of the remainder.

The productivity performance of the non-agricultural economy during the reform period is respectable,
but not outstanding. To the degree that the reforms have improved efficiency, these gains may lie
principally in agriculture.


Alwyn Young
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
a-young2@uchicago.edu
I Introduction
      Between 1978 and 1998 GDP per capita in the People's Republic of China, as reported in
official statistics, grew 8.0% per annum, a performance which makes China the most rapidly
growing economy in the world during this period, as well as all of recorded human history.'
While the unprecedented growth of the Chinese economy can be taken as evidence of the success
of its economic reforms, its breathtaking magnitude and inordinate endurance has led others to
seek less favourable, statistical, explanations. Thus, Summers and Heston, in version 5.6 of their
popular international data set, cite the fact that "it is widely felt that [China's] growth rates are

too high" and, accordingly, arbitrarily lower the reported growth of consumption and investment
during the 1980-1993 period by 30 percent and 40 percent, respectively [Summers and Heston
1994]. In this paper I take a slightly different approach. Rather than discount the Chinese statis-
tical record, I embrace it. Accepting all the numbers the statisticians of the People's Republic
produce, but making systematic adjustments using their own data, I show that one can (a) reduce

the growth rate during the reform period to levels previously experienced by other rapidly grow-
ing economies, so that (b) once one takes into account rising labour force participation, the trans-
fer of labour out of agriculture and improvements in educationai attainment, labour and total
factor productivity growth in the non-agricultural economy are found to be 2.6 and 1.4 percent

per annum, respectively; a respectable performance, but by no means extraordinary.
      This paper proceeds as follows: In Sections TI-VT I explain, step by step, how I derive esti-
mates of output, labour input, human capital, physical capital, and factor income shares. In these
sections I discuss problems with Chinese statistics and the basis on which I have chosen among
alternative series. While the estimated growth of productivity is lowered by some choices (e.g.
when I substitute alternative price indices, showing higher rates of inflation, for the national
accounts deflators), it is raised by others (e.g. when I substitute a slower growing labour series



       All growth rates cited in this paper are In growth rates, while all data, unless otherwise
       1



noted, come from the annual issues of the China Statistical Yearbook (hereafter, CSY).


                                                   1
for the official data). In each case, however, I follow the precept of accepting the Chinese statis-

tical record, making adjustments only when other official series are available, and then only in
cases where the deficiencies of the commonly emphasized measures are well known or easily

recognized. Section VII brings the different components together, estimating total factor produc-
tivity growth in the non-agricultural economy, while Section VIII concludes the paper.
      The data of most economies are filled with apparently inconsistent series. By choosing

amongst these, one can produce almost any estimate of productivity growth imaginable. Conse-
quently, the only value added in a paper of this sort lies in its treatment and exposition of data,
following which the actual total factor productivity results are a mere afterthought. In this paper
I depart from standard practice, minimizing the discussion of productivity methodology and
results, and devoting almost the entire paper to a discussion of Chinese data. To keep the task

manageable, I focus on the reform period (1978-98) alone, eschewing any temptation to delve
into the data of the plan period, which involve a variety of additional issues. I explore the con-
struction and biases of each of the alternative data series available for the reform period. In the
process, I show that the measures of outputs and inputs I select, combined with other data on the
Chinese economy, form an internally consistent whole, with, for example, my measures of

labour growth matching demographic and participation trends, as well as output, wage and factor
share data. Readers can, however, see the steps I take to reach this conclusion and decide what
problems exist in my methods and what alternatives they would prefer.
      This paper restricts its analysis of total factor productivity growth to the non-agricultural
sector. Land is of great importance in agriculture, but any measure of this input faces the formi-
dable problem of its proper valuation relative to the other elements of the economy's capital
stock. Land, however, plays less of a role in the non-agricultural segments of the economy.2 In
developing economies much of the investment in agriculture involves livestock and labour inten-



     2For example, Kim and Park [1985, table 5-13] estimate that land input accounts for only 4
percent of Korean nonagricultural nonresidential income during the 1960s and 1970s.


                                                  2
sive land improvement (e.g. irrigation works). These are rarely captured in the national accounts
measures of capital investment in machinery and construction which fuel the capital stock
estimates of most total factor productivity studies. Finally, the annual yield of agriculture is
heavily influenced by the weather, which has to be controlled for in estimating productivity

growth. In sum, the study of agriculture, while of great importance, involves a host of unique
data and estimation problems. I avoid these by concentrating on the non-agricultural economy
alone.




                                                 3
II Output
      China's national income statistics are, in the main, based upon the reports of local officials,
which are passed up through the bureaucracy and aggregated to produce the national figures cir-
culated by the State Statistical Bureau (SSB). Since officials are rewarded for superior perform-

ance and punished for failing to meet targets, it is not surprising that they have a tendency to
modify their statistical reports in accordance with central policy objectives, as has been
documented, repeatedly, by none other than the Chinese themselves.3 Based upon press reports,
official opinion appears to be that local officials overstate the growth of output, while understat-
ing investment and births.4 Absent a history of independent and comprehensive survey data
there is no systematic way to evaluate or correct the bias in local reports. It is possible, however,

to identify and quantify biases introduced by the statistical methods of the SSB I discuss these,
and possible corrections, in this section, examining problems in the measurement of nominal
value added and the techniques used in its deflation.




               fairly frank reporting on the problem of statistical exaggeration, and its foundation
in the incentives and rewards faced by lower level officials, can be found in the following
sources (as reported and translated by the Foreign Broadcasting Information Service): Changsha
Hunan Provincial Service 1100 GMT 1 December 1985; Cheng Ming No. 198, 1 April 1994, p.
1; Guangming Ribao 24 March 1995 p. 1; Hsin Pao 24November93 p. 22; Liaowang 20 Febru-
ary 1995 p. 1; Renmin Ribao 18 March 1985 p. 1, 13 February 1994 p. 2,24 June 1994 p. 5, 17
August 1994 p. 1, and 15 December 1999 p.4; Xinhua Domestic Service 0222 GMT 13 June
1994, 0513 GMT 17 January 1995, and 1013 GMT 2 March 1995; and Zhongguo Tongxun She
1137 GMT 1 January 1995.
       I should note that the rewards for reporting good performance involve, in some cases,
clearly stipulated targets and benefits. Thus, in some localities township officials 'may be pro-
moted to deputy county level positions so long as the output value of the township enterprises
exceeds 100 million yuan" [Zhongguo Tongxun She 1137 GMT 1 Jan. 1995], while a State
Council decree of 1984 established output targets, varying with population size, which would
allow counties to be reclassified as cities, thereby automatically entitling them to a greater share
of enterprise profits and, apparently, higher state subsidies [Chan 1994, pp. 273-2761. On the
flip side, local officials may be punished for failing to meet particular targets, as reported, for
example, in a Xinhua 1516 GMT 5 March 1995 broadcast.

    4See Renmin Ribao 17 August 1994, p. 1 and 22 April 1995, p. 1, as well as Xinhua
Domestic Service 2041 GMT 28 June 1995 broadcast.


                                                 4
a) Nominal Value Added
      With regards to the measurement of nominal quantities, the SSB's reluctance to revise
downwards official figures and the approach it has taken in bringing its statistical system in line

with international precepts have, arguably, imparted an upward bias to the growth of nominal
value added in the industrial and service sectors.

      The SSB appears reluctant to revise national accounts figures substantially downwards

once these have been released. The most compelling example of this problem is given by the
revision of the gross industrial output series which took place in the mid-i 990s. In Table I below

I report the original gross industrial output series, up to 1994. Following a nationwide audit of
statistical reports, the 1994 gross industrial output estimates were revised downwards by about 9
percent, with most of the adjustment falling on township and village enterprises, whose output
was deemed to have been exaggerated by about a third. As shown in the Table, the output series
for earlier years was "smoothed' in accordance with the new, lower, output estimates.5 In the
Table I also report the national accounts industrial value added series prior to and after the revi-
sion of the industrial output series. As the reader can see, national accounts industrial value
added for 1994 was revised upwards, while for earlier years it was kept unchanged. Hsueh and
Li, who in their 1999 publication provide a comprehensive official description of Chinese statis-
tical methods, explain that the SSB estimates industrial value added by taking the gross output
series and applying information on the use of intermediate inputs gleaned from its more detailed




                   the 1995 Industrial Census, a new definition of gross output (excluding value
added taxes and redefining the gross output measure for outsourced production) was introduced
which reduced the gross output estimates further. The revised data for 1990-94, which drew
upon reduced estimates of output, should not be confused with this later revision, based upon
new definitions of output. The CSY 1997 clearly indicates that the revised 1990-1994 figures
(presented above in Table I) are based on the old definitions and, in fact, links the old and new
series by presenting comparable figures for 1995. Zhongguo Xinxi Bao 4 May 1995, p. 1 (as
translated in the FBIS) also reports that the reduced estimates for 1994 and earlier were the result
of the auditing and correction of exaggerated reports.



                                                  5
surveys of "independent accounting" (principally, large and state) enterprises.6 Consequently, a
9 percent downward revision in the gross output series, with no change in the estimates for state
enterprises, should have led to an equivalent downward revision of nominal value added, No
such revision took place. While the Chinese government has conducted laudable campaigns

against statistical misrepresentation, recording no less than 70,000 such cases in 1994 and 60,000
in l997, this information has difficulty in finding its way into revisions of the GDP estimates.
      Regarding the service sector, under the "Material Planning System," i.e. the statistical sys-
tem used under the pian, only the production and distribution, of material goods was considered a
source of output or income. Thus, freight transport, commerce, and even post were considered
as output, but items such as passenger transport, real estate, television and radio broadcasting,

education, research, finance, insurance, and public administration were not. With the exception
of a few limited areas, such as passenger transport, where detailed statistics were kept through
the years, the measurement of most service sectors was neglected. Consequently, when, during
the reform period, the State Statistical Bureau switched to a "System of National Accounts," with
its more standard definition of output and income, it was ill-equipped to provide a proper mea-
sure of the service sector. Acknowledgement of this defect led to the 1991-1992 Census of Ser-
vices, which produced a dramatic revision of the national accounts.
      Table II below reproduces the State Statistical Bureau's estimates of the GDP of the
service (tertiary) sector, as reported in the China Statistical Yearbook. Beginning with the 1995
issue of the publication, the GDP estimates were revised on the basis of the data from the Census
of Services. As the reader can see, the estimated value of service sector output in 1993 was




       6This approach is consistent with that taken, in numerous areas, in other economies (see,
also, Section VI below). Typically, aggregate information is limited to a few crude measures,
such as gross output, which are then transformed into value added estimates using more detailed
surveys of large enterprises.
           Zhongguo Tongxun She 0730 GMT 23 February 1995, Zhongguo Xinxi Bao 4 May
1995 p. 1, and Beijing Xinhua 1014 GMT 25 January 1999.


                                                 6
raised by about a third, while the estimates for 1978 were hardy changed at all. In other words,
when the SSB improved its measure of the service sector, it concluded that virtually all the

newly discovered, and hitherto unrecorded, value added had developed during the reform period.
This assumption is retained, with minor revisions, in the most recent (1999) version of the
national accounts. While the development of non-material sectors was neglected under the plan,
so was their measurement. Consequently, the approach adopted by the SSB seems somewhat
extreme, as it is likely that a fair amount of the newly discovered non-material output was pres-
ent in 1978. As an alternative, one might assume that the ratio of unmeasured to measured activ-
ity found in 1993 existed in 1978 as well. If so, the SSB's adjustments overstate the growth of
service sector nominal output between 1978 and 1993 by 1.6 percent per annum.
      Despite the problems discussed above, in this paper I defer to the SSB estimates of nomi-
nal value added. Any assumption about the quantity of unmeasured service sector output in 1978
is equally arbitrary, while an adjustment of the entire industrial value added series based upon
gross output revisions for the 1990-1994 period would be heroic in the extreme. The growth of
industrial and service nominal value added may be overstated, but it cannot be credibly adjusted.

b) Deflators
      The statisticians of most countries estimate real GDP by deflating nominal GDP using sep-

arate, independently constructed, price indices. This is not the procedure in the People's Repub-
lic. Beginning with the case of secondary industry (mining, manufacturing, utilities and
construction), in China enterprises are called upon to report the value of output in current and
constant (base year) prices. The difference between the two series produces an implicit deflator,
which is then used to deflate nominal value added (also reported by the enterprises). Histori-

cally, this statistical method dovetailed neatly with the reporting requirements of the plan and,
despite a general movement away from socialist statistical methods, remains in use today. In

regard to the primary sectory (farming, fishing, forestry and animal husbandry), a similar




                                                 7
approach is taken, although double deflation of value added is achieved by combining the enter-
prise implicit output            with separate price indices for intermediate inputs. Finally, in
regards to the tertiary sector (services), a variety of methods are used, ranging from single

deflation using enterprise provided implicit output deflators (telecommunications and wholesale
and retail trade), to extrapolation using real volume indices (transport), to single deflation using
specialized price indices, some of which are woefully inappropriate (e.g. interest rates in
finance!).9 Despite these riders and exceptions, it is fair to say that, overall, the State Statistical

Bureau remains heavily dependent upon enterprise-provided output-based implicit deflators to
deflate nominal value added.1°

      Ruoen [1995] and Woo [1995] argue that the implicit deflators provided by Chinese enter-
prises are systematically biased, Enterprises are well aware of the current value of output and
the nominal material value expended in its production, and so can easily report these to statistical
officials. However, the construction of accurate constant price estimates in the base year of the
SSB's choosing is an arduous task which, with the relaxation of government control over state




       As there has been a general privatization of agriculture during the reform period, the SSB
uses reports from the remaining state and military farms, supplemented with surveys of the agri-
cultural sector [Hsueh and Li 1999, p. 94].
            use of nominal interest rates to deflate the loan income of banks would measure
increases in the nominal value of loans brought about by inflation as an increase in the real vol-
ume of financial intermediation!
       While the preceeding lays out the formal SSB statement of its procedures [Hsueh and Li
1999], there are indications that, in practice, these methods are not exactly followed. For exam-
ple, the value added of wholesale, retail and restaurant trade is supposedly deflated using the
enterprise implicit output deflators [Ibid., p. 107]. However, between 1978 and 1982 the implicit
deflator for this sector, in the national accounts, falls 16.6 percent per annum! During the same
period, the overall GDP deflator rose 2.3 percent per annum and the retail price index rose 3.0
percent per annum. It is impossible to believe that even the most brazen enterprise directors
would report a total collapse of final commercial prices during a period of moderate retail and
GDP inflation.

      10The expenditure side of the accounts depend more on independent price indices, but
make use of a number of grossly incorrect procedures (e.g. using the consumption basket of gov-
ernment workers to deflate nominal government expenditure) to balance the two accounts. Sec-
tion V discusses the expenditure accounts in detail.



                                                   8
enterprises and the development of non-state finns during the reform period, is increasingly
unlikely to be seriously undertaken. Ruoen and Woo argue that many firms assume that the con-
stant price value of output equals the nominal value, i.e. that the implicit deflator always equals
one. This simplifying assumption has been taken by statisticians in other countries," and it
seems likely that Chinese firms would find it to be a time saving approach. More generally,
enterprises might assume that the inflation rate has some constant value. Regardless, the
assumption of a constant inflation rate, be it zero or positive, will make the GDP deflators insuf-
ficiently responsive to a surge in the underlying rate of inflation, such as has occurred during the

reform period. Fortunately, the State Statistical Bureau does, actually, compile independent
price indices of its own. It simply doesn't use these to deflate output! Ruoen [1995] argues that

these independent price indices can credibly substitute for the existing implicit deflators in the
estimation of the growth of real output.

      Table Ill below compares the average rates of inflation recorded by the implicit GDP
deflators with those of the independent price indices compiled by the SSB. Beginning with the
secondary sector, the Ex-Factory Industrial Price Index, recommended by Rouen as an alterna-
tive to the GDP deflator, covers the factory gate prices of raw materials, electric power, indus-
trial and construction inputs, and commercial final goods. This index shows 1.7 percent more
inflation per annum than the implicit secondary deflator. Alternatives to the Ex-Factory Price
Index are the Industrial Products Rural Retail Price Index and the Retail Price Index. Both
indices include the profit margins of commercial establishments. In addition, the coverage of the
Industrial Products Rural Retail Price Index is, obviously, restricted to rural areas, while the
Retail Price Index is basically a consumer goods index. Regressing the growth of the implicit
secondary deflator on the growth of all three indices, I find that only the Ex-Factory index is sig-




      "E.g. Singapore [Young 1995, p.658].


                                                  9
nificant.'2 For all these reasons, the Ex-Factory price index is arguably a superior choice as a

replacement deflator. It is significant, nevertheless, that during the reform period all three SSB
price indices show more inflation than the implicit secondary deflator. The exaggeration of
industrial output growth brought about by the use of enterprise deflators has also beenindepen-
dently confirmed by the SSB which, in a study of Hunan province for the period 1982-1987,

found that a real quantity index, using individual commodity outputs, implied 3.9percent less
growth per annum than indicated by the implicit deflators [Rouen 1995, p. 86].
      Turning to the primary sector, the long standing Farm and Sideline Products Purchasing
Price Index, recommended by Ruoen as an alternative to the primary deflator, measures the aver-

age cost of primary sector goods purchased by commercial enterprises (of all ownership types),
covering products as varied as grains, fruits, vegetables, meat, animal by-products (e.g. furs), fish
and lumber. This index evinces somewhat less inflation than the implicit GDP deflator, lending

no support to Ruoen and Woo's argument!3 Finally, for the tertiary sector, Ruoen suggests the
use of the only available service price index, i.e. the Service Price Index subcomponent of the
Consumer Price Index, which covers post and telecommunications, transport, housing, medical
and child care, and other personal and recreational services. The service CPI grew out of the
Staff and Worker Cost of Living Index, which, up until 1985, covered urban areas alone. Absent
any alternative, I use the urban service price index for 1978 to 1985, and the overall service price
index thereafter. As shown in the Table, the service sector CPI reports the existence of substan-



       '2For the period 1978-1998, the coefficients in the regression of the growth of the implicit
secondary deflator on the growth of the industrial products rural price index, the retail price
index and the ex-factory price index are -.16 (.27), 17 (.25), and .64 (.17), respectively (standard
errors in parentheses). The industrial products rural price index and the retail price index are,
individually, positively and significantly correlated with the secondary deflator, but only insofar
as they are correlated with the ex-factory price index.

             may partly be due to the fact that the implicit deflator is a double deflated value
added price index. With the prices of agricultural goods rising relative to industrial intermediate
inputs, the value added deflator will rise faster than the output deflator. Consequently, it is still
possible that the agricultural enterprise output deflator grows less than the farm products price
index.



                                                 10
tially more inflation than is indicated by the implicit tertiary deflator.

      Ruoen and Woo's hypothesis can be explored, more rigorously, using the stochastic
properties of the different price indices. Formally, describe both the GDP deflators and the alter-
native price indices as imperfect measures of underlying inflation rates:

       (1) D1, =   a1   + B1m1, +            P,, =   t + )7t,, + 1
where i denotes the sector (primary, secondary and tertiary), t is time, D the growth of the
implicit GDP deflator, P the growth of the alternative price index, a and 'r are constants, B and y
measure the responsiveness of the different indices to movements in the underlying inflation rate,
and S and 1 are iid errors. Ruoen's suggestion that the alternative price indices be substituted for

the implicit deflators is based upon the assumption that 'r equals zero and yone, i.e. that the price
indices are unbiased measures of underlying inflation. Maintaining this assumption, one can
then estimate the following bi-factor latent variable model:

       (2) Bi-factor model:         D1 =   a1    B1it + e,           P., =   +

If Rouen and Woo's argument concerning enterprise behavior is correct, then the estimate of B
should be significantly less than one. B measures the fraction of output which is properly

deflated, while 1-B is the faction of output produced by firms which assume that the inflation
rate is some constant rate (perhaps zero).

      Table IV below reports the results of the maximum likelihood full information estimation
of the bi-factor model. Letting the vector X = (D, D5, DTt, R,          PT), I constrain the covaria-
nce matrix of X (LA) to be the following function:

      (3) ; = BE,1B'+Z6
where B is 6x3 matrix composed of a 3x3 diagonal matrix of the B's followed, below, by the 3x3
identity matrix, E, is the 3x3 covariance matrix of the underlying inflation rates, and      is a 6x6
diagonal matrix of the variance of the individual error terms. Identification of the B's comes
from the covariance of the underlying sectoral inflation rates and the assumption, in the model,




                                                     11
that the ratio of the covariance of each (D1, P1) pair with the remaining Di's and    is (j   J) is
given by BI.L4 The analysis implicitly assumes that the price level is difference stationary, with

intratemporally correlated, but intertemporally iid, inflation shocks. While the price level itself
is unlikely to be trend reverting, it is likely that the inflation rate is intertemporally correlated and

I hope, in a latter draft, to modify the analysis appropriately, using both the intratemporal and
intertemporal covariance in the sectoral inflation rates to identify the B's, as well as including
serial correlation in the errors and allowing for the possibility that the deflator bias has worsened
through time.'5 In Table IV I focus on the parameters directly relevant to the current discussion,

reporting the remaining parameters in the appendix.'6

      14j should  note that the more standard limited information IV and 2SLS methods are not
quite appropriate for this model. Thus, for example, one could regress D1 on the remaining D
and P' s (i J) purging it of error, and then regress P1 on the estimated value of D, to derive an
estimate of B1. However, one could just as easily regress P, on the remaining D and P's (i J)'
purging it of error, and then regress D1 on the estimated value, deriving an estimate of 1/B1. As
there is no causal relationship between D, and P1, the model does not select one procedure over
the other, and both are appropriate. However, they give different answers. The full information
method I adopt above symmetrically combines the information contained in the relative covaria-
nce of D1 and P1 with the remaining price measures to estimate B. I should also note that IV and
2SLS methods would be difficult to apply to the extensions of the model I explore below, which,
however, can be neatly folded into the full information framework.

                    that is, that the overall approach meets with approval.
       '6The only issue which arises is that, in a few cases, some of the individual variances in
     are estimated to be zero, i.e. hit a corner (the appendix explains how I constrain the estimates
to produce positive definite covariance matrices). This so-called Heywood case appears fre-
quently in latent variable models with small samples and few variables per factor [see Loehlin
1998, p. 61]. In the context of the present model, it arises as follows: With the individual
variances assumed to be positive, B1 is estimated from the ratio of the covariance of D, with the
remaining Di's and P's to the covariance of P with these variables. With B, determined in this
fashion, the variance of inflation in sector i is then estimated using the fact that the covariance
between D, and P is equal to B,*Var(7t3. However, the variance of P1 is given by VarQt,) +
Var(i). If, for example, the covariance between D, and P1 is large, Var(m) is found to be large
and Var(1) is driven to zero, In this case, B, is no longer solely determined by the relative
covariance of D, and P, with the remaining variables, but is constrained by the covariance
between D, and P, and the variance of P1. I should note, however, that if one relaxes the non-
negativity constraints on the problem, and allows negative residual variances, the likelihood
reaches a maximum with the offending residual variances very close to zero and a virtually
unchanged ln likelihood, i.e. the non-negativity constraints are only mildly binding. Further,
with the non-negativity constraints in place, the restriction on the covariance matrix described by
(3) is not rejected.


                                                  12
      As shown in column (1) of Table IV, the stochastic properties of the different price mea-
sures strongly support Ruoen and Woo's hypothesis. The individual B's are all estimated to be
less than 1 and, with standard errors taken from the inverse negative Hessian, significantly so in
the case of the primary and secondary sectors. Since the standard results concerning maximum
likelihood estimators are asymptotic, and the sample of 20 years used here is laughably small, I

have taken the liberty of using the estimated parameters to randomly generate 500 similarly sized
samples and reestimate the model on each of these. The mean value and standard errors of the
parameters estimated from these simulations are also reported in Table IV. As indicated, for a
problem of this sort the small sample MLE estimator appears to be fairly unbiased, and the stan-
dard errors drawn from the square root of the diagonal elements of the negative Hessian are off
by no more than 10 to 20 percent. I also report, in the Table, the unrestricted ln likelihood for

the sample covariance matrix. The restrictions imposed by equation (3) are not rejected, whether
one uses the asymptotic or simulated test statistic.'7

      The lower rows of Table IV report the estimated average underlying rates of sectoral infla-
tion. Since the bi-factor model laid out in equation (2) above assumes that the price indices are
unbiased measures of the underlying inflation, these estimates are, trivially, the mean rates of
inflation of the price indices.'8 While the B estimates of the bi-f actor model are supportive of
Ruoen and Woo's hypothesis, it would be nice to derive estimates of the underlying inflation
rates that are not given by assumption. To this end, I have tried two approaches. In columns
(3)-(4) of Table IV I reestimate the bi-factor model, but constrain the estimate of the mean infla-




       '7Since for the simulated data the model is 'true", I simply report the 95th percentile for
the difference between the restricted and unrestricted ln likelihoods.

       '8The mean values of these, in the simulated model, are slightly greater. This does not
reflect bias in the estimation procedure, but rather a positive average realization of the stochastic
shocks generated by Stata's pseudo random number generator (as the estimated mean inflation
rates are simply the means of the realized random variables).


                                                 13
Lion rate by assuming that the a1' equal zero,19 so that the differences in the mean growth of the
implicit deflators and alternative price indices have to be spanned by B and the average
underlying inflation rate:

           (4) Constrained means:             =   B1i        = it,
if the B's were equal to one, this approach would find the mean inflation rate as the weighted
average of the growth of the deflator and the alternative price index, with the weights given by
the variance of the opposing unique error variances:


       (5)
              -    _&
              it, =D1 2      2
                                    e2    2



However, to the degree that B, can, without undo violence to the covariance matrix, equal D1IP,,
the estimated mean underlying inflation rate simply equals the average growth of the alternative

price index, As the reader can see from columns (3)-(4), the latter is basically the case. The

estimated average inflation rates, in particular for the non-agricultural secondary and tertiary sec-
tors, which form the focus of the analysis of this paper, are virtually unaffected by the mean con-
straint.

       As an alternative approach, I begin by noting that the bi-factor model used in columns
(1)-(4) is unable to separately identify the values of B, and y in equation (1) earlier. That is,
while Table IV reports estimated values for B, these can really be thought of as the value of B,1y1,
with the assumption that TI = 1 being a normalization that bundles the bias of the alternative price
indices into the estimated variance of the underlying inflation rates. Thus, while the estimates
are below one, the model does not rule out the possibility that the deflators are unbiased (B1 = 1),
while the alternative price indices actually overstate the inflation rate ( > I). This could arise,




       '9Th effect assuming that the misreporting enterprises posit a constant deflator, i.e. an infla-
tion rate of zero.



                                                        14
in particular, if the price indices were weighted toward products whose relative prices were sys-
tematically rising more rapidly?°
      To get around this problem, I propose an alternative model of the form:
      (6) Nominal shock model:           P1, =    + B1Ot + v1) + e,         =   it1 + y1v +

                                                      where   ; =; +
This model decomposes the sectoral price change into a nominal shock, common to all sectors,

and sector specificreal shocks. I assume that, from the point of view of enterprises, it does not
matter what is the source of the sectoral price change, the bias will be the same. However, no
price index, no matter what its weights, can overstate inflation when the price increase is com-
mon to all sectors and goods. Thus, if the price indices are biased     1), this bias can only
appear in their measurement of the price effects of real shocks. To the degree that the variance
of the nominal shock is substantial, this model allows for the separate identification of B and y

In the estimation, I allow the va's to covary with each other, but assume that the nominal shock is
orthogonal to the remaining elements of the model. This "classical" assumption is pretty much
forced, as the 6x6 covariance matrix has only 21 moments, and the model, as is, has 19
covariance-related parameters,2' which does not leave enough moments to allow for a general
covariance between the nominal and real shocks.

      Column (5) of Table IV reports the maximum likelihood estimate of the nominal shock
model. All of the B and parameters are measured with great imprecision, as everything is
leveraged off of the variation of the nominal shock. Nevertheless, based upon the point esti-
mates, one could, indeed, argue that both the primary and secondary price indices overstate the



       20As an example, consider a rise in the relative price of services brought about by its com-
paratively slower productivity growth. If the alternative price index is weighted toward service
industries with the most laggard productivity growth, it will overstate overall service sector
inflation.
      21
            six elements of the v, covariance matrix, the variance of the nominal shock and the
six specific shocks, and the three B/s and three t'


                                                 15
inflation caused by real shocks. Practically speaking, however, this turns out to be of little
import. With the "free means" of column (5) one cannot identify the mean inflation rates,22 but if

one constrains the deflator specific a,'s to be zero, they can be estimated. Doing so, one finds it
to be .056, and j71 to be .008, .004, and .060 in the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors,

respectively, i.e. with the exception of the tertiary sector, the nominal shock is the dominant

force determining the average growth of prices. Consequently, despite the large ''s, the esti-
mated rates of sectoral inflation (as reported in column (7)), are quite close to the growth of the

alternative price indices. For the secondary and tertiary sectors, in particular, the mean rate of
underlying inflation is about equal to, or exceeds, the growth of the corresponding alternative
price indices (compare with colunm (1)).
      To summarize, the joint stochastic behavior of the implicit GDP deflators and alternative
price indices lends substantial support to Ruoen and Woo's argument that the implicit GDP

deflators systematically understate price movements. Various attempts to allow the data to select
its own inflation rate return estimates close to, if not exceeding, the growth of the alternative

price indices. On this basis, I follow the suggestion of Ruoen, substituting the SSB price indices
he recommends for the implicit deflators of the national accounts. Table V compares the official
Chinese growth rates with the alternative estimates of GDP growth.23 As the Table shows, the
use of the alternative SSB price indices to deflate output lowers the growth of aggregate and non-




      22The sectoral deflators and price indices produce six means, but there are seven relevant
parameters (3 as's, 3 's, and it).
      23
               Chinese growth rates are computed using Laspeyres price weights. I compute
aggregate growth rates as the Tornqvist weighted sum of the sectoral growth rates, i.e.:

      g(t) =
               Eg1(t)[51(t(tfl
where s(t) is the share of sector i in the nominal value added of year t, and g1(t) is the constant
price growth of the output of sector i between years t-1 and t. In reporting "official" growth rates
in the Table, I reestimate the official growth rate using this procedure, which lowers the official
growth rate by .2 percent per annum.


                                                 16
agricultual GDP by 1.7 percent and 2.5 percent, respectively. These adjustments are substan-
tially less than those made by Summers and Heston version 5.6 which, for the period 1978-1992,

when official GDP grew 8.9 percent per annum, reports an adjusted aggregate GDP growth rate
of 5.6 percent.TM Figure 1 graphs the official and price index adjusted annual growth of QDP

achieved since 1978. All of the downward adjustment in the growth rate brought about by the
deflator substitution comes after 1986, with growth from 1986 to 1998 averaging 6.2 percent per

annum, 3 percent less than the officially reported figure of 9.2 percent. In 1989, a year of eco-
nomic retrenchment, GDP is now seen to have fallen by 5.2 percent, as opposed to the 4.0 per-

cent positive growth reported in official figures. This provides some insight into the forces
which precipitated the political unrest of that year.

      Before concluding this section, I should note that it is possible to improve upon the three-

sector single deflation procedure suggested by Ruoen. While the Ex-Factory Price Index is a
comprehensive industrial price thdex, it is an inappropriate deflator for construction (which is a
part of secondary sector activity). Similarly, one might argue that the Service Price Index, a
component of the CPI, is a poor indicator of price developments in wholesale and retail trade and
transport, which make up almost half of service sector value added. Further, the output deflators

suggested by Ruoen ignore changes in the relative prices of output and inputs. To this end, I
have developed six-sector double-deflated estimates, as outlined in Table VI. I accept the offi-
cial growth estimates of transport (as these are, purportedly, based upon real volume indices),
substitute the retail price index for the bizarre25 official implicit output deflator of wholesale &
retail trade, and use the Service Price Index to deflate the remainder of service sector value
added. For construction, I use data on the per square foot cost of state construction (1978-1990)
arid the new investment price index for construction activity activity (1990-1998) to derive an



      24For the same period, my adjustments lower the growth of aggregate GDP to 7.7 percent
per annum.
      25See footnote 9 earlier above.



                                                 17
alternative to the official implicit enterprise output deflator.26 Concluding with the substitution
of the Farm and Sideline Price Index and the Ex-Factory Price Index for the primary sector and

industry deflators, this alternative approach, when based upon single output-deflation, yields esti-
mates of real output growth somewhat higher than those produced by Ruoen's procedure (Table
VI). However, one can go further and, through the 6x6 use matrix of the 1987-1997 input output
tables, double deflate the value added of each of the six sectors. After all of these adjustments,
one arrives at estimated real, double deflated, value added growth rates slightly below those

developed using Ruoen's simple single-deflated three sector approach. Consequently, to keep
the analysis as transparent and reproducible as possible, in this paper I opt for Ruoen's suggested
method, bearing in mind that a more nuanced and complicated approach yields virtually the same
figures.




      26
            index produces a fairly conservative measure of construction inflation. Appendix B
compares it with potential alternatives.


                                                18
III Labour
      In the People's Republic there are two sources of data on the total and working population;
the annual administrative and survey-based estimates reported in the China Statistical Yearbook
and the tabulations of the occasional population censuses. In Table VII below I compare the fig-
ures found in the two sources. As the reader can see, the annual population estimates are quite

close to those reported by the censuses. This is not surprising, since the former, although based

on residence registration and sample surveys, are adjusted in accordance with the results of the
latter.27 In regards to employment, however, there are large discrepancies both between the Cen-
sus and the annual estimates and, within the annual estimates themselves, between the old series
and its recent revision. These discrepancies require some explanation.

      Under the plan, the SSB, using departmental reports and surveys, collected data on the
'Total Labour Force of Society,' which forms the basis for the 'old" China Statistical Yearbook

series reported in the Table. Referring to the working population, this series had a fairly strin-
gent definition of employment requiring, for example, that young people in cities and towns with
temporary employment28 earn, as a minimum, the wage level of local grade-one workers in order
to be included in the series.29 In contrast, the Census definition of employment includes all those

earning wage or management income, whether through permanent or temporary employment.30


      27
            CSY 1999, p. 110. I should note that the census population figures 1 report in the
Table do not agree with the numbers reported in popular sources (e.g. the CSY), as I have
adjusted the census population numbers to agree with the definition used in the annual series, i.e.
adding in the members of the People's Liberation Army. The data presented in this and the fol-
lowing section, in addition to the CSY, draws upon the 1982 and 1990 Population Censuses, the
1987 and 1995 1 Percent Sample Surveys, and the annual issues of the China Population
Statistics Yearbook.
      28
              is, while waiting to exercise their "right" to employment, participation in the mili-
tary or further schooling.
      29See Hsueh, Li and Liu [1993, p. 565] and Chen and Niu [1989, p. 203].

       30Both censuses required that those with temporary employment worked 16 or more days
in the month before the enumeration (1982 Census, pp. 606-607; 1990 Census, Vol. 4,p. 515)
and restricted the working population to those aged 15 and above.



                                                 19
Not surprisingly, the Census numbers tend to be greater. In 1997 the employment seriesreported
in the China Statistical Yearbook was revised on the basis of the results of the annualSurvey of

Population Change. While the figures for earlier years were retained, the numbers from 1990 on
rose substantially. As the reader can see, based upon the similarity of the estimates, the employ-

ment definition used by the population survey appears to correspond more closely with that used
in the Census.31 The linking of the old data on the Labour Force of Society (prior to 1990) with
the new labour force series (from 1990 on) in current official publications is regrettable, as it

generates spurious labour force growth which, unfortunately, has been used by some economists
as a measure of employment growth. While the Total Labour Force of Society is no longer

reported as the official aggregate employment series, these data continue to be collected and can
be inferred from the detailed tabulations of the China Statistical Yearbook.32 I use these to

extend the "old" series to 1998, as reported in the Table. However, Jam not able to avoid a fur-
ther discontinuity, introduced in 1998, when the definition of workers in urban enterpriseswas

revised to include only those actually working and receiving income (as opposed to those who
retained employment contracts, without actually working in the unit). This resulted in a substan-
tial reduction in the estimated working population, particularly in manufacturing.




      3!
             China Population Statistics Yearbook reports the population survey results, but gives
no detail as to the underlying definitions. In any case, although the revised annual labour force
series represent an adjustment "in accordance with the data obtained from the sample surveys on
population changes" (CSY 1999, p. 133), they are not literally the population survey results, as
the survey indicates even more working persons than are reported in the China Statistical Year-
book (compare China Population Statistics Yearbook 1998, p. 72 and CSY 1999, p. 133). I
should also note that much of the revised industry and enterprise (e.g. state vs. collective) detail
reported in the early l990s appear to be based upon simple "fudge factors", i.e. if the revised
series indicated 9 percent additional aggregate employment, then the revised estimates of
employment by industry or enterprise were increased, similarly, by 9 percent. As its name
implies, the original emphasis of the Survey of Population Change concerned demographics, not
the details of employment.

       32While the summary tabulations on industry and enterprise employment in the China Sta-
tistical Yearbook are adjusted to reflect the revised totals, the tables on the detailed industry
structure of employment continue to be based upon the old series which, consequently, can be
extended by summing the relevant categories.


                                                 20
      As Table VII reports, all sources show labour force growth substantially exceeding the

growth of the population. To explore the basis of this result, in Table VIII I report the participa-
tion rates by age group and sex implied by census and survey data.33 Between 1982 and 1990,

according to the Census, participation rates for the youngest age groups fell, while those for
middle aged and elderly women rose slightly. The data of the 1997 Population Change Survey
extend these trends. These developments are consistent with growing investment in education
and the gradual aging of Communist-era women, who are likely to have had a greater history of
lifetime market labour force participation than their predecessors. They are, however, largely

offsetting. Of the increase in the overall participation rate from .52 to .57 between the Censuses
of 1982 to 1990, only 1.1 percent is due to changes in the age specific participation rates, with

fully 98.9 percent attributable to the evolving age distribution of the population.
      Since demographic trends play such an important role in explaining the rise in participation
rates, it is important to examine these in greater detail. Table lix reports the distribution of the
population of each sex by age group as reported in the two censuses and 1997 Survey, and, more
importantly, compares the population of each Census/Survey with its surviving members (suit-
ably aged) in the succeeding study.34 As shown, between 1982 and 1990 the cohort of 1982
infants grows, which is consistent with underreporting of births (to avoid official sanction), as
does the cohort of 20-24 year old males, many of whom would have been in the military in 1982

(neither distribution includes active service military).35 Overall, however, the two Censuses are




       33Prior to the 1982 Census, only fragmentary data on the characteristics of the workforce
in particular sectors are available (e.g. Chen 1967, p. 484). The Labour Force of Society series,
in particular, did not collect information on the characteristics of workers. Consequently, it is
not possible to estimate labour force participation rates by age group prior to 1982.
         use the data on the population by single year of age, and then aggregate into the quin-
quennial age groups reported in the Table.
       35While the 1990 Census reports (in separate tabulations) the age distribution of active ser-
vice military, the 1982 Census does not. To keep the columns consistent, I report the civilian age
distribution for both years.



                                                 21
broadly consistent. In particular, the working age population does not miraculously expand. The
same cannot be said for the 1997 Survey, which appears to undersample youths of 17-26 years of

age (in 1997) and grossly oversample midd].e-aged women. One can correct for this, however,
by "ageing" the 1990 Census population (using the annualized 1982-1990 age specific survival

rates), and applying the 1997 Population Survey age specific participation rates to arrive at asyn-
thetic 1997 working population.

      Between 1982 and 1990, according to the Census, the working population grew 2.7 percent

per annum. Comparing the 1997 synthetic working population with the 1990 Census, one finds
that the working population grew 1.4 percent per annum during this period. Extending the 2.7
percent growth rate to the entire 1978-1990 period, and the 1.4 percent growth to the 1990-1998
period, one derives an average estimated working population growth of 2.2 percent between
1978 and 1998. As can be seen from Table VIII earlier, this agrees, exactly, with the growth

reported by the "old Labour Force of Society employment series (particularly after it removed,
in 1998, absentia workers). In sum, working population growth of 2.2 percent per annum, in
excess of the 1.3 percent rate of population growth, is completely consistent with reasonable par-
ticipation and demographic trends and may be deemed fairly accurate.
      To complete this section, I need to derive estimates of the growth of the working
population in the non-agricultural sector alone. Table X below summarizes the distribution of

the working population by economic sector, as reported in the Labour Force of Society data and
the Census. The Labour Force of Society data indicate a substantial movement of labour out of
agriculture into the industrial and service sectors of the economy. In contrast, the census data
show an extraordinary stability in sectoral shares. Given the well-known explosion of rural

industrial activity during the reform period, these data strain credulity. The shift of labour out of
agriculture into the industrial sector is confirmed by the the industrial censuses of 1985 and 1995
which, as shown in Table XI, indicate industrial labour force growth which exceeds that reported
in the data of the Total Labour Force of Society.




                                                 22
      The Chinese population censuses are unusual in that rather than ask the respondent to spec-

ify his area of industrial activity, they ask the respondent to provide the name of his place of
work, which is then used to determine the industrial sector. Thus, the 1982 Census contains
detailed instructions for enumerators on how the enterprise name should be recorded, even

requiring, in the case of large enterprises, a precise specification of the department name. The
1990 Census provides similar instructions but, perhaps frustrated by the large number ofrespon-
dents reporting 'agriculture" in the earlier Census, emphasizes that peasants must report the
name of their enterprise (but, still, not its industrial sector). In any case, the instructions then
completely undermine the accuracy of the statistics by noting that for households which contract
land, and operate as an independent economic unit, all working members of the household
should report the main household product as the enterprise name. The confusion createdby the
use of a single question to collect two pieces of information, industry of employment and a
record, with associated personal names, of each individual's place of work, is obvious.36 In con-
trast with the Census, the Total Labour Force of Society, as it is based partly on enterprise
reports, is much better equipped, albeit not perfectly so, to track the movement of labour between
sectors.37

      One can make use of a national income identity to verify the accuracy of the intersectoral

transfer of labour reported in the Total Labour Force of Society data series. The share of labour
in non-agricultural GDP equals the sum of worker wages divided by total value added:

                      w1L1 w1s
      (7)    0LNA =        =         LNA
                               QNA




     36The statistical purpose served by collecting workplace names is mystifying, as this infor-
mation cannot be meaningfully aggregated.

      37j should note that the broader Census definition of employment cannotexplain the differ-
ence between the two series. As shown in Table XI, the Census actually reports lower absolute
industrial employment in 1990, despite the fact that its overall employment estimate substantially
exceeds that reported in the Labour Force of Society series (Table VII earlier).



                                                  23
where the index i denotes the various subsectors of non-agricultural GDP and s1 their correspond-

ing shares of total non-agricultural labour, From this, it follows that the growth of non-

agricultural labour should equal the (ln) growth of nominal non-agricultural GDP, minus the
growth of weighted wages, plus the growth of the share of labour. Table XII below presents the
relevant data. Between 1978 and 1998 nominal non-agricultural GDP grew 16.1 percent per
annum. Weighting the official series on the wages of staff and workers by detailed sector using
the detailed employment distributions of the Labour Force of Society data, I find that weighted

nominal non-agricultural wages grew 12.5 percent per annum. Finally, as will be seen in Section
VI, the national accounts show the income share of non-agricultural labour rising 1.4 percent per
annum. Together, these data imply a 5.0 percent annual growth in non-agricultural employment.

The Labour Force of Society indicates growth of 4.5 percent per annum. Thus, if anything, this
series may understate the growth of non-agricultural employment.38
      In this paper I use the data series on the Total Labour Force of Society to measure the

growth of labour input. As shown above, the overall growth of the working population in this

series is perfectly consistent with reasonable demographic and participation data, while its non-
agricultural component is, by the standards of the industrial surveys and national income and
wage data, modestly conservative.




      38Alternatively, one can interpret the data in Table X as indicating that the growth of nomi-
nal output is overstated by about .5 percent per annum.


                                                24
IV Human Capital
      A proper measure of the growth of labour input should account for differentiation in the
human capital of the workforce. Following Jorgenson et a! (1987), 1 take labour input to be a
translog index of differentiated labour types, with the growth of effective labour input between
periods t-1 and t given by:

                I   4(t)   1   re,w÷eJt—1)
      (7)
            ZlnlLJL                 2

where L, is labour of type i and 0, its share of total payments to labour. The difference between
the growth of the effective labour force and the overall growth of the working population can be

taken as the growth of "human capital.'39 To arrive at this measure, one needs data on the char-
acteristics (age, education and sex) of workers and their relative incomes.

      While the Labour Force of Society data series provides a reasonable measure of the overall
growth of the labour force and its sectoral distribution, it does not contain any information on the
characteristics of workers. To adjust for the changing characteristics of workers, one must turn
to census and occasional survey data. Table Xffl below summarizes the sex, educational and age

characteristics of the working population, as indicated by the 1982 and 1990 Censuses, the 1987

and 1995 1% Sample Population Surveys, and the 1997 Survey on Population Change. As the
Table shows, the various censuses and surveys indicate a gradual rise in the proportion of female
workers, aging of the labour force, and improvement in its educational attainment. In the pages
below I examine the accuracy of these trends. To shorten the discussion, I focus on the changes
from 1982 to 1990 (Census to Census) and 1990 to 1995 (Census to Survey), as I will use these




                in mind that, in a fashion common to all growth accounting measures of factor
inputs, improvements in the efficiency of each like unit (which, in theoretical models are also
termed 'human capital") are bundled into the residual.


                                                25
two discrete growth periods to measure the growth of human capital during the reform period.40
      The preceeding section established the reasonableness of the demographic and employ-
ment trends by sex and age present in the Chinese census data. Turning to the educational data,
Table XIV below reports the distribution of educational attainment by age cohort in the

aggregate Chinese population as recorded in the 1982 Census. The table then subtracts this dis-
tribution from that present in the (suitably aged) equivalent cohort in the 1990 census. While a
rise in the educational attainment of young cohorts, who would still be pursing formal schooling,
is to be expected, in the Chinese data improvements in educational attainment extend deeply into

older age groups. Better educated persons are likely to have lower mortality rates (which will
shift the educational distribution up as cohorts age) but, as the right hand side of the Table
shows, this does not explain the Chinese data, where the absolute number of educated persons in
older age cohorts rises from one census to the other!

      The political campaigns of the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) disrupted the lives of
many in the People's Republic, preventing them from pursing formal education to the level they
might otherwise have chosen. To compensate for this, the Chinese government provides equiv-

alency exams which individuals, after self study or adult education, may take to increase their
formal certification.4' Table XV below reports data from the 1995 1% Population Survey on the
share of those claiming tertiary or secondary educational attainment who achieved that standard
through adult education. As shown, an extraordinarily large percentage of older age groups
achieved their educational status through adult education courses.42 Data on the annual flow of




     4°i do not have access to data on the educational attainment of the total population for the
1997 Survey. As I need this information to generate a synthetic educational attainment (see
below), I rely on the 1995 Survey instead.
      41Both the 1982 and 1990 Census indicate explicitly that persons taking such exams may
claim the corresponding formal attainment.

      42Not surprisingly, younger age groups also avail themselves of the opportunity to achieve
higher levels of certification through this channel.



                                                26
students in mainstream and adult education schools (Table XVI) confirm the relative importance
of continuing education. These data also show, however, the inferior quality of adult education
programmes, as these tend to be shorter, with a high ratio of graduates to students, and have
much higher student-teacher ratios. While not all such graduates could claim mainstream equiv-
alency, the mixing of mainstream and adult education in the Census data on improving educa-
tional attainment is clearly problematic, as the two types of certification would, most likely,

command different market prices. To alleviate any concerns on this dimension, in the analysis
below I develop a synthetic 1990 labour force, in which any improvement in the educational dis-
tribution of cohorts aged over 25 in 1982, is disallowed.43

      Turning next to the 1995 1% Sample Population Survey, Table XVII ages the quinqennial
age cohorts of the 1990 census and compares the resulting distribution to the population recorded
by the 1995 Survey. Once again, the cohort of 1990 infants expands, reflecting the underreport-
ing of births. More worrisome, however, is the underreporting of youths and oversampling of
middle aged men and, particularly, woman, patterns which, as discussed in the preceeding
section, appear in the 1997 Population Survey as well.'14 To correct for changes in thesampling
distribution, in the analysis below I construct a synthetic 1995 working population by aging the
1990 age cohorts (using the 1982-1990 annual survival rates) and then applying theage x sex

labour force participation rates recorded by the 1995 Sample Survey. A comparison of the
cohort specific distribution of educational attainment indicates, as was the case in the 1982-1990
period, a systematic rise in the educational attainment of older cohorts (Table XVII). To allevi-
ate concerns on this dimension, I construct an alternative synthetic estimate in which I disallow
all improvements in the educational attainment of cohorts aged over 25 in 1990.




         allow younger cohorts to improve their attainment, as these could still have been pursu-
ing formal schooling between 1982 and 1990.

      "This appears to be a characteristic of the 1990s Surveys. The 1987 Survey, in contrast, is
quite consistent with the age distribution of the 1982 and 1990 Censuses.



                                                27
      Table XVIII below summarizes my measures of the sex, age and educational composition
of the workforce. The baseline measure accepts the 1982 and 1990 census data and estimates the

age distribution of the 1995 population by ageing the 1990 Census population using the annual-
ized 1982-1990 survival rates, using the 1995 Survey to determine the participation rates and
educational characteristics of each quinqennial age cohort, The alternative measure disallows
any improvement in the educational attainment of cohorts aged over 25 between 1982 and 1990,
but uses the age x sex x education participation rates of the 1990 Census to determine the labour

force participation of the resulting educationally-demoted population. The alternative 1990 pop-
ulation is then aged further from 1990 to 1995, disallowing any improvements in the educational
attainment of cohorts aged over 25 in 1990, and uses the age x sex x education participation rates
of the 1995 Survey to determine labour force participation of each group in that year. The result-
ing marginal distributions are summarized in the Table.
      Published data on the relative labour incomes of Chinese workers by worker characteristic

are, basically, non-existent. However, the SSB's Urban Household Survey has a history of ask-
ing for the characteristics and individual labour income of the members of the survey house-
holds. I have been able to acquire the survey files for the years 1986-1992. I supplement these

with the files of the Household Survey (urban and rural) executed in 1988 and 1995 by the
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, which contain similar data.45 While thesurveys cover a
large number of provinces and cities, they are by no means a balanced sample (e.g. some prov-
inces are not represented, while the samples, both rural and urban, are heavily biased toward bet-

ter educated households). The survey responses also have substantial coding errors and internal
inconsistencies, with, for example, non-labour market participants reporting positive earnings. I
narrow the samples considerably by requiring that the respondents consistently, across a variety
of questions, identify themselves as working employees in the non-agricultural sector. The final



              data can be purchased from the Universities Service Centre, Chinese University of
Hong Kong.


                                               28
sample size is 222,281 observations. I regress the In wage of each individual on age, sex and
education dummies, these dummies interacted with time, and a dummy for eachsurvey (year or

urban/rural), the latter controlling for overall wage growth and differences in the definition of
income used by the different surveys. The R-squared of the regression is .83, with a partial
R-squared, netting out the survey dummies, of .16.

      Table XIX reports the estimated education, age and sex income profiles in the People's
Republic, and contrasts these with 1980/81 estimates for the newly industrializing countries.46 In
China, wages rise with educational attainment, but at a slower rate than in the other economies.
Similarly, for given age and educational characteristics, women earn lower wages, but consider-
ably less so than in the NICs. The age income profile in most of the NICs follows an inverted-U

pattern, reflecting, perhaps, the competing forces of experience, vintage effects in human capital,
and physical ageing. In contrast, experience (or seniority) in the People's Republic confers per-
manent income advantages. It is unclear whether these differences reflect genuine differences in
relative marginal products, or Socialist wage distortions aimed at promoting income equality and
protecting the elderly. The Chinese trend coefficients argue in favour of the latter interpretation,
as reform appears to have led to a declining relative female wage, rapidly rising premium for
tertiary educated workers, and sharp movement toward an inverted-U age profile (with elderly

workers earning substantially lower incomes). Nevertheless, rather than make ad hoc adjust-
ments to the Chinese data, I accept them as they are, using the relative wage estimates to weight




      46
             Taiwanese profile is estimated using the individual labour income of non-
agricultural wage earners (excluding self employed and unpaid workers) in the 1980 Survey of
Personal Income Distribution. For Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea I do not have
individual files, and base my estimates upon Census data and wage surveys (see Young 1995).
For these economies I regress my estimates of the average labour incomes of each sex x age x
education cell on the appropriate dummies. I focus on 1980 on the grounds that the technology
and factor supplies in use in these economies at that time might, heroically, approximate those at
play in China during the l980s and 1990s. I should note that the Korean data refer primarily to
the manufacturing sector.



                                                29
the changing composition of the workforce.47

      Table XX below reports my estimates of the average growth of human capital in the Peo-

ple's Republic during the reform period.48 The baseline working population, using Chinese
income weights, suggests a growth rate of 1.1 percent per annum. This is not substantially
different than the estimates one arrives at using the original data (which, in 1995, introduces
older workers and more females) or my alternative estimates (disallowing educational improve-
ments for those over 25). The use of MC income weights, with theft steeper profiles, would, on

average, raise these estimates slightly. As explained in the previous Section, I reject the Census
data on the distribution of the working population across sectors as being highly unrealistic.
Consequently, I also reject the Census detail on the characteristics of workers by sector, taking
the data on the improvement of the human capital of all workers as being a more accurate reflec-
tion of overall and sectoral trends.49 Nevertheless, for the reader's information, I report in the
Table the growth of human capital calculated using data on the characteristics of non-agricultural




          use the estimates for 1990 and 1995 to weight the working population of those years,
and the point estimate for 1986 to weight the working population of 1982, i.e. I do not extrapo-
late the wage trends out of sample.

      48j calculate the growth rate separately for the 1982-1990 and 1990-1995 periods and
arrive at an average growth rate for 1978-1998 by combining these with 12/8 weights (i.e.
assuming that these rates held throughout 1978-1990 and 1990-1998, respectively).
                   on the characteristics of the total working population also allows me, as shown
above, to evaluate the overall accuracy of the data and develop alternative estimates. This is not
possible at the sectoral level.
       I should note that the 1995 1% Sample Survey, like the Census, shows virtually no transfer
of labour out of agriculture. This Survey continues the tradition of trying to use one question to
gather both industrial and personal information. Thus, following the disappointing results of the
previous Censuses, the Survey instructions excoriate peasants not to report "agriculture', empha-
size that villagers with stable employment in enterprises should report the enterprise as their
place of work, and even provide an area (within the item) for detail on the actual industry of
employment, while to continuing to make the recording of the enterprise (and sub-department)
name the main objective of the questionnaire including, this time, a special emphasis on deter-
mining the exact legal status of the enterprise. As shown above, the Survey's overall sample is
biased and needs to be adjusted, so I do not include it in Section Il's discussion of the
intersectoral allocation of labour, Nevertheless, since it shares a questionnaire very similar to
that of the Census, it is not surprising it yields similar results.



                                                30
workers alone. This lowers the growth rate somewhat when calculated using Chinese income

weights, but has a negligible impact on the estimates derived with the NIC income weights. The
NIC income weights place a greater premium on tertiary education, which contributes more to
the rise in the human capital of non-agricultural workers, as reported in these sources.
      In this paper I take the growth of human capital in the non-agricultural sector of the Chi-
nese economy between 1978 and 1998 to be 1.1 percent per annum. As Table XX clearly shows,
both slightly lower and moderately higher estimates are plausible, but all estimates are tolerably
concentrated around a value of 1.1 percent.




                                               31
V Physical Capital
      Figure H below graphs the ratio of inventory accumulation and gross fixed capital forma-
tion to nominal GDP in the People's Republic. In my experience, the "changes in stocks" figures
reported in the national accounts of developing countries are frequently a residual, fabricated,

item used to conceal large discrepancies between the production and expenditure sides of the
accounts. In addition, the proper measurement of inventory changes, including the adjustment
for differences between current valuations and accounting conventions, is technically more chal-

lenging than the measurement of the flow value of investment in fixed capital. Finally, in the

context of the People's Republic, considering the unsold inventories of state enterprises as a
productive element of the capital stock would seem to be an egregious error. For these reasons,
in this study, as in past work [Young 1995], 1 exclude inventories frommy measure of the capital
stock, and focus on gross fixed capital formation alone.

      As emphasized in the Introduction, this paper focuses on the non-agricultural sector of the

Chinese economy, using reproducible capital, alone, as a measure of the capital stock. Although
the published Chinese national accounts do not provide information on the sectoral distribution
of gross fixed capital formation, the provincial accounts do. For the period 1978 to 1995, Hsueh
and Li [1999] report the sectoral distribution of gross fixed capital formation in 26 provinces,50
accounting for an average of 78 percent of the annual value of national gross fixed capital forma-

tion. I assume that aggregate gross fixed capital formation during this time period has the same
agricultural/non-agricultural distribution, and extend the series forward by assuming that
investment shares in 1996 and 1997 were the same as in 1995. For the period 1952-1977, I draw
on data in the CSY on the sectoral distribution of the gross fixed capital formation of state owned
units, which accounted for an average of 57 percent of the annual value of national gross fixed
capital formation during this period, to allocate the overall national fixed capital formation




      50A11 provinces other than Jiangxi, Guangdong, Hainan and Tibet.



                                                32
between the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors of the economy. As shown in Figure III,
the proportion of state enterprise investment in agriculture is well below the provincial average

(which includes the activity of collective enterprises), so my use of state enterprise investment to
allocate investment during the period 1952-1977 introduces a discontinuity in 1978, when, as I
switch to the provincial sample, the proportion of investment in agriculture jumps. This intro-
duces a slight downward bias into my estimate of capital growth in the non-agricultural sector.
      With a measure of non-agricultural investment in hand, it is necessary to derive an

appropriate fixed capital formation deflator. The official deflator for GFCF is presumably an

inappropriate choice, as it is relies upon enterprise output deflators5' and is, consequently, likely
to be characterized by the same understatement of inflation that plagues the People's Republic's

production estimates. An alternative independent price index is available in the form of the Price
Index of Investment, but this index has only been available since 1990, which does not provide a

sufficiently long time series. A third approach is possible, exploiting the national income
accounting identity equating the GDP deflator calculated from the production accounts with the
same deflator calculated from the expenditure accounts. Alternative price indices for the non-
capital components of final expenditure are available, or easily constructed. Combining these
with the revised production deflators calculated in Section II earlier, one can construct an
implicit GFCF deflator as part of the process of developing an internally consistent set of pro-
duction and expenditure accounts.

      Table XXI summarizes the growth of the expenditure accounts deflators, official and
alternative. While the standard Chinese statistical sources never report the deflators (or real
growth) of the expenditure components of GDP, Hsueh and Li provide some such information,
for the period 1978-1995, in their comprehensive (1999) review of Chinese national income
accounting methodology. At the top of the Table I list the growth of the implicit GDP deflator,



              of capital formation is construction (see below), which is deflated using the implicit
enterprise output deflator for the construction industry (Hsueh and Li, p. 148).


                                                 33
calculated from the production side of the accounts,52 along with my alternative estimates. The

expenditure share weighted average of the growth of the component deflators should equal this
number. To begin with the simplest item, private consumption expenditures, the Chinese
national accounts deflate these using various components of the consumerprice index, plus the

implicit enterprise deflator for construction.53 I replace the official deflators with the Consumer
Price Index, rural and urban,54 which report very similar inflation rates.

      Turning to government consumption, the official (Hsueh and Li 1999, p. 148) methodol-
ogy is to deflate government employee salaries by the consumption basket of those workers (I),
and the goods and service components of government purchases using the retail and service price
indices. Not only is this approach grossly incorrect, it is also, apparently, not implemented. At
5.6 percent per annum, the growth of the official government expenditure deflator is well below
the growth of the retail price index, the consumer price indices, or the (CPI) service price index.
The extremely slow growth of this deflator plays an important role in offsetting the high inflation

recorded in other components of the expenditure accounts, thereby bringing the officialexpendi-
ture accounts in line with the production side. To replace the official deflator, I calculate the

share of employee salaries (taken as the value of government output on the production side of the
accounts) in government expenditures, and arbitrarily divide the remainder, about 80% of the
total, equally between goods and services purchases. I then use these weights to construct an
expenditure deflator by combining the growth of the average wage of staff and workers in gov-




      52This is not, precisely, the official deflator as I replace the official Paasche weights with
Tornqvist weights, which raises the growth of the deflator .2 percent per annum (see footnote 23
in Section II)

      53Peculiarly, the consumption accounts include an adjustment for the depreciation of pri-
vate housing [Hsueh and Li, p. 147].
      54The rural CPI is only available from 1984 on. I extend it back to 1978 using the growth
of the urban CPI.



                                                 34
ernment and party agencies and social organizations55 with the growth of the retail and services
price indices.

      With regards to inventories, the official deflator divides inventory accumulation into agri-

cultural, industrial and commercial components and deflates these using price indices such as the
farm and sideline products procurement price index. I adopt a similar approach, using the
detailed capital formation accounts of the 26 province sample noted earlier to separate inventory

accumulation into primary, secondary and tertiary sectors, which I then deflate using the farm
and sideline products, ex-factory and retail price indices, respectively. Reassuringly,my mea-
sure of overall inventory inflation is close to the official estimate. Finally, for exports and

imports no official deflator, that I know of, has been circulated. From earlier work [Young
1999], I have quantity and value data on Hong Kong's trade with the Mainland during the period
1984-1996 broken down into 823 consistent import and 899 consistent export product categories.
I use these to construct a weighted unit value index for that period, and extend the analysis to the
years 1996-1998 and 1981-1984 using data on the values and quantities of principal import and

export products published in the CSY.56 For the period 1978-1981, I use the retail price index to

deflate both imports and exports.57 The import and export price indices show about 9 percent
inflation per annum, although the movement in dollar prices is considerably less, as the effective
yuan/dollar exchange rate58 depreciates 7.9 percent per annum.




             a 1.1 percent per annum adjustment to reflect the changing characteristics of work-
ers, as per my analysis of Section IV earlier.

       56The Hong Kong data account for an average of 30 and 19 percent of the value of Chinese
exports and imports, respectively, while the CSY data cover about 2/3 of the total value of
exports and imports in 1981-1984, and 1/3 of their value in 1996-1998. The CSY data only con-
tains about 150 export and 70 import categories. Consequently, for the period 1984-1996 I rely
on the Hong Kong data, which, despite its smaller share of the value of trade, contains much
finer product detail.
      57j hope to improve on this, with further unit value data, in a later draft.

                    by dividing the value of exports and imports in yuan by their value in dollars,
as reported in the CSY.



                                                 35
      Turning, finally, to fixed capital formation, the official deflator increases 7.0 percent per
annum between 1978 and 1995. Taking as given my estimates for the other elements of the
expenditure and production accounts, I produce an alternative GFCF deflator, as a balancing
residual, which grows 10.1 percent per annum during the same period. It is interesting to note
that the official deflator, which relies heavily on the enterprise deflators in secondary industry,
shows about .7 of the inflation recorded in the alternative GFCF price index, which is close to
the estimates, in Section II, of the bias in the secondary deflators. As another consistency check,
I note that between 1978 and 1998 the machine building industry component of theex-factory

price index increases 4.3 percent per annum, while the unit cost of construction activity, calcu-
lated from data on state and overall construction costs (see Section II and Appendix B) grows

10.6 percent per annum. Weighting these by the annual investment shares of machinery and
construction (with construction accounting for about .7 on average),59 one arrives at an annual
GFCF inflation rate of 8.9 percent for the 1978-1998 period. This compares, very favourably,

with the 8.8 percent 1978-1998 GFCF inflation rate calculated, as a residual, in Table XXI. In

sum, three independent ways of calculating the average growth of the GFCF deflator all yield
highly similar estimates.

      Figure IV below graphs the official and alternative GFCF deflàtors. For the period
1978-1998, I take as the alternative deflator the residual inflation calculated above. However, I
lack the price indices to reproduce this analysis for 1952 through 1977. Consequently, for that
period, I assume that officially recorded GFCF inflation is .7 of actual. As shown, the plan
period was one of relative price stability so that the notion that the official deflator is any multi-

ple of the underlying inflation rate amounts, in effect, to the assumption of a constant capital




      59j use the CSY data on fixed asset investment by use of funds (e.g. CSY 1999, Table 6-1).
These data include a category 'other', which encompasses not-capital costs such as training,
product research, etc. I remove these, focusing on equipment and construction alone. According
to Hsueh and Li (1999, p. ) many, but not all (e.g. research), of these elements are removed in
producing the national accounts estimates of GFCF.



                                                  36
deflator, With these deflators in hand, I calculate the capital stock using the perpetual inventory
method and a 6 percent depreciation rate. I initiate the capital stock in 1952 by assuming that the
real investment growth recorded in the first 5 years of the data extends into the infinite ast.6°

With 26 years of data before the beginning of the analysis, the initial capital stock is fairly irrele-
vant, and any assumption will do equally well.

      Table XXII summarizes my estimates of the growth of the capital stock. Using the official

deflators, the non-agricultural capital stock increases 9.2 percent per annum. With the alternative
deflator it grows only 7.7 percent. Despite a fairly constant investment to GDP ratio during the
reform period, both the official and alternative data indicate a falling non-agricultural capital-

output ratio, driven by an almost one percent annual increase in the relative price of capital.6' As

noted above, machinery prices are rising relatively slowly, but the growth of the price of
construction (whether measured officially or using alternative price indices) is very high, and
construction dominates fixed capital formation.




      60Specifically, the capital stock in 1952 is given by real investment in 1952 divided by .06
(the depreciation rate) plus the average annual growth of real investment between 1952 and
1957.

                  1978 and 1998 the official and alternative non-agricultural GDP deflators grow
5.5 and 7.9 percent per annum, respectively, while the corresponding capital deflators increase
6.3 and 8.8 percent per annum. I should note that, as described earlier, Hsueh and Li's data on
the official GFCF deflator ends in 1995. To compute the "official" estimates, I extend the defla-
tor to 1998 using the growth of the Price Index of Investment.



                                                 37
VI Factor Income Shares
      Table XXIII below reports the ratio of compensation of employees to GDP at factor cost in
the People's Republic, estimated using data from the national accounts and input-output tables.
As the reader can see, the figures produced by the two sources are in broad agreement, although
the data in the input-output tables are quite volatile. The overall economy-wide share of labour
appears to be about .6, while in the non-agricultural sector it averages slightly below .5. At first
glance, these figures appear to be somewhat low. As shown in Table XXIV, in my 1995 analysis

of total factor productivity growth in the newly industrialized countries, for example, I used(ad-
justed) shares of labour in non-agricultural activity on the order of .6, .7, and even .75. Only in
the case of Singapore did my estimate of the share of labour in non-agricultural activity fallas
low as .5. These figures, however, involve a modification of the underlying data. In Table
XXIV I also report the actual share of labour, i.e. compensation of employees divided by GDP at
factor cost, recorded by the national accounts and input-output tables of the NIICs. At this level,
the NICs are quite similar to the People's Republic, and to each other as well, with non-
agricultural labour shares of .5 appearing to be the norm, rather than the exception. To under-

stand the adjustments I made, why these were so minimal for Singapore and so substantial for
the other economies, and why no such adjustments are necessary for China, requires some
explanation of the methods of the national accounts.

      While the standard precepts of national income accounting require the imputation of some
sources of income (e.g. the implicit rental on owner-occupied housing), they explicitly exclude
such imputations in the case of labour. "Compensation of employees', as defined in the System
of National Accounts, includes all wages, salaries, and supplements earned by employees, the
value of any income in kind (lodging, etc) they receive from their employers, and employer pay-
ments for their social or private pensions. The implicit labour income of proprietors, unpaid

family members and the self-employed is supposed to be captured, along with elements of the
return to capital, under items such as "Income from unincorporated enterprises" [United Nations




                                                38
1953]. Since compensation of employees is restricted to employees, a natural adjustmentsug-
gests itself: Impute to each non-employee worker an hourly wage equal to the average hourly
wage of employees with the same age, sex and educational characteristics. Aggregating across
employee and non-employee hours of work then provides an estimate of total explicit and
implicit labour income. Multiplying the unadjusted share of labour (compensation of employees
over GDP at factor cost) in the national accounts by one plus the ratio of implicit to explicit
labour income yields an estimate of the "true" share of labour.62 This is theprocedure I used in

my 1995 analysis of the NICs. Unfortunately, it systematically overstates the share of labour.
      While national income accountants are not supposed to impute labour income to non-

employees, in practice they do so, albeit unintentionally. To understand why, the reader might
consider how he or she would go about constructing an estimate of total compensation of
employees in a data poor developing country. The cost shares of large incorporated enterprises
are somewhat known, from sectoral surveys or tax records. In the case of small unincorporated
enterprises, however, officials have little data, as the costs of data collection and monitoring limit
the information, where it exists, to the most basic items, e.g. declared output. Bereft of data, the
national income accountant can either assume that (a) unincorporated enterprises pay no com-

pensation of employees; or (b) that the share of compensation of employees in their total output
is the same as that appearing in larger incorporated enterprises. The latter assumption is more
palatable, and appears to be used in practice.63 Since the share of unpaid workers in small firms

is substantially higher than in large firms, this procedure automatically imputes labour income to
the unpaid workers of small firms. In Table XXV below I list my 1995 estimates of the adjusted




      62
             cannot use the estimates of implicit and explicit labour income drawn from labour
force survey and census data directly, as these typically do not include income in kind or pen-
sions. Multiplying by the national accounts estimate of compensation of employees scales for
these factors, as well as adjusting for any inconsistency between the overall level of employee
income reported by workers and firms.

      63See, for example, Republic of China [1997, pp. 235-239].


                                                 39
share of labour in sectors such as wholesale and retail trade and personal, social and community

services, which have large numbers of non-employee workers. Imputing an implicit income to
unpaid workers frequently results in a labour share exceeding one, as payments to labour more
than exhaust the total output of the sector'4 This is precisely what would arise if one double
counted the implicit income of unpaid workers.65

        The compensation of employees data reported by national income accountants lie some-
where between the accounting precepts of the System of National Accounts and a measure
involving a full imputation of the implicit labour income of unpaid workers. As a lower labour
share will typically yield lower estimates of total factor productivity growth, to avoid cricitism
on this dimension in Young 1995 I assumed that the national accounts followed, precisely, the
conventions of the SNA and made a full adjustment for the implicit income of unpaid workers.

The difference between Singapore and the other economies does not lie in the national income
data, but rather in the fact that Singapore has far fewer unpaid workers operating in small family

run enterprises. While my labour share estimates for Singapore are often criticized as being too
low, it is more likely the case that, if anything, the estimates for the other economies are too

high.

        lathe People's Republic, self employment is fairly rareY Moreover, the Chinese national
accounts impute labour income to the self-employed, assuming that where self-employment is
found (e.g. industry and construction), all income is labour income, and going so far as to con-



        64
              trends in the share of labour derive from the trends in the share of self-employed
workers (falling in wholesale & retail trade and rising in community, social & personal services)
as the unadjusted national accounts estimates of compensation of employees over GDP at factor
cost are fairly constant.

      651n a similar vein, Denison [1979, appendix G] found that business income (net of labour
and material payments) in unincorporated enterprises in the United States was insufficient to
cover an implicit labour and capital income equal to that of business sector employees and incor-
porated enterprise capital.
     66According to the CSY 1999 (Table 5-4) self-employed individuals accounted for only 3
percent of the working population in 1990. This figure rises to 9 percent by 1998.


                                                 40
elude that the entire output of some sectors, e.g. personal and social services, contains no capital

income component whatsoever, allocating all of the output of the sector between compensation
of employees and depreciation.67 Consequently, there is no reason to modify the reported Chi-
nese estimates of the share of labour. The share of labour in the non-agricultural economy in
China is similar to that reported in other economies. Once adjustment is made for unpaid
workers, the ratios of other economies are higher, which may or may not reflect an overstate-

ment. In either case, given the methodology of the Chinese national accounts and the small num-
ber of self-employed in that economy, this fact provides no basis on which to modify the Chinese
estimates. In this paper I use the average share of labour reported in the Chinese national
accounts, in preference over the more volatile figures of the input-output tables.




     67SeeHsuehandLi      1999, pp. 111, 114-l15& 123.




                                                41
VII Total Factor Productivity Growth
      Table XXVI summarizes this paper's deconstruction of Chinese growth during the reform
period. Using official data, the growth of output per capita, at 7.8 percent per annum, is unprece-
dented. If one substitutes the SSB's own price indices for its GDP deflators, the growth of out-

put per capita is reduced to 6.1 percent, an extraordinary, but not unheard of, achievement. From
here, the usual factors, present in other high growth economies, take over, Rising participation
rates lower the growth of output per worker to 5.2 percent. Removing the agricultural sector
raises the growth of GDP, but the growth of employment rises even further, lowering the growth
of labour productivity to 3.6 percent. Accounting for the ageing and improving educational
attainment of the workforce then brings this number down to 2.6 percent. The movement from

7.8 percent to 2.6 percent summarizes, in full, the main result of this paper. A few simple adjust-
ments reduce the Chinese growth experience to a reasonable and comprehensible number.

      Table XXVI also presents, as an afterthought, the growth of the output-capital ratio and
total factor productivity. The growth of total factor productivity is a moderate, but respectable,
1.4 percent per annum. As there is no capital-deepening (in fact, the opposite) this result, conve-
niently, reemphasizes a point I have made repeatedly in previous papers:68 Labour-deepening
(the rise in participation rates, transfer of labour out of agriculture, and improvements in

educational attainment) and not capital-deepening is the key force explaining the extraordinary
improvements in per capita living standards, in the presence of moderate total factor productivity
growth, achieved by the high growth economies of East Asia.

      The total factor productivity estimates of this paper should not, by any means, be taken as
definitive. As Table XXVI shows, if one merely accepts the official GDP deflators, but keeps all
other elements of the analysis unchanged, the growth of total factor productivity jumps to 3.0

percent. Beyond this, an impressive range of estimates is possible. A quick and dirty optimist




      68See Young 1995, 1994 and even 1992 (p. 62).



                                                 42
(Dr. Pangloss) might focus on the official (Laspeyres) growth of aggregate output per capita,

denying the improvements in participation rates, ignoring changes in the composition of the
workforce, and avoiding the difficult question of the validity of GFCP as a measure of the agri-
cultural capital stock,69 assume a constant capital-output ratio and a .7 labour share (in line with
the developed world), to produce a total factor productivity growth estimate of 5.6 percent per

annum. At the other extreme, the data mining pessimist (Dr. Doom) might take my estimates as
a baseline, but lower the growth of nominal output by 1 percent (to correct for exaggeration), use
the current official series on employment (with its discontinuity in 1990), and weight the growth

of human capital using Singaporean relative wages in 1980, to produce a non-agricultural total
factor productivity growth estimate of -0.4 percent per annum. These parodies highlight the ease
with which one can raise or lower estimates of total factor productivity growth. Hopefully, the
reader can make use of the lengthy discussion of data in this paper to adjust the estimates pres-
ented in Table XXVI and attach to them the appropriate standard error.




     69
                 frequently taken, explicitly or implicitly, in studies of total factor productivity.



                                                43
VIII Conclusion
      Having pressed through countless pages of dry data analysis, the reader should, arguably,
be rewarded with some free ranging interpretation and speculation. The finding of moderate
non-agricultural labour and total factor productivity growth can be viewed as either positive or
negative. On the one hand, when contrasted with the experience of other reforming economies,

sustained 2.6 percent labour productivity growth can be seen as nothing short of miraculous. On
the other hand, given that the estimates presented in this paper are by no means the lowest possi-

ble70, and given the presumed inefficiency of central planning, one might haveexpected greater

gains in a 'successfully' reforming economy. In this regard, moderate productivity growth
might be seen as reflecting enduring problems, such as the failure to reform state enterprises and
the inefficiencies introduced by local government intervention in industrial production and trade.
Both interpretations are valid, as the Chinese glass is, clearly, both half full and half empty.
      Like many magicians and alchemists, this paper buries its trickery in the setting of the

stage. Excluding agriculture, at the very beginning, from the analysis incorporates the transfer of
labour out of that sector as an input, while excluding agricultural total factor productivity growth

and the efficiency gains brought about by movement of labour from the measurement of output.
The sustained growth of agricultural output during the reform period, in light of its rapidly
declining share of the labour force, is a testament to the misguided nature of plan policies which

kept the peasantry tied up in agriculture, by restricting rural-urban migration and limiting the
development of rural non-agricultural activity, while saddling it with inefficient and alien organi-
zational structures. The reversal of these policies may be one of the greatest, and easiest,
achievements of the reforms, although agriculture remains distorted in many respects.7' A
proper analysis of the agricultural sector, lying well beyond the abilities of the techniques used in




      70 particular, there is no adjustment for the exaggeration of nominal growth.
      71E,g. with local procurement and price controls.



                                                 44
this paper, might find rapid productivity growth in that sector and large gains from the release of
its pent up "surplus" labour.

      Along with rising participation rates, educational attainment, and capital-investment, the
transfer of labour out of agriculture, whether driven by productivity growth in that sector or the

equalization of labour's marginal product with other sectors of the economy, has played an
important role in the growth of economies such as Korea and Taiwan. It plays an equally signifi-

cant role in fueling the growth of the People's Republic. Despite the popular academicemphasis
on industry and exports, a deeper understanding of the success of the world's most rapidly
growing economies may lie in that most fundamental of development topics: agriculture, land
and the peasant.




                                               45
IX Bibiliography
Chan, Kam Wing. 'Urbanization and Rural-Urban Migration in China since 1982," Modem
     China Vol. 20, No. 3 (July 1994), pp. 243-281.

Chen, Dong, and Zhili Niu, eds, Practical Manual on Economic Statistics of China (Zhongguo
     Ton1i ShiyonQ Daguan') (Beijing: China People's University Publishers, 1989).
Chen, Nai-Ruenn, Chinese Economic Statistics: A Handbook for Mainland China(Chicago:
     Aldine Publishing Company, 1967).
Denison, Edward F., Accounting for Slower Economic Growth: The United States in the 1970s
     (Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1979).
Hsueh, Tien-tung, and Qiang Li, eds, China's National Income. 1952-1995 (Boulder: Westview
     Press, 1999).

Hsueh, Tien-tung, Qiang Li and Shucheng Liu, eds, China's Provincial Statistics 1949-1989
     (Boulder: Westview Press, 1993).
Jorgenson, Dale W., Prank M. Gollop and Barbara M. Praumeni, Productivity and U.S.
      nomic Growth (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987).
Loehlin, John C., Latent Variable Models, 3rd ed. (New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
      1998).

People's Republic of China, State Statistical Bureau, China Population Statistics Yearbook
     (Zhonzguo Renkou TonQii Nianiian') (Beijing: China Statistical Publishing House, annual
     issues).
________ China Statistical Yearbook (Zhongguo Tong/i Nianiian') (Beijing: China Statistical
     Publishing House, annual issues).
         ,Tabulations of China 1 % Population Sample Survey (Zhongguo l987Nian 1%
     kou Chouvang Diaocha Ziliao') (Beijing: China Statistica Publishing House, 1988).
________ Tabulation on the 1990 Population Census of the People's Republic of China
     guo 1990 N/an Renkou Ton gfl Ziliao) (Beijing: China Statistical Publishing House, 1993).
________ 1982 Population Census of China (Zhongguo 1982 Nian Renkou Pucha Ziliao') (Beij-
     ing: China Statistical Publishing House.
________ 1995 Nian OuanQuo 1% Renkou Chouvanc' Diaocha Ziliao (Beijing: China Statis-
     tical Publishing House).
Republic of China, Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, National Income in
     Taiwan Area of the Republic of China 1997.

Ruoen, Ren, "China's Economic Performance in International Perspective." O.E.C.D. Develop-
     ment Centre manuscript, October 1995.




                                             46
Summers, Robert and Alan Heston, "Append 5.6: Appendix TABLE OF CONTENTS for a
    Space-Time System of National Accounts aka Penn World Table 5.6", text file accompa-
    flying Penn World Tables Version 5.6, December 1994.

United Nations, Department of Economic Affairs, A System of National Accounts and
     in Tables (New York: United Nations, 1953).
Woo, Wing Thye, "Chinese Economic Growth: Sources and Prospects", Manuscript, University
     of California, Davis, October 1995.
Young, Aiwyn, "A Tale of Two Cities: Factor Accumulation and Technical Change in Hong
    Kong and Singapore", in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
    nomics Annual 1992, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
________ "Lessons from the East Asian NICS: A Contrarian View", Euronean Economic
     Review 38(1994): 964-973.
________ "The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian
     Growth Experience", Quarterly Journal of Economics (August 1995): 641-680.
          "Transport, Processing and Information: Value Added and the Circuitous Movement
     of Goods", Manuscript, University of Chicago, May 1999.




                                            47
X Appendix A: Remaining Parameters of the Latent Variable Models
       Table A-I lists the remaining parameters of the latent variable models estimated in Section
II of the paper. To ensure that the covariance matrices are positive definite, Iuse a Cholesky
factorizatjon to estimate the covariance matrix of the latent inflation rates, and decompose the
variance of the orthogonal price specific errors into the product ofdiagonal standard error
matrices. In sum, I estimate the following covariance matrix:
      (3) ; = BCC'B'+PP'
where C is the lower-triangular Cholesky factorization and P is a diagonal matrix of the standard
errors of the price specific errors. In the case of the nominal shock model, the Cholesky factor-
ization refers to the real shocks v1, while a, measures the standard error of the nominal shock.


                  Table A-I: Remaining Parameters of Latent Variable Models
        Bi-factor model         Bi-factor model    Nominal shock model Nominal shock model
          (free means)        (constrained means)     (free means)      (constrained means)
         (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)
        Data     Simulated      Data     Simulated   Data    Simulated    Data     Simulated
C11     .097         .092       .076        .074       .032         in         .033         in
       (.0 15)     (.015)      (.016)      (.013)     (.010)     progress     (.010)     progress
C21     .050        .049        .052        .050       .030                    .033
       (.013)      (.013)      (.014)      (.013)     (.014)                  (.014)
C22     .047        .043        .043        .040       .038                    .040
       (.008)      (.008)      (.009)      (.008)     (.010)                  (.009)
        .024        .024        .033        .032       .011                    .013
       (.016)      (.017)      (.017)      (.018)     (.020)                  (.023)
C32     .061        .056        .055        .050       .059                    .067
       (.013)      (.013)      (.014)      (.015)     (.027)                  (.031)
C33     .000        .008        .017        .010       .004                    .008
       (.081)      (.012)      (.029)      (.015)     (.091)                 (.056)
                                                       .039                   .040
                                                      (.020)                 (.020)
        .029        .025        .020       .016        .000                   .000
       (.005)      (.007)      (.018)     (.013)      (.077)                 (.026)
        .016        .014        .014       .012        .016                   .016
       (.004)      (.005)      (.004)     (.006)      (.003)                 (.003)
        .049        .043        .049       .045        .049                   .049
       (.008)      (.009)      (.009)     (.009)      (.009)                 (.009)
        .000        .011        .040       .038        .000                   .000
       (.025)      (.013)      (.013)     (.010)      (.018)                 (.017)
12      .014        .012        .019       .017        .006                   .009
       (.006)      (.007)      (.006)     (.007)      (.017)                 (.012)
        .040        .032        .042       .035        .039                   .038
       (.007)      (.012)      (.012)     (.013)      (.010)                 (.010)




                                               48
XI Appendix B: Construction Deflators
       This appendix compares the alternative price index I develop for the construction industry
with other measures of construction cost inflation. As noted above, since 1990 the CSY has a
published an investment price index, and I use the construction component of that index to mea-
sure construction inflation in the period 1990-1998. I extend the index back to 1978using CSY
data on the unit cost (per sq. metre) of state capital construction (which excludes land cost,
demolition and removal and investment in outdoor supplementary projects). In Table B-I below
I compare the growth of the alternative price index with the official construction GDP deflator,
based upon the implicit enterprise output deflators, and other measures of construction costs,
which are available for various subperiods.72 While the alternative price index grows faster than
the official deflator, it shows considerably less inflation than the other potential candidates.
Since the other measures may be contaminated by increases in the cost of land, in developing my
six-sector measures of GDP growth (in Section II), I opt for my alternative construction price
index, which provides the most conservative alternative measure of construction costs. I should
note that all measures, including the official GDP deflator, show a large rise in the relative price
of construction, which underlies the rise in the relative price of capital discussed in Section V.



                       Table B-I: Measures of Construction Cost Inflation

                                             1978-98 1981-98 1983-98 1987-98 1994-98
Alternative Deflator                           10.6       10.8        11.1       10.7        3.2
Official Enterprise-based                       8.2
GDP Output Deflator
Overall Construction Investment!                          15.1
Floor Space of Buildings Completed
Value of Buildings Completed! Floor                                   12.5
Space (Urban Private Investment)
Cost of Buildings Completed                                           is.o
(Rural Private Investment)
Value of Commercial Building Sales/                                              14.7
Floor Space of Buildings Sold
Cost of Buildings Completed                                                                 10.6
(Real Estate Development Data)




     72All of the non-GDP data can be found in the section on Investment in Fixed Assets in the
annual issues of the CSY, with the GDP deflator coming from the section on National Accounts.


                                               49
             Table I: Gross Industrial Output and Value Added (100 million Yuan
            Gross Output                      of which:                         National Accounts
                                 State enterprises Township & village            Value Added
           Original Revised      Original Revised     Original Revised          Original Revised
 1990      23924 23924           13064  13064            4835                   6858.0     6858.0
 1991      28248      26625      14955  14955            5935                   8087.1     8087.1
 1992      37066      34599      17824 17824             8957        7166       10284.5   10284.5
 1993      52692 48402           22725 22725            13950        10537      14143,8   14143.8
 1994      76909 70176           26201      26201      23423         17760      18358.6 19359.6

  Note: "Original", CSY 1995; 'Revised", CSY 1996 and       later.




                Table II: Nonliflal GDP of the Service Sector    (100 million Yuan)
                                1994 CSY             1995 CSY                1999 CSY
               1978                 824.8                860.5                 860.5
               1980                 918.6                966.4                 966.4
               1984                1527.0               1769.8                1769.8
               1985                2119.2              2556.2                 2556.2
               1986                2431.0              2945.6                 2945.6
               1987                2851.2              3506.6                 3506.6
               1988                3656.0              4510.1                 4510.1
               1989                4491.6              5403.2                 5403.2
               1990                4946.9              5796.3                 5813,5
               1991                5797.5              7227.0                 7227.0
               1992                6863.4              9135.9                 9138.6
               1993                8485.4             11204.5                11323.8




                         Table Ill: Average Rates of Inflation (1978-1998)

Primary                Implicit Deflator                                                   8.5
Sector                 Farm & Sideline Products Purchasing Price Index                     7.9
Secondary              Implicit Deflator                                                   4.4
Sector                 Ex-Factory Industrial Price Index                                   6.1
                       Industrial Products Rural Retail Price Index                        5.3
                       Retail Price Index                                                  6.6
Tertiary               Implicit Deflator                                                   7.1
Sector                 Consumer Price Index (Services)                                    10,7
                                Table IV: Latent Variable Models
          Bi-factor model         Bi-factor model      Nominal shock model Nominal shock model
           (free means)         (constrained means)       (free means)      (constrained means)
           (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
          Data     Simulated     Data      Simulated     Data     Simulated      Data     Simulated
          .636        .654        .905        .902       1.32         in         1.31         in
         (.068)      (.083)      (.096)      (.087)     (.386)     progress     (.391)    progress
B5        .678        .680        .709        .711       .815                    .756
         (.065)      (.074)      (.049)      (.O52)     (.137)                  (.092)
Br        .753        .759        .688       .689        .765                    .630
         (.202)      (.247)      (.103)     (.106)      (.312)                  (.202)
                                                         2.72                    2.67
                                                        (.611)                  (.592)
Is                                                       1.35                    1.25
                                                        (.245)                  (.185)
Yr                                                       .913                    .830
                                                        (.411)                  (.397)
ir        .079       .080         .090       .092                                .065
         (.022)     (.023)       (.019)      (.020)                             (.022)
it5       .061       .063         .062        .064                               .060
         (.016)     (.017)       (.015)      (.017)                            (.016)
          .107       .110         .106        .109                               .116
        (.017)      (.018)       (.017)      (.018)                            (.036)
lnLR    209.99      220.86      204.99      214.62     212.72                  212.35
ln1L    214.70      225.45      214.70      220.49     214.70                  214.70
5%X 6.30             9.47        8.46        11.44       3.00                   4.75
P          21         21          18          18          25                     23

      Notes: LnLR and lnL report the model and unrestricted ln likelihood, respectively. 5% X
= 5% critical value for difference between unrestricted and restricted
                                                                       ln likelihoods, according to
chi squared and simulated distribution. "P" =
                                              parameters used in estimating the 21 covariance
and 6 mean moments.
               Table V: Estimated Growth of Real GDP (1978-1998)

                                               Aggregate        Non-Agricultural
Official                                            .091             .106
Alternative                                         .074             .081




              Table VI: Six-Sector Double-Deflated Growth Estimates
              Inflation by sector           Official           Adjusted
     Primary                                 .085                   .079
     Industry                                .040                   .061
     Construction                            .082                   .106
     Transport                               .073
     Wholesale & retail trade                .070                   .066
     Other Services                          .069                   .107
              Growth of real GDP          Aggregate        Non-Agricultural
     Output deflators                        .077                   .086
     Value added deflators                   .072                   .080




            Table VII: Chinese Population and Labour Force Data (millions)
                      China Statistical Yearbook              Census Sources
                Population           Employment            Population Working
                               Old Series    Revised                  Population
     1978          963             402         402
     1982          1017             453       453            1008          522

     1989          1127             553       553
     1990          1143             567       639            1134          647

     1997          1236             637       696
     1998          1248             624       700
   Growth:
    82-90          1.5              2.8       4.3             1.5            2.7
    78-98          1.3              2.2       2.8

       Notes: Total population numbers include the military, while the working
  population figures do not. 'Old series' employment data for 1997-1998 based
  upon author's calculations.
                         Table Vifi: Participation Rates by Age and Sex
                         1982 Census             1990 Census              1997 Survey
                          M       F                       F               M        F
         Overall         .57       .47           .61     .53              .62      .56
          15-19          .71       .78           .62     .68              .44      .47
         20-24           .96       .90           .93     .90              .92     .89
         25-29           .99       .89           .98     .91              .97     .91
         30-34           .99       .89           .99     .91              .98     .92
         35-39           .99       .88           .99     .91              .98     .92
         40-44           .99       :83           .99     .88              .98     .91
         45-49           .97       .71           .98     .81              .97     .85
         50-54           .91       .51           .93     .62              .93     .72
         55-59           .83       .33           .84     .45              .82     .53
         60-64           .64       .17           .63     .27              .62     .37
           65            .30       .05           .33     .08              .34     .16
             Note: 1982 and 1990 Census exclude military personnel from the numerator
        and denominator. 1997 data do not specify.


                                 Table IX: Demographic Trends

                  Distribution by Age Group                    Surviving/Original Members
          1982 Census    1990 Census     1997 Survey           1990/1982
           M      F        MF               MP                 M       F        M
                                                                                 1997/1990
                                                                                         F
 0-4       .10     .09     .10     .10     .07     .06         1.03   1.03      1,09     1.10
 5-9       .11     .11     .09     .09     .10     .09         0.99   0.99      1.02     1.01
10-14      .13     .13     .09     .09     .09     .09         0.97   0.98      0.84     0.85
15-19      .12     .13     .11     .11     .08     .07         1.01   0.99      0.89     0.95
20-24      .07     .07     .11     .11     .08     .08         1.03   0.99      0.98     1.02
25-29      .09     .09     .09     .09     .10     .11         0.98   0.98      1.02     1.05
30-34      .07     .07     .08     .07     .10     .10         0.99   0.99      0.99     1.03
35-39      .06     .05     .08     .08     .06     .06         0.97   0.98      1.01     1.05
40-44      .05     .05     .06     .06     .08     .08         0.96   0.97      1.03     1.08
45-49      .05     .05     .04     .04     .06     .06         0.93   0.95      1.00     1.08
50-54      .04     .04     .04     .04     .05     .05         0.90   0.93      0.99     1.08
55-59      .03     .03     .04     .04     .04     .04         0.83   0.88      0.95     1.03
60-64      .03     .03     .03     .03     .04    .04          0.74   0.81      0.89     0.95
65         .04     .06     .05     .06     .07    .08          0.47   0.54      0.61     0.67
              Table X: Distribution of the Working Population by Economic Sector
                      Labour Force of Society                       Population Census
                   Agricultural   Non-agricultural            Agricultural    Non-agricultural
  1978                  .71                .29
  1982                  68                 .32                     .73                 .27
  1990                 .60                 .40                     .72                 .28
  1998                 .53                 .47
absolute growth
 82-90                  1.3                5.6                    2.5                  3.3
  78-98                0.8                 4.5




                          Table Xl: Industrial* Employment (millions)
             Labour Force of Society        Population Census              Industrial Census
  1982                  72                          72
  1985                  83                                                        94
  1990                  97                          87
  1995                 110                                                       147
absolute growth
 82-90                 3.7                         2.4
 85-95                 2.8                                                       4.5
        (*) Mining, manufacturing & utilities, i.e. the secondary sector other than construc-
tion.




                          Table XII: Consistency between National
                              Income, Wage & Employment Data
                          (non-agricultural growth rates, 1978-1998)
                       Nominal GDP                                 16.1
                       Weighted wages                              12.5
                       Share of labour                               1.4
                       Implied employment growth                     5.0

                       Reported employment growth                        4.5
 Table XIII: Distribution of the Working Population by Sex, Education and Age Characteristics

                 1982     1987
                                                                                          Age Group
                                 1990    1995
          M      .563     .555   .550    .543    .535            <20       .178    .140     .120   .070
          F      .437     .445   .450    .457    .465           20-24      .133    .191     .177   .138   .120
                                                                25-29      .167    .119     .152          .167
                        Educational Attainment                  3 0-34     .132    .144     .123          .164
                 1982 1987 1990 1995            1997           35-39       .098    .114     .127   .116   .103
     None        .282 .229 .169 .126            .116           40-44       .085    .083     .092          .124
  Primary        .344 .363 .378 .372            .348           45-49       .077    .069     .068   .088   .095
Secondary        .366 .396 .434 .473            .501           50-54       .057    .059     .055   .060
  Tertiary       .009 .012 .019 .029            .035           55-59       .038    .041     .042   .044   .045
                                                               60-64       .021 .023        .024   .027   .031
                                                                           .015 .017        .019   .020   .029



              Table XIV: Rise in the Educational Attainment of 1982 Census Cohorts
           1982 Distribution by Age Shift in Distribution 1982-90                 Increase (millions) 1982-90
            N     p              T     N        P       S     T                      N      P       S      T
15-19      .094 .282 .619 .005              -.029 -.000 .004             .025      -3.67 -0.18 0.18 3.15
20-24      .143 .231 .617 .009             -.043        .044 -.014       .014      -3.13 3.51       1.06
25-29      .224 .335 .432 .008             -.070        .054 .004        .011      -6.70 4.40 -0.35 1.01
30-34     .262 .443     .287 .008          -.070        .041   .018      .010      -5.23 2.61 1.08
35-39     .280 .431     .275 .014          -.046        .024 .013        .008      -2.81 0.67 0.33 0.42
40-44     .387    .385 .206 .022           -.039        .022   .011      .006      -2.51 0.33 0.15 0.23
45-49     .521    .331 .131 .016           -.039    .026 .009            .004      -3.27 0.16 -0.01 0.15
50-54     .617 .272 .101          .009     -.027    .021 .003            .003      -3.22 -0,19 -0.23 0.07
55        .759 .187 .051          .004     -.026    .019 .006            .002     -28.76 -5.18 -1.36 -0.02
        Note: N, P, S & T denote "none", "primary", "secondary" and "tertiary", respectively.
            Table XV: Proportion of Individuals Reporting Tertiary and Secondary
                 Education Attained through Adult Education (1995 Survey)

                                      Tertiary                       Upper Secondary
                               Male              Female             Male        Female
             15-19
             2 0-24             .29               .35               .07          .08
             25-29              .36               .40               .08          .08
             30-34              .47               .52               .07          .07
             35-39              .58               .59               .07          .08
             40-44             .59                .55               .12          .14
            45-49              .52                .46               .14          .12
             50-54             .32                .23               .12          .08
             55-59             .22                .14               .11          .07
             60-64             .22                .14               .11           08
             >65               .17                .09               .09          .06



                      Table XVI: Mainstream and Adult Education (1998)
                                       Mainstream                               Adult
                                                        Full-time                         Full-time
                          Students Graduates            Teachers     Students Graduates   Teachers
Primary                   139538         21174            5819          5386     5485         64
Secondary                     73407      21241            4312         66760    88530        342
 peasant technical training                                            59830    82019        140
Tertiary                       3409         830           407
                                                           2822                   826         97
     Note: bOOs of persons. 5: CSY 1999, Tables 20-1 & 20-21.
    Table XVII: Consistency between 1990 Census and 1995 Sample Survey
         Growth of 1990                          Shift in educational
             cohort size                      distribution by age cohort
            M          F                    N          P             S   T
  0-4      1.13      1.13
  5-9      1.09      1.09
 10-14    0.94       0.94         20-24   -.012     -.001     .006     .007
 15-19    0.86       0.93         25-29   -.014      .018    -.012     .008
 20-24    0.95       1.03         30-34   -.019      .012    -.002     .009
 25-29    1.01       1.07         35-39   -.022      .014     .000     .007
 30-34    1.00       1.05        40-44    -.017      .017    -.006     .006
 35-39    1.04       1.08        45-49    -.013      .015    -.007     .005
 40-44    1.05       1.10         50-54   -.015      .012    -.003     .006
 45-49    1.04       1.10         55-59   -.007      .008    -.006     .005
 50-54    1.02       1.07          60     -.022      .016     .003     .003
 55-59    1.00       1.06
 60-64    0.96       1.03
  65      0.75       0.80
      Note: Growth of cohort size includes military personnel in both population
estimates. Shift in educational distribution does not include military personnel in
1990 figures. N, P, S & T denote "none", "primary", 'secondary" and "tertiary",
respectively.
                         Table XVIII: Measures of Worker Characteristics

               1982                         1990                                       1995
Baseline      Census                      Census                      Age 1990 Census population cohorts
               data                         data                      and apply 1995 educational distribu-
                                                                      tion and sex x age x education partici-
                                                                      pation rates.
Alternative   Census          Age 1982 Census cohorts,                Age alternative 1990 cohorts, retain-
               data           retaining 1982 educational dis-         ing 1990 educational characteristics,
                              tribution, and apply 1990 sex x         and apply 1995 sex x age x education
                              age x education participation           participation rates.
                              rates.

Distribution of working population:
                             Sex                                                   Age Group
                    Baseline        Alternative                              Baseline
              1982     1990 1995         1990 1995                       1982 1990 1995     1990 1995
    M         .563     .550      .552    .550   .552            <20      .178   .120   .075     .120
    P         .437     .450      .448    .450 .448         20-24         .133   .177   .157     .177    .157
                                                           25-29         .167   .152   .174     .152    .174
                                                           30-34         .132   .123   .142     .123    .142
                  Baseline               Alternative       35-39         .098   .127   .115     .127    .115
              1982 1990 1995             1990   1995       40-44         .085 .092     .117     .092    .117
None          .282     .169     .119     .195   .152       45-49         .077 .068     .082     .068    .082
Primary       .344     .378     .369     .361   .346       50-54         .057 .055     .056     .055   .056
Secondary     .366     .434     .483     .429   .481       55-59         .038 .042     .041     .042   .041
Tertiary      .009     .019     .029     .015   .021       60-64         .021 .024     .024     .024   .025
                                                            65           .015 .019     .017     019    .017
         Table XIX: Ln Wage Profiles by Employee Characteristics (relative to base group)
                                 China                   Hong      Singapore     South          Taiwan
                                                         Kong                    Korea
                       1986              trend           1981        1980         1980              1980
 education:

none               -.32 (.022)    .001 (.007)            -.08         8               II            -.33
primary               Base            Base              Base        Base         Base           Base
secondary          .16 (.008) .000 (.002)                 .42         .94         .44                .22
tertiary           .25 (.010)     .015 (.002)            1.09        1.60         .99                .51
      age:
<20            -.25C014) -.014C004)                      -.37         8          -.30               -.28
20-24                 Base         Base                 Base        Base        Base            Base
25-29              .30 (.010) -.000 (.002)                .24        .49          .29            .26
30-34              .49 (.009) -.003 (.002)                .39        .76          .36               .41
35-39              .54 (.009) .007 (.002)                 .39        .87          .39               .51
40-44              .58 (.009)     .011 (.002)             .35        .90          .45               .54
45-49              .66 (.010) .004 (.002)                 .37        .96          .49               .53
50-54              .71 (.011) -.001 (.003)                .36       1.04          .58               .54
55-59              .67 (.014) .004 (.003)                 .27        .90          .54               .47
60-64              .60 (.023) -.074 (.006)                .14        .59          .69               .38
65                 .55C033) -.118C009)                   -.07         11          11                .16
      sex:
male                  Base      Base                    Base       Base         Base            Base
female         -.12 (.005) -.004 (.001)                  -.44      -.47          -.55            -.37
       Note: ft or 8 signify "included in adjacent group". Standard errors in parentheses.




                             Table XX: Growth of Human Capital (1978-98)
                                                          Income Weights
                                   China         HK         SI     SK          TW          Avg. NIC
     Original                      .011          .011       .019     .010      .011          .013
     Baseline                      .011          .011       .018     .010      .011          .013
     Alternative                   .010          .010       .016     .009      .010          .011
     Non-agricultural              .008          .012       .017     .010      .008          .012
        Table XXI: Growth of Official and Alternative Deflators
                                     Official          Alternative
                                    1978-95        1978-95     1978-98
GDP (Production)                       7.1             8.9        8.1

Farm Consumption                         7.1           7.8        7.1
Non-farm Consumption                     8.4           8.6        7.8
Government Consumption                   5.6           9.4        9.2
Inventories                              7.9          7.8         6.5
Exports                                  NA           11.3        9.5
Imports                                  NA           11.0        8.8
GFCF                                     7.0         10.1         8.8



        Table XXII: Non-Agricultural Growth Rates (1978-98)
                               Capital          CapitallOutput
        Official Data           9.2                  -1.4
        Alternative             7.7                  -0.4
       Table XXIII: Share of Labour in GDP at Factor Cost
                   National Accounts         Input-Output Tables
                   GDP       Non-Agri.        GDP       Non-Agri.
    1978            .57           .42
    1979            .59           .42
    1980            .58          .43
    1981            .60          .43
    1982            .61          .44
    1983            .61          .43
    1984            .61          .44
    1985            .60          .45
    1986            .60          .46
    1987            .59          .46           .60          .49
    1988            .59          .47
    1989            .59          .47
   1990             .61          .49           .63          .52
   1991             .60          .49
   1992             .58          .48           .52          .40
   1993             .59          .50
   1994             .59          .51
   1995             .61          .53           .54          .44
   1996
   1997                                       .63           .56
 Average            .60          .46          .58           .46
      Note: 1-0 data for 1987 and 1990 calculated from GDP at
market prices and include under labour remuneration a residual
category, "other", consisting of some payments to labour and ele-
ments of enterprise material consumption.
   Table XXIV: Non-Agricultural Labour Shares in the NICs (as estimated in Young 1995)
                           Adjusted                                  Unadjusted
               HK         SI      SK        fly            HK        SI      5K        TW
1961            .62                                        .50
1966                                        .74                                         .55
1970            .66      .50       .69      .74            .56       .39      .47       .53
1975            .67                .63                     .55                .45
1980            .57      .53       .76      .74            .49       .44      .50       .55
1985            .62                .70                     .53                .49
1990            .60      .48       .78      .76            .52      .43       .56       .59
Average         .62      .50       .71      .75            .53      .42       .49       .56
      Note: Hong Kong data for 1970 on refer to the year plus one, e.g. 1971 instead of 1970.
Hong Kong and Singapore data refer to the entire economy, but the agricultural sectors are
negligible.



        Table XXV: Non-Agricultural Labour Shares by Sector in Korea and Taiwan
                 (adjusted for unpaid workers, as estimated by Young 1995)
            Wholesale &        Community,                    Wholesale &      Community,
             retail trade social & personal                    retail trade social & personal
                                 services                                        services
South Korea                                      Taiwan
   1970           1.20              0.98            1966           1.50             0.98
   1975           1.01              0.96            1970           1.92             1.06
   1980           0.95              1.04            1980           1.18             1.03
   1985           0.86              1.04            1990           1.09             1.02
   1990           0.68              1.07
                Table XXVI: Gold into Base Metals
                  (Chinese growth rates, 1978-98)
                                   Official         Adjusted
      Aggregate
Output per Capita                    7.8              6.1
Output per Worker                    6.9              5.2
      Non-Agricultural
Output per Worker                    6.1              3.6
Output per Effective Worker          5.0              2.6
Output per Unit of Capital           1.4              0.4
Total Factor Productivity            3.0              1.4
NO
.2                                     N-
                                       a)
C)                                     a)
a-
                                       U)
E
'I                                    a)
                                      0)
 0
"-
 a)                                   a
                                      CO
                                      a)
C)
-S
                                      ra
                                      a
C,
I-                                    0)

'C
                                      r
                                      cc
                                      0)

IC
-S                                    cc
                                      r
                                      a
0
1.
a                                     U)
                                      cc
                                      0)
0
C                                     Ct)

a                                     cc
                                      a
                                      1
I.
                                      cc
C)                                    a
C)                                    a
it                                    r
                                      a
      C'J
      d
            LU   r0 P
                    U)   o   U)
                             C
            C        C       9    9
                   Figure II: Investment over GDP
                                   Inventories U GFCF
0.5



0.4



0.3




  0
      1952 1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996




           Figure III: Agricultural Share of Investment
0.15




 0.1




0.05




  0
       1952 1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996
             —- State Capital Construction -4— Provincial National Accounts
    Figure IV: Official and Alternative GFCF Deflators (1 978=1 .00)
7




0
    1952 1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996

                        —9— Official —e-- Alternative
