                                   '%()          




                                        


                                      
                                            !"#
                                         $%


                                         %&$*+*,
                                 !!$-..///0&.$$1./*+*,



                         ( '  (2( (223
                                 456511"1!!17"
                                   208594,+
                                      $!09555



                              
            ! " !  "  "
  #      $  $%    & '    &  !  &   (
)       *++,-  #        *++.  -  
      *++./ $     0  *++.12/$& 3     *+++
&&               4  5 '    6  &   5 '      
5 '                   1     1 
-   !  !     &' '   7  8   9 (  ' :    
  '4:                   1  
2  /       $ 

;<===-   &   $ >#& 0$     '&
    :   :  4   ? 4   :     '  
     ;  '     
      
                   !  
"#$!%  "%&'&(
 )*+++
,$"%-(+-(.-(/



                                               $%#%

        !     %001% )%0 %  0 ) % %%0%
0  % % 20 %      0    0 %
 %       0%           %%  )0 % % 
 0%      1 %   0%% %      %%
 %00 %%  0%          2   %0 0%
% %      % % 3    1 %0  1%%
 % 1%          1 %0 % 1% 
     


                                                  
4 -      %%%0#                                   5%%0#  
6  %0)                                            7% 6 
) 89*:+                                               '+:; 
                                                                   *8++" 
                                                                   5% ) 7;.(*8+
                                                                       "#$
                                                                    <%)%%= 

  !  
5%%0#  
7% 6 
'*.; 
*8++" 
5% ) 7;.(*8+
1. Introduction

    In this paper, we investigate a sample of 325 firms that decrease the number of segments they

report for the first time from 1979 to 1994. A key feature of our sample is that it permits us to

take into account the performance of segments in our analysis. We first investigate why firms are

in our sample. A firm can stop reporting a segment because it divests it as a whole, sells it off

piecemeal, discontinues its operations without asset sales, or restructures it (perhaps only to the

extent of changing its reporting) so that it is incorporated into another segment. We find that 168

firms in our sample divest the segment they stop reporting. We then investigate why some firms

in our sample divest a segment while others do not. Finally, we attempt to explain why a

particular segment is divested or no longer reported.

    The empirical literature has examined three reasons for asset divestitures: (1) to have specific

assets operated by those who could operate them most efficiently (efficiency hypothesis); (2) to

make the firm operate more efficiently by reducing its degree of diversification (focusing

hypothesis); and (3) to relax credit constraints for the firm (financing hypothesis). These reasons

are not mutually inconsistent. The literature on divestitures has generally found a positive stock-

price reaction to the announcement of divestitures. In some papers, such as Hite, Owers, and

Rogers (1987), this positive stock-price reaction has been interpreted as evidence of the efficiency

hypothesis. More recent papers, starting with John and Ofek (1995), show that the stock-price

reaction is more positive for firms that divest assets not related to their core activities. These

papers attribute this effect to the benefit of increased corporate focus. Lang, Poulsen, and Stulz

(1994) find evidence that selling firms are poorly performing and financially constrained.

    The hypotheses explaining asset divestitures in the literature have implications for firm and

segment performance prior to the divestiture and for the type of assets divested. The financing

hypothesis implies that firms that divest assets are financially constrained. The focusing

hypothesis predicts that divesting firms are poor diversifiers. To the extent that unrelated

diversification is inefficient, the focusing hypothesis predicts that firms divest unrelated

segments. The efficiency hypothesis does not have a strong prediction for firm performance,


                                                 1
since a firm could have a segment that could be operated more efficiently by another firm even

though it is performing well. It does predict, however, that divested segments perform poorly

relative to their industry. Finally, the financing hypothesis implies that firms are more likely to

divest segments that drain their resources. We call sample firms that do not divest a segment

restructuring firms for simplicity, even though some of the firms only change their accounting.

We call segments no longer reported but not divested restructured segments. One would expect

restructuring firms to be poor performers that are under pressure to do better and stop reporting

one or more segments as part of an effort to improve their performance.1

    The firms in our sample are poor performers, invest less than their benchmark firms, and have

large diversification discounts. In logit regressions predicting whether a diversified firm stops

reporting a segment, the diversification discount (calculated as in Berger and Ofek (1995)) and

Tobin's q are the only clearly significant variables. We find that divesting firms and restructuring

firms are remarkably similar, so that traditional firm performance measures do not distinguish

between these firms. This leaves us with a puzzle, namely why it is that among apparently similar

firms that stop reporting a segment, some firms divest and others do not.

    We show that asset liquidity can help resolve this puzzle and that it helps in understanding

which segment a firm divests. As Shleifer and Vishny (1992) emphasize, the market for corporate

assets is like any other market. For a transaction to take place, there has to be a buyer and a seller.

If a firm wants to divest an asset, it has to find a buyer. If it is selling an asset in a liquid market,

the firm can sell the asset quickly at a price close to its "fundamental value" in the language of

Shleifer and Vishny. However, if the market for the asset is not liquid, the firm has to offer a

liquidity premium to attract a buyer. Selling the asset in an illiquid market may therefore yield a

price below the firm's reservation price, so that no sale takes place. Consequently, we would

expect firms in our sample to be more likely to divest a segment if the segment can be sold in a

liquid market.
1
  See John, Lang, and Netter (1992) for an investigation of restructuring firms. Berger and Ofek (1999)
provide evidence of pressure from the market for corporate control on firms that are inefficient in their
diversification efforts.


                                                   2
    Shleifer and Vishny argue that in periods when an industry has difficulties, it is harder for

firms to sell assets to raise cash because the potential buyers who are best able to evaluate the

assets are themselves financially constrained. Pulvino (1998) provides supportive evidence. This

argument implies that diversified firms with core activities in poorly performing industries are

more likely to sell non-core assets. This is because the bidders for core assets with the most

expertise would be other firms in the financially constrained industry.

    The microstructure literature has investigated liquidity in financial markets extensively. It has

used bid-ask spread, market depth, and volume among measures of liquidity. Markets for

corporate assets do not have market makers who hold an inventory of corporate assets to facilitate

transactions, so that bid-ask spreads and market depth are not available for such markets. Shleifer

and Vishny argue that a high volume of transactions in an industry is evidence of high liquidity

since it means that discounts that sellers have to offer to attract buyers are less of an obstacle.

Consequently, we use the volume of transactions as a measure of liquidity. We construct an

industry liquidity index by taking the ratio of the value of corporate transactions (excluding the

segment divested) to the value of assets at the 2-digit SIC code level. While this is not a perfect

measure, its explanatory power is strong. In logit regressions, segment liquidity is the only

variable that helps explain why some sample firms divest a segment while others do not.

    If liquidity matters, it should also help predict which particular segment a firm divests. We

find that this is the case. A firm is more likely to divest a non-core segment than a core segment if

the firm's non-core segments are more liquid than its core segments. In regressions predicting

which segment a firm divests, the segment liquidity index has a significant positive coefficient.

The performance of the segment also matters: segments with poorer cash flow performance are

more likely to be divested. In our sample, however, industry-adjusted performance is less

important than absolute performance. This appears inconsistent with the efficiency hypothesis,

since poor industry-adjusted performance indicates that a segment could be more efficiently

managed outside the firm. The result is consistent with the financing hypothesis, however, since

segments with low cash flow aggravate the firm's financing constraints. Alternatively, it could be


                                                 3
that a segment's performance relative to its industry is not indicative of efficiency gains that could

be achieved through a divestiture.

    The probability that a segment will no longer be reported, either because of a divestiture or a

restructuring, is inversely related to the segment's size, measured as segment sales over firm sales.

Size could play an important role for three reasons. First, a segment might no longer be reported

simply because it is too small to be covered by reporting requirements. This explanation has

some validity, but it is incomplete because size seems more important in predicting which

segments get divested than in predicting which segments are restructured. Second, small

segments might be segments in which the firm has less of a comparative advantage. Maksimovic

and Philips (2000a) provide a theoretical model where this would be the case and find supportive

evidence in a contemporaneous paper using plant-level data (Maksimovic and Philips (2000b)).

Another possible explanation for the role of size is that, as argued by Shleifer and Vishny (1992),

the market for corporate assets is less liquid as size increases. We investigate these possible

explanations for the importance of size as a determinant of firms' choice of which segment to

divest. However, none of these explanations appears strong enough to explain the significance of

segment size.

        The paper proceeds as follows. We introduce our sample in Section 2. In Section 3, we

show that firms in our sample are poor performers and that firms that divest rather than

restructure a segment are worse performers. In section 4, we compare divested, restructured, and

segments still reported, which we call retained segments. Section 5 concludes.



2. The sample

    To investigate divestiture decisions, we start with a sample of firms that decrease the number

of reported industry segments in the period 1979-1994. For fiscal years ending after December

15, 1977, SFAS No. 14 requires that firms report information for segments that represent 10

percent or more of consolidated sales. The Business Information file of Compustat collects this

information. We use the Compustat Full-Coverage Industry Segment File (CISF) database,


                                                  4
including the Research Tapes, to identify these firms.2 We exclude firms that have either a

Compustat SIC or an Industry Segment Identification code (SID) between 6000 and 6999

(Financial Services Industry), 4900 and 4999 (Regulated Utilities). We also exclude American

Depository Receipts.

    We include firms with assets in excess of $100 million that decrease their number of

segments for the first time. As reported by Hyland (1997), firms sometimes change their number

of segments without changing their activities. We therefore investigate each firm using LEXIS

NEXIS to identify firms where the decrease in the number of segments corresponds to an actual

transaction reported in the financial press.3 We also search the SDC Mergers and Acquisitions

database for transactions involving our sample firms and check whether these transactions

correspond to segment divestitures. Our sample of segment divestitures includes all segments no

longer reported for which we find either a transaction in the SDC database or an announcement of

an actual transaction in the financial press. We call segments no longer reported but not divested

restructured segments. These criteria result in an initial sample of 325 firms with total assets in

excess of $100 million. Of these 325 firms, 168 divest segments and 157 restructure segments.

    Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on the final sample of 325 firms. The distribution of

segments no longer reported, restructured, and divested by year is shown in panel A of Table 1.

The highest number of segments no longer reported occurred in 1981 with 38 cases. There are

more events in the first half of the sample period than in the second half. Half of the restructuring

events have taken place by the end of 1983 while half of the divestitures have taken place by the

end of 1985. We would expect such an outcome since our sample includes only the first instance

where a firm reports fewer segments.

    Panel B of Table 1 reports the decrease in the number of segments in year (0) relative to year

(-1). It shows that 267 firms decreased the number of segments by one, 46 firms by two, and 12


2
  The Full-Coverage File consists of all companies that file 10-K’s with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
3
  The following sources are used in LEXIS NEXIS: PR Newswire, The Financial Times, Reuters Financial
Service, The New York Times, The Chicago Tribune, Business Wire, and The Wall Street Journal.


                                                 5
firms by three segments or more. The decrease in the number of segments does not correspond to

the number of segments that firms stop reporting. This is because, in a number of cases, firms that

restructure in year t stop reporting all their existing segments of year t-1. In this case, they report

either only one segment in year t or one segment fewer than they did at t-1, but all the segments

have a new name. As a result, 27 firms that had more than two segments before the restructuring

do not report any pre-existing segment after the restructuring. We find that firms that restructure a

segment stop reporting 382 segments, or 2.43 segments per firm. In contrast, firms that divest a

segment stop reporting 207 segments, or 1.23 segments per firm.

    We used annual reports to investigate what happened to the restructured segments, namely

the segments no longer reported but not divested. We had annual reports available for 93 firms.

For these 93 firms, 38 annual reports were uninformative. Twelve firms indicated that they

changed their reporting. Ten firms discussed a restructuring that involved the merging of a

segment into another. Nineteen firms reported discontinued operations and sales of some assets,

while seven firms reported sales of assets without discontinuing operations. Finally, two firms

reported a spinoff. There is a possibility that some of the firms that report sales of assets and a

spinoff should not be in the restructuring sample but instead should be in the divesting sample.

However, we did not find a transaction corresponding to a segment divestiture for any of these

firms. As a robustness check, we re-compute and re-estimate all our results without these firms.

Removing these firms from the restructuring sample does not change our results.


3. Characteristics of firms reducing the number of segments


3.1. Benchmark portfolios

     In this section, we examine whether firms that decrease their number of reported segments

are poor performers, are financially constrained, and are poor diversifiers. We also evaluate the

performance of firms that divest and firms that restructure. To investigate the performance and

financial condition of our sample firms, we compare firms in our sample to benchmark portfolios.



                                                  6
Since we are trying to understand why firms decrease their number of reported segments, the

most natural comparison firms are firms that are diversified and do not decrease their number of

segments. Therefore, to find comparison firms, we construct portfolios consisting of a minimum

of five firms in the same annual sales decile 4 as the sample firm, with the same number of

segments as the sample firm in the year before it stops reporting a segment, and require that the

comparison firms do not divest segments during the year the sample firm stops reporting a

segment. For this comparison, we start with the 284 firms for which the necessary Compustat

data is available and compare as many sample and benchmark pairs as the data permit.


3.2. Size, growth, investment, and diversification efficiency

       Table 2 compares median values of characteristics of sample firms and benchmark firms. The

use of medians is common when comparing firm characteristics to avoid having the result

dominated by a few observations. We indicate when results differ using means, but our

conclusions would be similar using means rather than medians. Sample firms are slightly smaller

than benchmark firms in terms of market value of equity. By construction, sample and benchmark

firms have similar sales. Sample firms are growing significantly more slowly than benchmark

firms. We find that asset growth, sales growth, capital expenditures growth, and cash flow growth

are all significantly lower for sample firms. The ratio of capital expenditures to total assets for

sample firms is slightly more than half that for benchmark firms. The fact that sample firms

invest so little compared to benchmark firms is consistent with these firms being more financially

constrained or having poorer investment opportunities. Sample firms have a significantly lower

Tobin's q when proxied by the ratio of the firm's market value to the value of its assets. We

compute the diversification discount measure of Berger and Ofek (1995) and find that the sample

firms have a substantially larger diversification discount. We estimate the Rajan, Servaes, and


4
    Size deciles are based on annual sales deciles of all firms listed on Compustat.




                                                        7
Zingales (2000) diversity measure and find that it does not differ between sample firms and

benchmark firms. Consequently, our evidence supports the hypothesis that sample firms are

poorer performers and, despite lower leverage, appear to be more financially constrained than

benchmark firms.


3.3. Cash flow and financial condition

    In the third part of Table 2, we also report measures of cash flow, cash to assets, leverage,

interest coverage, and dividend yield for sample firms and benchmark firms. Benchmark firms

are in much better financial condition than sample firms. Sample firms are less profitable than

comparison firms. In addition, the ratio of cash to assets of sample firms is half what it is for

benchmark firms. However, at the same time, the firms in our sample have less leverage than

benchmark firms. This result is surprising since in general sample firms appear to be financially

constrained relative to benchmark firms. The coverage ratio of our sample firms is lower, but not

significantly so, than the one of benchmark firms. Finally, sample firms have a significantly

lower dividend yield than benchmark firms.



3.4. Asset liquidity

    Asset liquidity should help us understand whether sample firms divest or restructure

segments. Furthermore, asset liquidity should help us predict which segments get divested and

which are retained. However, while liquidity affects the conditions under which segments can be

sold, it is not the initial catalyst in the firm’s decision to stop reporting a segment. Consequently,

we have no predictions about how the asset liquidity of benchmark firms differs from the asset

liquidity of sample firms. At this point, we therefore report the liquidity measures in the last part

of Table 2 for completeness since we keep using them throughout the paper.

    An asset market is more liquid if assets can be sold quickly without a discount. If the market

has more transactions taking place, it means that buyers and sellers are active in that market, so

that a potential seller can find buyers without having to discount the price as much. We therefore


                                                  8
use the extent to which transactions take place for a type of corporate asset as our liquidity index.

We construct our segment liquidity measure by estimating a liquidity index at the two-digit SIC

code level each year. To construct this index, we first collect from the SDC Mergers and

Acquisitions database all corporate transactions at the two-digit SIC code level in each year.

Corporate control transactions include all disclosed and completed leverage buyouts, tender

offers, spinoffs, exchange offers, minority stake purchases, acquisitions of remaining interest, and

privatizations. Buybacks (e.g., repurchases and self-tenders) are excluded from the sample. We

then take the ratio of the value of corporate control transactions in a year (excluding the

divestitures in our sample) divided by the total assets of firms in that two-digit SIC code for that

year to obtain the industry's liquidity index. 5 It is important to remove the divestitures in our

sample from the transactions used to compute the liquidity index since otherwise an industry

would have more liquidity just because of the divestitures from our sample. We only use the

liquidity index if it is between zero and one and if the industry has at least ten firms. Because of

these constraints, we are unable to obtain a liquidity index for 16 segments out of 753. We define

a firm's segment liquidity to be the asset weighted average of the liquidity index for the industries

of the firm's segments. Our results are qualitatively similar if we use the market value of firms

(defined as total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity) in the

denominator of the index rather than the sum of the book values of assets of firms. However,

liquidity measures based on book values are more appropriate because market values incorporate

anticipatory takeover premia.

    Industries with many corporate control transactions have a high liquidity index. Though the

question of why an industry might have more corporate control transactions than another one is

an important one, we make no attempt to explain the level of corporate control transactions in this




5
 We recognize that the SIC codes reported by Compustat will differ from those of SDC (Kahle and
Walkling, 1996). We do not believe this materially affects our results.


                                                 9
paper.6 One reason for a high level of corporate transactions is that an industry suffered a shock

that makes it optimal for corporate assets to be rearranged within the industry. A situation where

many parties want to trade is one where liquidity is high. Yet, there is more to liquidity than

industry clustering. In particular, we constructed a liquidity index that attempts to measure

whether divesting a segment would represent a large transaction relative to the volume of

transactions in the industry. We therefore also used as the liquidity index the assets of the

segment divided by the sum of the value of the transactions in the industry as obtained from SDC.

This index yields qualitatively similar, but statistically weaker conclusions.

    In the last part of Table 2, we first report the weighed average of the liquidity indices of the

firm’s segments, where the weights are the assets of the segments divided by the total assets of

the firm. We find that firms that stop reporting a segment have less liquid segments than

benchmark firms. If firms sell assets to raise funds, the weighted average of the liquidity indices

of the firm's segments is not the relevant measure of liquidity. A firm might have mostly illiquid

segments, but might also have one segment that is highly liquid. If it considers selling assets to

raise cash, it would be able to do so by selling the segment that is highly liquid and the financing

hypothesis would predict that it would sell that segment. Consequently, the liquidity index of the

most liquid segment of the firm is an important liquidity measure that we have to consider. We

call this measure the maximum liquidity index. We find that the maximum liquidity index is

lower for the firms that stop reporting a segment than for the benchmark firms. This means that

high liquidity does not cause firms to stop reporting segments. We would be surprised if it did. In

our analysis, liquidity facilitates disposition of an asset; it does not act as a motive for the

divestiture.



6
  Mitchell and Mulherin (1996) document that corporate acquisitions are clustered in industries. Mulherin
and Boone (2000) confirm that this is true for the 1990s also, but surprisingly they show that there is an
insignificant negative correlation between the rate of acquisitions and the rate of divestitures across
industries. Industry shocks also play an important role in the model of Maksimovic and Philips (2000a).



                                                   10
    Many of the variables in Table 2 are correlated. Therefore, to better understand which

variables are important determinants of a firm’s decision to reduce the number of segments, we

estimate logit regressions where the dependent variable takes value one if the firm reduces the

number of segments and zero for benchmark firms. A typical regression is as follows (p-values in

parentheses):



Firm stops reporting     =

−5.368                   + 0.112 Cash flow/Assets                − 0.645 Capital Expenditures/Assets
(0.001)                  (0.906)                                 (0.576)

− 0.487 Sales Growth     + 0.412 Diversification discount        − 2.021 Firm Liquidity
(0.231)                  (0.018)                                 (0.353)


In this regression, the diversification discount is the only significant variable. The regression is

consistent with the focusing hypothesis, in that better diversifiers are less likely to stop reporting

segments. The other coefficients are not significant. We estimated a number of specifications

where we added other firm characteristics to the regression. We find that Tobin's q has a negative

significant coefficient when added to the regression and that adding Tobin's q makes the

diversification discount insignificant. However, Tobin's q is highly correlated with the

diversification discount, so that this evidence is still consistent with the diversification discount

being an important determinant of the decision to stop reporting a segment. If we add the interest

coverage ratio to our regression, it has a p-value of 0.10 with a positive coefficient, so firms with

greater interest coverage ratio are more likely to stop reporting a segment. No other firm

characteristic that we added to the regression is significant.


3.5. Comparing divesting and restructuring firms

    In Table 3 we split our sample, reporting differences between sample firms that restructure a

segment and those that divest. We find only two significant differences. First, firms that

restructure are significantly smaller than those that divest segments. Second, firms that divest


                                                  11
have a significantly higher liquidity index than firms that restructure. With the financing

hypothesis of asset sales, one would expect firms to be more likely to sell segments with higher

liquidity since they have to discount these segments less and hence get more proceeds relative to

the fundamental value of these segments. As a result, one would expect the segment with the

highest liquidity to be more relevant to the divesting decision of such firms. The difference in the

medians is not statistically significant, while the difference in the means (not reported) is

significant.

    In Table 4, we provide estimates of logit regressions where the dependent variable takes

value one for firms that divest a segment and zero for firms that restructure. The explanatory

variables in the first regression are cash flow over sales, capital expenditures over sales, the

coverage ratio, and the diversification discount. No variable is significant. In other regressions not

reported here, we find that other firm characteristics are also unhelpful in understanding the

divestiture versus restructure decision. Thus, we are left with a puzzle: firms that divest appear

indistinguishable from those that restructure. To explore this puzzle, we turn to the role of asset

liquidity.

    In regression (2) of Table 4, we add the liquidity index of the most liquid segment of the firm.

The greater the liquidity index of the most liquid segment, the more likely it is that a firm in our

sample divests a segment rather than restructures it. Liquidity is the only significant variable in

that regression. In other words, firm performance variables cannot convincingly explain why

some firms in our sample divest and others do not, while the liquidity variable does. The third

regression in the table uses a different proxy for liquidity, namely the liquidity index of the most

liquid segment of the firm. Again, we find that a firm is more likely to divest a segment if its most

liquid segment is more liquid. Liquidity can therefore explain what firm characteristics such as

cash flow, capital expenditures, diversification discount, leverage cannot, namely why some firms

in our sample divest a segment while others do not.




                                                 12
4. Which segments are no longer reported?

    The focusing hypothesis implies that unrelated segments are more likely to be divested

because such segments reduce firm efficiency. The efficiency hypothesis predicts that segments

that perform poorly relative to their industry are more likely to be divested. The financing

hypothesis implies that low cash flow segments are more likely to be divested because they drain

resources of credit-constrained firms. In this section, we first compare the characteristics of

segments that are no longer reported to those of retained segments. Next, we compare

performance and liquidity variables for divested, restructured, and retained segments. Logit

regressions are then used to evaluate the importance of these variables in the divestiture decision.

We conclude the section by showing that segment liquidity is helpful to understand whether a

firm divests a core segment or an unrelated segment.



4.1. Segments no longer reported versus retained segments

    By definition, firms restructuring or divesting some segments are retaining others. Table 5

compares the median values of restructured and divested segments to those retained. Looking at

the divested segments, it is immediately clear that divested segments are smaller segments than

retained segments. We find that divested segments are less efficient and have poorer growth

opportunities. In particular, for firms that divest, the sales and assets of divested segments grow

more slowly than those of retained segments. Divested segments also are less profitable, have

lower capital expenditures, and have lower growth opportunities. Finally, as we would expect, the

liquidity index of segments divested is significantly higher than the liquidity index of segments

retained by firms that divest segments. When we turn to firms in our sample that restructure

segments, we find that the segments restructured are smaller than the segments retained by these

firms, grow less, and have lower cash flow. The liquidity index of segments restructured is not

significantly different from the liquidity index of segments retained by firms that restructure.




                                                 13
    Comparing segments divested to segments restructured, we find few significant differences.

However, segments restructured are larger as a fraction of total sales than segments divested, are

more profitable, and have higher capital expenditure growth. As our arguments imply, divested

segments have a higher liquidity index than segments restructured. Specifically, non-core

segments divested have a higher liquidity index than non-core segments restructured. Comparing

segments retained between firms that divest and firms that restructure, we find that the only

significant difference between these segments is that the retained segments of firms that

restructure have worse growth opportunities than the retained segments of firms that divest.

    Firms have to report segments whose sales exceed 10% of total sales. Thus, small segments

might be no longer reported simply because their sales fall below 10% of total sales. We find that

although many segments no longer reported have sales below 10%, segments divested are more

likely to have sales below 10% than segments restructured (i.e., no longer reported but not

divested). For the firms that divest segments, 46.9% of the segments divested have sales of less

than 10% of firm total sales. In contrast, only 19.9% of segments retained by these firms have

sales of less than 10% of firm total sales. For the firms that restructure segments, 36.4% of

segments no longer reported have sales below 10% and 22.5% of segments still reported have

sales below 10%.


4.2. Industry-adjusted comparisons

    The efficiency hypothesis predicts that divested segments are inefficient relative to their

industry. In Table 6, we provide industry-adjusted comparisons of segments no longer reported

with segments retained. The table reveals that segments divested perform poorly relative to their

industry. Segments divested have negative capital expenditures growth before being divested and

negative sales growth compared to their industry. In contrast, restructured segments have higher

cash flow than their industry. However, they invest less than the industry and their sales growth is

lower than the industry. The evidence on capital expenditures is consistent with the hypothesis



                                                14
that the firms in our sample are financially constrained. When we compare segments divested to

segments restructured, segments divested have lower cash flow and invest less.

    The segments retained in Table 6 have higher cash flow than their industry whether the firm

divests a segment or restructures it. However, the segments retained invest less than their

industry, which is again consistent with the hypothesis that firms that stop reporting segments are

financially constrained. Finally, retained segments have lower sales growth than their industry.

Industry-adjusted characteristics of the retained segments of divesting firms are not different from

the industry-adjusted characteristics of the retained segments of restructuring firms. This is

consistent with the lack of differences between these firms that we have emphasized.


4.3. Relative ranking of divested, restructured and retained segments

    Stein (1997) argues that an advantage of internal capital markets is that they can better

allocate resources by ranking performance across divisions. This suggests that firms might choose

to divest segments that perform poorly relative to other segments within the firm. We therefore

investigate whether firms keep the best segments and stop reporting the worst. In table 7, we

examine how the relative ranking of these segments within the firm is associated with

restructuring or divestiture. To construct the table, we rank segments according to the various

characteristics. We then compare these rankings to the likelihood of the segment being divested

or restructured. Consider, for example, all firms with five segments and then rank the segments

within each firm according to liquidity.      If liquidity doesn’t matter for the divestiture or

restructuring decision, we would expect 20% of the segment divestitures or restructurings to

occur in each of the five segment ranks. We use a Pearson Chi-square statistic to test for an equal

distribution of divestiture (restructuring) cases across the segment ranks. We then report in the

table the number of segments no longer reported for each rank for each characteristic. The first

characteristic we consider is the cash flow performance of the segment. We find that 49 out of

124 (40%) segments divested have the lowest cash flow performance in their firm. At the same



                                                15
time, however, 20 divested segments have the best cash flow performance in their firm.

Strikingly, 66 divested segments are the smallest in their firm, but only seven are the largest. A

segment is more likely to be divested because it is small rather than because it performs poorly.

More divested segments have the highest industry q among firm segments (41) than the lowest q

(33). The fact that the number with the highest or lowest rank of q are close together suggests that

segment growth opportunities measured by the industry q of single segment firms in their

industry is not important to the divestiture decision. However, among divested segments, 51%

have the highest liquidity index in the firm and only 12% have the lowest liquidity index.

    From all this, it is clear that a segment's size, liquidity, cash flow, and relatedness to the firm's

core activities affect its probability of divestiture. Using a Pearson chi-square test we can reject at

the 10% level or better the equality of the variation across ranks for cash flow over sales, sales,

and liquidity for the divestitures. The largest segment and the most illiquid segment are highly

unlikely to be divested. When we turn to the retained segments of divesting firms, rankings still

matter but are less important. In particular, while 55% of the segments divested are the smallest in

their firm, 29% of the segments restructured are the smallest in their firm. Further, 40% of

restructured segments have the highest liquidity index in their firm, while 19% have the lowest.


4.4. Logit analysis predicting divested and restructured segments

    Given that divested segments are smaller, are more liquid, and have lower cash flow than

other segments in their firm, we investigate whether each one of these variables is important or

whether some are important because they are correlated with other variables. In Table 8, we

report logit regressions for the probability that a segment is divested or restructured rather than

retained. We first use a segment's cash flow, its size, its capital expenditures, its industry q,

whether it is a core segment, and its liquidity index as independent variables. The dependent

variable is set to one for divested or restructured segments and equal to zero for retained

segments. In regression (1D), we find that a segment is more likely to be divested if its cash flow



                                                   16
is low, if it is a small segment, if it is a non-core segment, and if its liquidity index is high. The

significance for non-core segment dummy variable is consistent with firms finding unrelated

diversification costly and is therefore supportive of the focusing hypothesis. The cash flow result

is consistent with the financing hypothesis. Regression (1R) is the same as regression (1D), but it

examines the probability that a segment will be restructured but not divested. The only significant

variables are a segment's relative size and its capital expenditures. Smaller segments and

segments with lower capital expenditures are more likely to be restructured than retained. Since a

restructured segment is not sold, one would not expect its liquidity index to matter. The fact that

the segment liquidity index plays no role for whether a segment is restructured or retained is

therefore supportive of the hypothesis that a segment's liquidity plays an important role in the

divestiture decision.

    A segment with low cash flow can be divested for two separate reasons. One reason, provided

by the efficiency hypothesis discussed in the introduction, is that the firm is unsuccessful at

operating the segment efficiently. A second reason, coming from the financing hypothesis, is that

the segment is consuming corporate resources because its cash flow is too low and, as a result, a

financially constrained firm is better off without the segment. The efficiency argument implies

that a segment is more likely to be divested when industry median cash flow is higher since this

means that the performance of the segment is poor relative to its industry. In regression (2D), we

test this hypothesis by adding industry median cash flow to regression (1D) as well as industry

median capital expenditures. We find that the industry medians have insignificant coefficients. As

a result, performance relative to the industry does not seem to be an important determinant of the

divestiture decision. In regression (2R), we estimate regression (2D) for restructured segments.

The results are similar to regression (1R), except that median industry capital expenditures are

significantly negative. In other words, a firm is less likely to stop reporting a segment from an

industry with a high capital expenditures rate. One might think that this is because segments with

high growth opportunities are less likely to be restructured, but industry q is never significant.


                                                 17
Our evidence shows that a segment's probability of being divested or restructured does not seem

to depend on its performance relative to its industry. This evidence is more consistent with the

financing hypothesis than with the efficiency hypothesis.

    To this point, the importance of segment size is surprising. One possibility is that the effect of

size is due to segments that are below 10% of sales, so that the firm would no longer have to

report them. In regressions (3D) and (3R), we add a dummy variable for segments smaller than

10% of firm sales. This dummy variable is significant in the regression for segments no longer

reported but not in the regression for segment divested. A second possibility is that size matters

for the divested segments because liquidity is related to size. We construct another liquidity index

based on size. To construct this index, we divide up transactions across all industries into size

deciles. We then assign an index value to each decile by dividing the value of transactions in a

decile by the total value of transactions across deciles. However, whether we use the liquidity

index based on size, a liquidity index based on industry, or both, firm size is still significant. A

final possibility is that small segments have large influence costs, so that they get divested when

firms face pressure to improve their performance. Some models (see, in particular, Meyer,

Milgrom, and Roberts (1990) and Scharfstein and Stein (2000)) are consistent with the hypothesis

that small segments draw rents in diversified firms. These models might make it possible to

explain the importance of segment size in the divestiture decision.


4.5. Core versus non-core segments

    Strikingly, 78% of the segments no longer reported by firms that do not divest are in the same

two-digit SIC code as the firm, while only 43% of the segments divested are. One is tempted to

conclude from the fact that divesting firms are more likely to divest non-core segments that firms

in our sample have decided to focus. However, the arguments of Shleifer and Vishny (1992)

imply that the most liquid segments of firms that divest segments to raise funds are more likely to

be non-core segments than core segments. If firms that divest segments are firms whose core

business is performing poorly and if this poor performance is the result of an industry effect, the


                                                 18
bidders who would be best equipped to operate a core segment are financially constrained as well

and hence will not be the highest bidders. We find that for divesting firms the highest liquidity

segment among non-core segments has a significantly higher liquidity index than the highest

liquidity segments among core segments. This is not the case for the restructuring sample. The

importance of liquidity is again apparent: Among firms that divest segments, the greater liquidity

of non-core segments raises the possibility that the firm divests a non-core segment not because it

wants to focus but because it is the segment that can be sold most advantageously.

    To investigate further whether differences in liquidity between core and non-core segments

explain why some firms divest core segments and others divest non-core segments, we estimate a

logit regression. The dependent variable takes value one if the firm divests a core segment and

zero otherwise. The focusing argument for why firms divest non-core segments is that they are

inefficient diversifiers. We proxy for the extent to which a diversified firm is efficient by the

diversification discount. The efficiency hypothesis predicts that a firm is more likely to divest

segments that underperform their industry. We therefore include in the regression the difference

between the weighted average of industry–adjusted cash flow for core segments and non-core

segments. The efficiency hypothesis predicts the probability of divesting non-core segments

increases with this difference. Finally, the liquidity argument implies that a firm is more likely to

divest a non-core segment if the liquidity of the non-core segment with the highest liquidity is

higher. We therefore use as independent variables the liquidity index of the core (non-core)

segment with the highest liquidity index defined as Max Core (Max Non-Core).

    The regression estimates are as follows (p-values in parenthesis):



Divest core segment =


−1.056                                 + 24.186 Max Core                 − 59.565 Max Non-Core
(0.072)                               (0.043)                            (0.030)

−1.063 Diversification discount       + 3.47 Industry-adjusted cash flow difference
(0.224)                               (0.484)


                                                 19
        Segment liquidity is a significant determinant of whether a firm divests core or non-core

segments. The diversification discount and cash flow performance measures have no explanatory

power in explaining why a firm divests core or non-core segments. These results are inconsistent

with the view that firms shed non-core segments because they are poor diversifiers. However, the

sign of the coefficient for the diversification discount is negative as one would expect with the

focusing hypothesis. We estimate the same regression for segments no longer reported but not

divested. No coefficient is significant in that regression.

    These regression estimates provide limited support for explanations of divestitures that rely

on firms discovering that diversification is costly for them. In the regressions of Table 8, we find

that firms were more likely to divest non-core segments and here the intercept of the regression

has the same interpretation. However, specific measures of diversification costs cannot explain

this result. We also investigate whether a firm is more likely to divest segments whose divestiture

would reduce the Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales (2000) diversity measure the most using the

regressions of Table 8. We find that the change in the diversity measure that would result from

divesting a particular segment is never significant.


5. Conclusion

        In this paper, we examine the determinants of a firm's decision to stop reporting a

segment and to divest it. We find that firms that stop reporting a segment are poor performers that

underinvest relative to benchmark firms and have a significantly larger diversification discount

than benchmark firms. In a logit regression, the diversification discount and Tobin's q are the only

clearly significant variables in explaining why some diversified firms stop reporting a segment

and others do not. This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that firms that divest segments

are unsuccessful diversifiers. The performance evidence and the evidence on cash holdings is

consistent with our sample firms being financially constrained, (although our firms do have less

leverage than benchmark firms). Segment size is also an important determinant of the divestiture


                                                  20
decision: A small segment is more likely to be divested regardless of performance. We explore a

number of reasons for why small segments are more likely to be divested, but this issue remains a

puzzle. In contrast, a segment's growth opportunities are irrelevant to the divestiture decision in

our sample.

    Using traditional firm performance measures, we find that firms that stop reporting a segment

are remarkably similar whether they divest that segment or not. To explain the puzzle of why

some sample firms divest a segment while others do not, we resort to differences across firms in

asset liquidity. We show that controlling for firm performance, a firm in our sample is more likely

to divest a segment if its segments are in industries with a larger volume of corporate transactions

relative to industry assets. This is consistent with the analysis of Shleifer and Vishny (1992). As

expected from the theoretical analysis, part of the reason firms divest unrelated segments is that

they tend to be more liquid. All these results are highly supportive of the hypothesis that segment

liquidity plays an important role in firms' decisions to divest segments. Our evidence therefore

shows that in evaluating the performance and strategies of a firm, it is essential to take into

account the liquidity of the markets for the firm's assets. A firm might retain segments it would

otherwise divest if markets for corporate assets were perfectly liquid and yet its management

might be maximizing the wealth of its shareholders.




                                                21
References

Berger, Philip G. and Eli Ofek, 1995, Diversification's effect on firm value, Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 39-65.
Berger, Philip G. and Eli Ofek, 1999, Causes and consequences of corporate refocusing
programs, Review of Financial Studies, 12, 311-345.
Hite, Gailen L., James E. Owers and Ronald C. Rogers, 1987, The market for interfirm asset
sales: Partial sell-offs and total liquidations, Journal of Financial Economics , 18, 229-252.
Hyland, David, 1997, Why firms diversify: An empirical examination, Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
John, Kose and Eli Ofek, 1995, Asset sales and increase in focus, Journal of Financial
Economics 37, 105-26.
Kaplan, Steven, and Michael S. Weisbach, 1992, The success of acquisitions: Evidence from
divestitures, Journal of Finance 47, 107-139.

Kahle, Kathleen and Ralph Walkling, 1996, The impact of industry classifications on financial
research, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 31, 309-335.
John, Kose, Larry H. P. Lang, and Jeffry Netter, 1992, The voluntary restructuring of large firms
in response to performance decline, Journal of Finance, 1992, 47, 891-918.
Lang, Larry, Annette Poulsen and René M. Stulz, 1994, Firm performance, asset sales, and the
costs of managerial discretion, Journal of Financial Economics 37, 3-37.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Philips, 2000a, Do conglomerate firms allocate resources
efficiently?, unpublished working paper, University of Maryland, Maryland.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Philips, 2000b, The market for corporate assets: Who engages
in mergers and corporate sales and are there gains, unpublished working paper, University of
Maryland, Maryland.

Mitchell, Mark, and J. Harold Mulherin, 1996, The impact of industry shocks on takeover and
restructuring activity, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 193-229.
Meyer, Margaret, Paul Milgrom, and John Roberts, 1990, Organization prospects, influence costs,
and ownership changes, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 1, 9-35.
Mulherin, J. Harold, and Audra L. Boone, 2000, Comparing acquisitions and divestitures,
unpublished working paper.

Pulvino, Todd C, 1998, Do asset fire sales exist? An empirical investigation of commercial
aircraft transactions, Journal of Finance 53, 939-978.
Rajan, Raghuram, Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, The diversification discount and
inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 35-80.
Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets:
divisional rent-seeking and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance , forthcoming.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.



                                               22
Stein, Jeremy C., 1997, Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources,
Journal of Finance 52, 111-133.




                                             23
                                               Table 1
                                           Sample Breakdown
Our sample consists of all firms identified by the Compustat Business Information file as reporting a
decrease in the number of segments over the period 1979-94. We exclude American Depository Receipts
and firms that have either a Compustat SIC or an Industry Segment Identification code (SID) between 6000
and 6999 (Financial Services Industry), 4900 and 4999 (Regulated Utilities), and firms smaller than $100
million in assets. Firms for which we could not confirm a transaction through Lexis-Nexis corresponding to
the decrease in segments are labeled Restructuring Events. Firms for which we could identify a
corresponding transaction are labeled Divestitures. Panel A presents the yearly distribution of the sample of
firms. Panel B presents a frequency distribution of the number of segments within each firm that
disappeared during the event year.
                                Panel A: Yearly Distribution of Sample Firms

                  Restructuring Events                 Divestitures                         Total
Event Year      Frequency        Percent        Frequency        Percent        Frequency           Percent
    79              22           14.01%              9            5.36%             31              9.54%
    80              13             8.28             11              6.55            24                7.38
    81              17            10.83             21            12.50             38               11.69
    82              19            12.10             12              7.14            31                9.54
    83               9             5.73              9              5.36            18                5.54
    84              16            10.19             18            10.71             34               10.46
    85               9             5.73             14              8.33            23                7.08
    86              13             8.28             14              8.33            27                8.31
    87               4             2.55             11              6.55            15                4.62
    88               6             3.82             10              5.95            16                4.92
    89               8             5.10              9              5.36            17                5.23
    90               2             1.27              5              2.98             7                2.15
    91               8             5.10              9              5.36            17                5.23
    92               2             1.27              5              2.98             7                2.15
    93               6             3.82              6              3.57            12                3.69
    94               3             1.91              5              2.98             8                2.46
  Total            157            100%             168            100%             325               100%

                                 Panel B: Decrease in Reported Segments

Decrease in       Restructuring Events                 Divestitures                         Total
 Segments       Frequency        Percent        Frequency        Percent        Frequency           Percent
    1              125           79.62%            142           84.52%            267              82.15%
    2               24            15.29             22            13.10             46               14.15
    3                5             3.18              4              2.38             9                2.77
    4                1             0.64                                              1                0.31
    5                2             1.27                                              2                0.62
   Total           157            100%              168            100%            325               100%




                                                    24
                                                Table 2
                     Characteristics of firms that reduce the number of segments
Cells denote sample medians of firm performance variables and their benchmark values. Each benchmark
value is calculated as the mean value of the performance measure for a portfolio that consists of a minimum
of five firms in the same year, with the same number of segments, and in the same annual sales decile as
the sample firm. Benchmark firms cannot reduce the number of segments during the event year. Cash Flow
is defined as operating income before depreciation. The firm’s q is defined as the sum of the book value of
assets and the market value of equity net of the book value of equity over the book value of assets. Debt
divided by assets denotes the firm's total liabilities divided by assets. Cash includes inventories and is
normalized by assets. The coverage ratio is defined as EBIT plus depreciation divided by interest expense.
The coefficient of variation in q is reported times hundred. The diversification discount is calculated as in
Berger and Ofek (1995). The firm liquidity index is defined, as the size-based weighed average of the firm's
segment values for the liquidity index. The maximum liquidity is the maximum value for the liquidity
index within the firm for a divested/restructured segment. Panel B presents the difference between
restructuring events and divestitures. Statistical significance (p-values) of the median difference is based on
the Wilcoxon signed-rank-test under the null hypothesis of a median difference of zero and is denoted with
***, **, and * for 1, 5 and 10 percent rejection levels respectively.
                                               Panel A: Full Sample

                                           n          Sample        Benchmark       Difference        p-value
               Size
               Sales                     280           6.476          6.573         -0.035             0.396
    Market Value of Equity               284           12.474         12.542        -0.050*            0.085
      Growth rates, investment, and growth opportunities
       (Sales t-1/Sales t-2)-1           276           0.082          0.111         -0.027**           0.021
      (Assets t-1/Assets t-2)-1          276           0.079          0.108         -0.038***          0.002
  (Cash Flowt-1/Cash Flowt-2)-1          260           0.070          0.138         -0.057***          0.001
       Cap. Exp t-1/Sales t-2            274           0.047          0.086         -0.038***          0.000
   (Cap. Exp t-1 /Cap. Exp t-2)-1        272           0.100          0.187         -0.078*            0.053
    Diversification discount             160           -0.181         -0.099        -0.047*            0.077
                 q                       275           1.059          1.208         -0.115***          0.002
  Coefficient of Variation in q          190           84.382         86.249        -2.226             0.859
            Leverage
         Debtt-1/Assets t-1              267           0.535          0.608         -0.074***          0.001
         Coverage Ratio                  259           7.249          9.063         -1.503             0.373
            Cash flow
           Cash/Assets                   267           0.031          0.062         -0.031***          0.001
      Net Income t-1/Sales t-2           276           0.042          0.048         -0.008***          0.001
      Cash Flowt-1/Sales t-2             276           0.114          0.151         -0.034***          0.001
         Dividend yield                  270           0.034          0.045         -0.016***          0.001
      Liquidity Measures
         Liquidity Index                 270           0.017          0.027         -0.003***          0.001
   Maximum Liquidity Index               270           0.031          0.056         -0.011***          0.001




                                                     25
                                                                        Table 3
                                           Characteristics of firms that restructure versus divest segments
Cells denote sample medians of firm performance variables and their benchmark values. Each benchmark value is calculated as the mean value of the
performance measure for a portfolio that consists of a minimum of five firms in the same year, with the same number of segments, and in the same annual sales
decile as the sample firm. Benchmark firms cannot reduce the number of segments during the event year. Cash Flow is defined as operating income before
depreciation. The firm’s q is defined as the sum of the book value of assets and the market value of equity net of the book value of equity over the book value of
assets. Debt divided by assets denotes the firm's total liabilities divided by assets. Cash includes inventories and is normalized by assets. The coverage ratio is
defined as EBIT plus depreciation divided by interest expense. The coefficient of variation in q is reported times hundred. The diversification discount is
calculated as in Berger and Ofek (1995). The firm liquidity index is defined, as the size-based weighed average of the firm's segment values for the liquidity
index. Segment Liquidity is calculated as the ratio of the value of corporate control actions within a year and 2-digit SIC class and the assets of all firms on
Compustat in the same year and 2-digit SIC class. The maximum liquidity is the maximum value for the liquidity index within the firm for a
divested/restructured segment. Panel B presents the difference between restructuring events and divestitures. Statistical significance of the median difference is
based on a Wilcoxon signed-rank-test and is denoted with ***, **, and * for 1, 5 and 10 percent rejection levels respectively.




                                                                                26
                                                                Table 3 - continued
                                         Characteristics of firms that restructure versus divest segments

                                                      Restructuring Events versus Divestitures
                                           Restructuring Events                                  Divestitures                         Difference
                                      Sample   Benchmark   Difference                   Sample   Benchmark   Difference
                                n       (1)       (2)       (1) − (2)   p-value    n      (3)       (4)       (3) − (4)   p-value   (1) − (3)   p-value
              Size
   Market Value of Equity       131    12.208     12.350   -0.092*      0.072     153   12.736    12.876     -0.056       0.294     -0.528*     0.070
             Sales              125     6.316     6.517     0.034       0.890     155    6.686    6.649      -0.066*      0.097     -0.369      0.273
   Growth rates, investment, and growth opportunities
     (Sales t-1/Sales t-2)-1    123     0.102     0.124    -0.020       0.356     153    0.067    0.103      -0.032**     0.021      0.036      0.177
    (Assets t-1/Assets t-2)-1   123     0.089     0.109    -0.036*      0.068     153    0.075    0.105      -0.046***    0.004      0.014      0.539
     Cap. Exp t-1/Sales t-2     122     0.046     0.089    -0.046***    0.000     152    0.050    0.084      -0.035***    0.000     -0.004      0.324
(Cash Flowt-1/Cash Flowt-2)-1   116     0.099     0.151    -0.042       0.165     144    0.059    0.136      -0.056***    0.001      0.039      0.206
 (Cap. Exp t-1 /Cap. Exp t-2)-1 120     0.066     0.186    -0.156**     0.038     152    0.104    0.168      -0.053       0.296     -0.039      0.237
  Diversification discount       69    -0.104     -0.088    0.036       0.946      91   -0.246    -0.108     -0.140**     0.016      0.142      0.128
                q               124     1.037     1.171    -0.095**     0.018     151    1.089    1.243      -0.127**     0.023     -0.052      0.355
 Coefficient of Variation in q   71    91.170     85.418    4.004       0.594     119   81.147    86.775     -3.022       0.419     10.023      0.287
          Leverage
       Debt t-1/Assets t-1      123     0.535     0.606    -0.065***    0.001     144   0.540     0.611      -0.080***    0.001     -0.005      0.947
       Coverage Ratio           119     7.176     9.191    -1.623       0.410     140   7.320     8.920      -1.410       0.646      0.396      0.752
  Cash flow and liquidity
             Cash               123     0.029     0.062    -0.033***    0.001     144   0.031     0.063      -0.030***    0.001     -0.002      0.947
    Net Income t-1/Sales t-2    123     0.043     0.051    -0.009**     0.041     153   0.038     0.046      -0.007**     0.011      0.005      0.713
     Cash Flowt-1/Sales t-2     123     0.121     0.151    -0.035***    0.000     153   0.111     0.150      -0.034***    0.000      0.010      0.713
       Dividend yield           125     0.035     0.050    -0.018***    0.000     145   0.031     0.041      -0.010**     0.031      0.004      0.715
  Liquidity Measures
     Liquidity Index           125     0.013     0.024     -0.003***    0.001     145   0.020     0.029      -0.002       0.160     -0.011*     0.068
 Maximum Liquidity Index       125     0.025     0.049     -0.011***    0.001     145   0.035     0.063      -0.013***    0.001     -0.012      0.273




                                                                            27
                                                                       Table 4
                                          Logit Regressions predicting whether a firm divests or restructures
Logit regressions with a binary dependent variable that takes on the value zero for a restructuring event and one for a divestiture. Cells denote respectively the
coefficient, p-value and the slope (defined as ∂ E[ y ] ∂ x , for the binary model y(0,1)=β
                                                                                          β 'x+ε, evaluated at the mean of x), the pseudo-R2 , and the value of −2 times
the log likelihood. Cash Flow (CF) is defined as operating income before depreciation. Capital Expenditures (CPX) denote the firm's net capital expenditures.
The Coverage Ratio is defined as EBIT plus depreciation divided by interest expense. Excess Value is calculated as in Berger and Ofek (1995). The firm liquidity
index is defined, as the size-based weighed average of the firm's segment values for the liquidity index. Segment Liquidity is calculated as the ratio of the value
of corporate control actions within a year and 2-digit SIC class and the assets of all firms on Compustat in the same year and 2-digit SIC class. The maximum
liquidity is the maximum value for the liquidity index within the firm for a divested/restructured segment. Accounting numbers are based on the firm-level data,
and the numerator in the ratios is measured in year (−1) and the denominator in year (−2). Statistical significance is denoted with ***,**, and * for 1, 5 and 10
percent rejection levels respectively.

     Model               Intercept             CF/Sales            CPX/Sales           Coverage Ratio       Excess Value         Max Liquidity         Firm Liquidity

       (1)                 0.220                -4.437                4.672                0.028               -0.053
                           0.566                0.202                 0.251                0.186               0.894
                                                -1.092                1.150                0.007               -0.013
                     Pseudo-R2 = 1.51%                                               −2 log likelihood = 197.2

       (2)                 -0.326               -4.130                4.620                0.032               -0.006               19.746**
                           0.455                0.245                 0.260                0.138               0.988                 0.011
                                                -1.002                1.121                0.008               -0.002                 4.790
                     Pseudo-R2 = 5.29%                                               −2 log likelihood = 189.6

       (3)                 -0.579               -3.253                4.356                0.035               -0.035                                     15.440***
                           0.208                0.370                 0.289                0.106               0.935                                       0.002
                                                -0.768                1.028                0.008               -0.008                                      3.645
                     Pseudo-R2 = 7.75%                                               −2 log likelihood = 184.7




                                                                                  28
                                                                     Table 5
                              Univariate Analysis for Divested and Restructured Segments versus Retained Segments
Cells represent median values of performance of divestitures and restructuring events' divested and retained segments. Segment accounting data is taken from the
Compustat CISF Full-Coverage Segment File. The size<10% dummy is equal to one if the segment sales are less than 10% of the firm's total sales and zero
otherwise. Cash flow (CF) is defined as operating profits plus depreciation. Tsales denotes the aggregated sales for the firm. Capital Expenditures (CPX) is
defined as net capital expenditures (i.e., gross capital expenditures minus depreciation). Segment Median Industry q is calculated as the fraction of the book value
of total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity and the book value of total assets of all Compustat firms with the same 2-digit SIC
code as the segment. Segment Liquidity is calculated as the ratio of the value of corporate control actions within a year and 2-digit SIC class and the assets of all
firms on Compustat in the same year and 2-digit SIC class. The difference in q is between divested (restructured) non-core segments and all retained segments.
The change in the coefficient of variation in Tobin's q (∆Coefficient of Variation in q ) is denoted in percent change. The t subscript refers to the year relative to
the focusing year t. Ratios are truncated at minus and plus one, growth variables at -100 and +200 percent. Asset and sales numbers are in $ millions. Statistical
significance of the difference in medians is denoted with ***,**, and * for 1, 5 and 10 percent rejection levels respectively.




                                                                                 29
                                                                     Table 5 - continued
                                   Univariate Analysis for Divested and Restructured Segments versus Retained Segments

                                                            Divestiture                                   Restructuring Event                    Divestiture − Restructuring Event
                                                                                                                                               Divested
                                              Divested   Retained   Difference             Restructured    Retained   Difference             (Restructured) p-value   Retained
                                                (1)        (2)      (1) − (2)    p-value        (3)          (4)      (3) − (4)    p-value     (1) − (3)              (2) − (4)   p-value
Size
ln (Sales)t-1                                  4.621      5.452     -0.831***    0.001       4.817          5.245     -0.428***    0.001       -0.196       0.436       0.207     0.344
ln (Assets)t-1                                 4.240      5.158     -0.918***    0.001       4.312          4.780     -0.468***    0.005       -0.072       0.430       0.378     0.103
Mean Size<10% dummy                            0.516      0.199      0.317          -        0.344          0.208      0.136          -         0.172          -       -0.009        -
Growth rates, investment, and growth opportunities
(Sales t-1 / Sales t-2) - 1                    0.016      0.047     -0.031       0.163        0.021         0.064     -0.043**     0.022       -0.005       0.911      -0.017     0.262
(Sales t-1 / Tsales t-2) - 1                   0.097      0.231     -0.134***    0.001        0.146         0.202     -0.056*      0.056       -0.049***    0.003       0.028     0.344
(Sales t-2 / Tsales t-3) - 1                   0.107      0.223     -0.116***    0.001        0.156         0.191     -0.035       0.212       -0.049**     0.016       0.032     0.466
((Sales/Tsales)t-1 / (Sales/Tsales)t-2) - 1   -0.030      0.003     -0.033**     0.014       -0.017         0.020     -0.037**     0.012       -0.013       0.150      -0.017     0.366
((Sales/Tsales)t-2 / (Sales/Tsales)t-3) - 1   -0.033     -0.007     -0.026       0.198       -0.015         0.004     -0.019       0.141       -0.018       0.284      -0.012     0.425
Net CPXt-1 / Sales t-2                         0.027      0.040     -0.013***    0.006        0.036         0.039     -0.003       0.652       -0.009***    0.008       0.001     0.852
Net CPXt-2 / Sales t-3                         0.032      0.042     -0.010**     0.022        0.038         0.039     -0.001       0.405       -0.006       0.151       0.002     0.584
(CPXt-1 / CPXt-2) - 1                         -0.150     -0.016     -0.134**     0.022       -0.003         0.060     -0.063       0279        -0.147*      0.056      -0.076     0.167
(CPXt-2 / CPXt-3) - 1                          0.056      0.014      0.042       0.658        0.029         0.010      0.019       0.908        0.027       0.618       0.005     0.762
Segment Median Industry q                      1.156      1.269     -0.113**     0.024        1.197         1.199     -0.002       0.909       -0.041       0.737       0.070*    0.065
∆Coefficient of Variation in q (×100%)        -0.151     -0.171      0.020       0.709       -0.186        -0.106     -0.080       0.176        0.035       0.686      -0.065     0.413
Cash flow
CFt-1 / Sales t-2                              0.071      0.122     -0.051***    0.001       0.100          0.113     -0.013*      0.088       -0.029**     0.011       0.009     0.441
CFt-2 / Sales t-3                              0.097      0.131     -0.034***    0.001       0.112          0.122     -0.010       0.305       -0.015*      0.082       0.009     0.152
Liquidity measures
Segment Liquidity                              0.024      0.016      0.008**     0.018       0.020          0.017      0.003       0.380        0.004*      0.067      -0.001     0.978
Segment Liquidity (Core Segments)              0.021      0.016      0.005       0.663       0.021          0.019      0.002       0.657        0.000       0.999      -0.003     0.634
Segment Liquidity (Non-core Segments)          0.026      0.016      0.100**     0.014       0.020          0.016      0.004       0.425        0.006*      0.086       0.000     0.999




                                                                                           30
                                           Table 6
               Univariate Analysis for Industry-Adjusted Segment Performance
Cells represent median values of industry-adjusted performance of divestitures and restructuring events'
divested and retained segments. Segment accounting data is taken from the Compustat CISF Full-Coverage
Segment File. Cash flow (CF) is defined as operating profits plus depreciation. Tsales denotes the
aggregated sales for the firm. Capital Expenditures (CPX) is defined as net capital expenditures (i.e., gross
capital expenditures minus depreciation). Industry-adjustments are based on the difference between the
variable and the median value of all Compustat firms with the same 2-digit SIC code in the fiscal year
before the focusing. Ratios are truncated at minus and plus one and capital expenditures growth at minus
and plus two hundred percent. Asset and sales numbers are in $ millions. Statistical significance of the
difference in medians is denoted with ***,**, and * for 1, 5 and 10 percent rejection levels respectively.
                               Divested (Restructured)
                                       Segments                Retained Segments               Difference
Variable          Event         n      median    p-value     n      median    p-value      Median   p-value
CF / Sales      Divestiture    120   -0.017***    0.001     290    0.024***    0.001      -0.042*** 0.001
               Restructuring   231    0.013***    0.009     113    0.027***    0.000      -0.014     0.136
                Difference           -0.030***    0.008           -0.002       0.716

CPX / Sales     Divestiture    118   -0.024**    0.030      289   -0.016***    0.001      -0.008***   0.005
               Restructuring   230   -0.016***   0.001      115   -0.019***    0.001       0.003      0.761
                Difference           -0.008**    0.013             0.003       0.741

CPX growth      Divestiture    113   -0.228***   0.001      276   -0.082       0.227      -0.145**    0.037
               Restructuring   220   -0.102      0.181      108   -0.047       0.782      -0.055      0.482
                Difference           -0.126*     0.054            -0.035       0.496

ln (Sales)      Divestiture    119    0.707***   0.001      290    1.219***    0.001      -0.512***   0.002
               Restructuring   231    0.739***   0.001      115    1.027***    0.000      -0.288*     0.087
                Difference           -0.032      0.910             0.192       0.337

Sales growth    Divestiture    119   -0.060***   0.001      289   -0.022***    0.003      -0.037**    0.012
               Restructuring   231   -0.062***   0.001      114   -0.028       0.108      -0.034*     0.062
                Difference            0.002      0.910             0.006       0.528




                                                     31
                                                                      Table 7
                                Relative Ranking of Within Firm Performance of Divested and Restructured Segments
Cells denote the number of restructured (R) and divested [D] segments within a ranking for different variables. The Number of Divisions denote the total number of
segments within a firm and the rank denotes the relative magnitude, from low to high, of the variable. Cash flow (CF) is defined as operating profits plus
depreciation. Capital Expenditures (CPX) is defined as net capital expenditures (i.e., gross capital expenditures minus depreciation). Segment q is calculated as the
fraction of the book value of total assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity and the book value of total assets of all Compustat firms with
the same 2-digit SIC code as the segment. Segment Liquidity is calculated as the ratio of the value of all corporate control actions within a year and 2-digit SIC class
and the assets of all firms on Compustat in the same year and 2-digit SIC class. The last row denotes the total number of divested segments, n, for each firm. Ties are
assigned to the higher rank. The last column denotes the Pearson χ2 test-statistic for restructuring events (R) and divestitures [D]. Significance is denoted with
***,**, and * for 1, 5 and 10 percent rejection levels and indicates rejection of equality of the variation across the rankings.
                                                                        Number of Segments within Firm                                                    Pearson χ2
                                  2                   3                      4                      5                     6                  7           test-statistic
Variable        Rank         R         D         R          D          R           D          R           D          R         D        R           D        R [D]
CF/Sales       1 (low)       19         9       17         17          19         14           9          5          7          3       4           1       20.54
                   2         19         5       13          7          13          9           3          8          8          9       2           1      [39.15]*
                   3                            10          6          13          7          10          4          4          1       4           0
                   4                                                   11          6           5          3          7          3       3           1
                   5                                                                           5          3          7          1       3           0
                   6                                                                                                 5          0       3           0
               7 (high)                                                                                                                 2           0
ln(Sales)      1 (low)       21        13       17         21          20         20           7          6          5          6       5           0      28.60
                   2         17         1       13          7          13         10           8          8          8          4       3           2     [72.65]***
                   3                            10          2          11          5           5          4          7          2       4           0
                   4                                                   12          1           5          4          8          1       3           1
                   5                                                                           7          1          6          2       2           0
                   6                                                                                                 4          2       1           0
               7 (high)                                                                                                                 3           0
CPX/Sales      1 (low)       19        11       18         11          11         10           6          5          6          4       4           2      15.14
                   2         19         3       12          8          16         10           8          6          7          4       3           1     [22.15]
                   3                            10         10          16          6           6          7          8          2       3           0
                   4                                                   12          9           8          3          5          4       4           0
                   5                                                                           4          3          7          3       2           0
                   6                                                                                                 5          0       2           0
               7 (high)                                                                                                                 3           0
                  n          38        14       40         30          56         36          32         24         38         17      21           3




                                                                                  32
                                                                 Table 7
                       Relative Ranking of Within Firm Performance of Divested and Restructured Segments - continued

                                                           Number of Segments within Firm                                   Pearson χ2
                              2              3                4                    5             6                7        test-statistic
Variable     Rank        R        D     R        D        R         D        R          D   R        D       R         D       R [D]
CPX         1 (low)      19       8     14       13       12       13        7          3   8        4        5        0     12.68
Growth          2        18       6     15        5       15        6        8          7   6        5        2        2    [28.10]
                3                        5        7       13       10        6          5   5        2        2        0
                4                                         13        4        4          4   6        4        3        0
                5                                                            6          5   6        1        2        1
                6                                                                           7        0        2        0
            7 (high)                                                                                          5        0
Segment q   1 (low)      13       5     10       12        9        8         5        6     4       2        2        0    40.23*
                2        25       9      9        8        7        7         6        7     6       1        3        0   [23.09]
                3                       21       10       18        8         2        0     1       4        1        1
                4                                         22       11        14        2     9       2        0        0
                5                                                             5        8    11       5        2        0
                6                                                                            7       3        8        0
            7 (high)                                                                                          3        0
Segment     1 (low)      13        1     9        5       12        4         3        2     4       1        0        0    58.71***
Liquidity       2        24       11    11        4        4        6         5        3     4       1        1        0   [66.73]***
                3                       19       18       16       14         2        1     5       1        2        0
                4                                         24        9        10        7     9       0        3        0
                5                                                            12        9    10       3        2        0
                6                                                                            6       8        9        1
            7 (high)                                                                                          2        2
                n        38       14    40       30       56       36        32        24   38       17      21        3




                                                                     33
                                                                        Table 8
                                      Retained versus Divested and Restructured Segments Logit Regression Results
Logit regressions with a binary dependent variable that takes on the value one for divested (models (1D), (2D), and (3D)) and restructured (models (1R), (2R), and
(3R)) segments and zero for retained segments. Cells denote respectively the coefficient, p-value and the slope (defined as ∂ E[ y ] ∂ x , for the binary model
       β 'x+ε, evaluated at the mean of x), the pseudo-R2 , and the value of −2 times the log likelihood. Cash Flow (CF) is defined as operating income before
y(0,1)=β
depreciation. Capital Expenditures (CPX) denote the firm's net capital expenditures. Industry median variables are calculated as the median value of all Compustat
firms within the same 2-digit SIC code as the segment during the same year. The Non-core Dummy takes on a value of one when the 2-digit segment SIC code is
different from the 2-digit firm SIC code. Segment Liquidity is calculated as the ratio of the value of all corporate control actions within a year and 2-digit SIC class
and the assets of all firms on Compustat in the same year and 2-digit SIC class. The size<10% dummy is equal to one if the segment sales are less than 10% of the
firm's total sales and zero otherwise. Accounting numbers are based on the firm-level data, and the numerator in the ratios is measured in year (−1) and the
denominator in year (−2). Statistical significance is denoted with ***,**, and * for 1, 5 and 10 percent rejection levels respectively.
                                        Ind. Median                  Ind. Median Segment Sales /          Non-core                        Segment         Size<10%
Model          Intercept    CF/Sales      CF/Sales      CPX/Sales     CPX/Sales        Firm Sales          Dummy           Segment q      Liquidity        Dummy
   (1D)        -0.192       -2.279**                     -0.667                          -4.993***        0.503*            -0.047        6.518**
                0.770        0.048                        0.654                           0.001           0.075              0.912        0.012
                            -0.381                       -0.112                          -0.835           0.084             -0.008        1.091
           Pseudo-R2 = 16.11%                                                       −2 log likelihood = 393.6
  (1R)       1.442**        0.180                      -2.605*                         -0.909*             -0.128        -0.225          0.289
             0.019          0.839                       0.051                           0.094               0.631         0.613          0.891
                            0.040                      -0.572                          -0.200              -0.028        -0.049          0.063
           Pseudo-R2 = 1.78%                                                        −2 log likelihood = 433.9
  (2D)       -0.384        -2.436**      0.114         -0.967        3.975             -4.942***            0.490*       -0.073          6.641**
              0.580         0.046        0.969          0.539        0.541              0.001               0.085         0.865          0.011
                           -0.408        0.019         -0.162        0.666             -0.828               0.082        -0.012          1.112
           Pseudo-R2 = 16.22%                                                       −2 log likelihood = 393.1
  (2R)       2.033***       0.395       -0.649         -1.509       -10.310*           -0.964*             -0.105        -0.229          0.347
             0.004          0.665        0.864          0.313         0.079             0.079               0.695         0.611          0.869
                            0.087       -0.143         -0.333        -2.272            -0.212              -0.023        -0.051          0.076
           Pseudo-R2 = 2.81%                                                        −2 log likelihood = 429.3
  (3D)       -0.631        -2.366*       0.040         -1.073        3.857             -4.344***            0.517*       -0.024          6.317**           0.246
              0.414         0.053        0.989          0.497        0.553              0.001               0.073         0.957          0.017             0.472
                           -0.403        0.007         -0.183        0.657             -0.740               0.088        -0.004          1.076             0.042
           Pseudo-R2 = 16.85 %                                                      −2 log likelihood = 383.2
  (3R)       1.442**        0.635       -1.268         -1.581       -10.270*           -0.069              -0.026        -0.150          0.491             0.989***
             0.049          0.496        0.742          0.290         0.082             0.913               0.925         0.743          0.815             0.003
                            0.138       -0.275         -0.343        -2.229            -0.015              -0.006        -0.033          0.107             0.215
           Pseudo-R2 = 5.35%                                                        −2 log likelihood = 398.6




                                                                                  34
