                                     '# ( )  




                                                       


                                                    
                                              
                                                !"


                                           #$%&*+*,
                                   &-..///0%.&&1./*+*,



                                   '2 2             
                                       345411!11 6!
                                         "07%8 493:+
                                             &"09444




                
        ! " 
#$     $%   !       &
    $'    $ !  &()
* &   +  "    #     &          !
   '           &!$& %   
        + "   #   !

,-...'  #!   !* !)  $!     %
  %&   '/ & %   $  
,  $  !
"1 66&
  887  !"
  '#$%& *+*,
 &"09444
  :8 ::8 5*

                                               

        670 71;&7!6 11767"181&&&11
"&<"7"1! =6&7!&1#
7!6"/$017&      66
& 10 ! &7!7"">/66% 6
%" 66& 7&711%?1""6
1!! @11=!% 1 / 0! 07   6611 !%! 
" A86"617%7!1!11871%$%1
0/ 1 / 1 # !1 1 "/$  %!7 ! "& <&  
7"1  ! =6 ; &7!6 8 1&  <"%  1& 0/
&%@&%0 %!127 1A7601117
/66& "/$#$/7%%"&"1!"11!1
1%"!1&78/&6767167%1 18&7!
!&111!&1% /=>70 1"0!6 !7
1016018!7%;"&/71&7%8%%%& 11!1
<&7&11787  1&"70
7"17!770 &61 1/8&%&7!6
7&71 767!! ?1$/7%B1$C !8&776
66& 1"&"&"7/1""">77!1
61@1!16%%"$1%=% <&"$1A  81
06%"% !1"11"76
66& 6&1D!! 

                                              !"
  %"             67'!111            %"
59=55E                                 7944               59=54*
                                     71 7                 
54"6                      '18 493,:               54"6
"07%8 493:F                    "&G017!                 "07%8 493:F
7 '                                                                H!"G"7!
11G"7!
I.     INTRODUCTION

       While R&D activity is relatively dispersed around the world, innovation of “new-to-the-
world” technologies has historically been concentrated in a few countries. During the 1970s and
the early 1980s, only Switzerland, a relatively small but technology-intensive economy, achieved
a per capita “international” patenting rate comparable to that of U.S. inventors. This variation
among advanced economies in their ability to innovate at the global frontier raises an empirical
puzzle: if inventors can draw on technological and scientific insights from throughout the world,
why does R&D productivity depend on location?
       This question is important for at least two reasons. First, technological innovation plays a
central role in the process of long-run economic growth. Despite substantial agreement about
this proposition, there is a great deal of debate about the underlying drivers of the innovation
process itself. International variation in R&D productivity presents an opportunity to examine
how different influences contribute to technological innovation and thereby distinguish among
different drivers of productivity growth. Second, understanding international differences in R&D
productivity informs science, technology, and broader issues of economic policy. Most R&D
productivity studies have focused on the “innovation” production function (i.e., the relationship
between inputs for innovation such as R&D expenditures or manpower and “visible” outputs
such as patenting or new product announcements) within a given public policy environment
(Griliches, 1984; 1998). However, estimating the impact on innovation of country-level policy
differences ties more directly to policy evaluation.
       Motivated by these twin concerns, this paper evaluates the sources of differences among
countries in terms of their production of visible innovative output. To do so, we introduce a
novel framework based on the concept of national innovative capacity. National innovative
capacity is the ability of a country – as both a political and economic entity – to produce and
commercialize a flow of innovative technology over the long term. Innovative capacity depends
on an interrelated set of investments, policies, and resource commitments which underpin the
production of new-to-the-world technologies. National innovative capacity is not the realized
level of innovative output at a single point in time but reflects the more fundamental

                                                 1
determinants of the innovation process. Differences in national innovative capacity reflect
variation in both economic geography (e.g., the level of spillovers between firms) as well as
cross-country differences in innovation policy (e.g., the level of public support for basic research
or legal protection for intellectual property).
        We develop the national innovative capacity framework by drawing on three distinct
areas of prior research: ideas-driven endogenous growth theory (Romer, 1990), the cluster-based
theory of national industrial competitive advantage (Porter, 1990), and the literature on national
innovation systems (Nelson, 1993). Each of these perspectives seeks to identify factors in a
national environment which determines the flow of innovation. Not surprisingly, these theories
share common elements; however, each also contributes a distinct perspective. For example, in
models of ideas-driven growth, the ideas production function depends on two aggregate factors
that influence the rate of innovation in a national economy: the prior stock of knowledge
accumulated by that economy and the level of R&D effort devoted towards ideas production (as
opposed to final goods production). Porter (1990) emphasizes the microeconomic underpinnings
of innovation in country-specific industrial clusters; this relationship depends on subtle
interactions between input supply and local demand conditions, the presence and orientation of
related and supporting industries, and the nature of local competitive rivalry. By focusing on
industrial clusters (e.g., information technology) rather than individual industry segments (e.g.,
printers), this perspective highlights how the rate of innovation depends critically on both
knowledge spillovers and the nature of technological interdependencies across related sectors.
Finally, the national innovation systems literature, built on rich descriptive accounts of the
organization of innovation in specific countries, tends to emphasize the role of the overall
national policy environment (e.g., intellectual property or trade policy), the educational sector, as
well as more idiosyncratic institutions that affect innovation but for which international
comparison is difficult (e.g., the rules of specific funding agencies in individual countries).
        When considered together, these perspectives suggest that the determinants of national
innovative capacity can be divided into several broad areas. First, national innovative capacity
depends on the presence of a strong common innovation infrastructure, or cross-cutting factors
which contribute broadly to innovativeness throughout the economy. Among other things, the

                                                  2
common innovation infrastructure includes a country’s overall science and technology policy
environment, the mechanisms in place for supporting basic research and higher education, and
the cumulative “stock” of technological knowledge upon which new ideas are developed and
commercialized. The common innovation infrastructure therefore includes several of the key
elements highlighted by the national innovation systems perspective and ideas-driven growth
theory. Second, a country’s innovative capacity depends on the more specific innovation
environments in a country’s industrial clusters. As emphasized by Porter (1990), whether firms
invest and compete on the basis of new-to-the-world innovation depends on the microeconomic
logic inherent in their local competitive environment. Ultimately, it is the microeconomic
conditions associated with a nation’s clusters which determine whether firms respond to
technological opportunity and innovate at the global frontier. Third, national innovative capacity
depends on the strength of linkages between the common innovation infrastructure and specific
clusters. The productivity of a strong national innovation infrastructure is higher when specific
mechanisms or institutions, such as a strong domestic university system and funding mechanisms
for new ventures, migrate ideas from the common infrastructure into commercial practice.
       This theoretical framework can be used to evaluate the sources of cross-country R&D
productivity differences. The framework highlights the potential importance of the composition
of research funding and performance. For example, while public R&D spending contributes to
the common innovation infrastructure, private R&D spending is a more direct reflection of the
innovation environments of a nation’s industrial clusters. As well, the framework incorporates
both the economic and political roles played by national boundaries. More precisely, whereas
one stream of prior research focuses on how geography mediates knowledge spillovers and
differential access to human capital (Porter, 1990; Jaffe, Henderson and Trajtenberg, 1993;
Krugman, 1991), a second area of prior work has emphasized how national R&D productivity
differences may be driven by differential public policies and institutions (Nelson, 1993). Rather
than concentrating on a single explanation for R&D productivity differences across countries, our
analysis incorporates a relatively diverse set of potential drivers and then adjudicates their
empirical salience. Finally, the national innovative capacity framework suggests that while
formal ideas-driven growth models offer insight into the broad determinants of innovative

                                                  3
activity, cross-country differences in R&D productivity may be driven by more nuanced factors
(such as those related to the composition of funding, public policy, and cluster-specific
circumstances).
         We employ our framework to guide an empirical exploration into the determinants of
country-level R&D productivity, estimating the relationship between the production of
international patents and a set of observable characteristics associated with national innovative
capacity.1 By focusing on aggregate international patenting data, our analysis cannot fully reflect
the full range of innovation produced by an economy nor fully control for differences in
countries’ industrial composition. However, like other researchers using international patenting
data (most notably Eaton and Kortum (1996; 1998)), our approach offers several advantages.2
First, by examining patenting (an observable consequence of national innovative capacity), we
separate the production of new technologies from the more general relationship between
investment in R&D and overall productivity growth.3 Second, by exploiting the panel nature of
the data, we can explicitly estimate the strength of several inherently dynamic processes, such as
the accumulation of frontier knowledge over time by an individual country, and identify those
results which are robust to controls for country-level fixed effects. Finally, our empirical
framework can be used to provide comparable quantitative assessments of the innovative
capacity of specific countries over time; these estimates complement the richer but less
comparable findings of the national innovation system literature.
         The bulk of the empirical analysis focuses on a detailed examination of the relationship
between international patenting and different potential contributors to national innovative
capacity. Since some of the most critical forces (such as the environment for innovation in
specific clusters) cannot be observed directly at the aggregate level; we therefore employ a


1
  International patents are defined as those patents which are granted by the USPTO to a non-US inventor (or in the
case of the US, by a major foreign patent granting agency). We also examine alternative indicators of new-to-the-
world innovative output, including scientific articles and export shares in “high-technology” industry segments.
2
  In using international patenting data to understand the sources and consequences of innovation, this paper builds on
Evenson (1984), Dosi, Pavitt, and Soete (1990), and recent work by Eaton and Kortum (1996; 1998). We extend
these prior analyses by linking our results more closely to a range of theories about the determinants of national
innovative capacity and by exploring a relatively long panel which allows us to incorporate both cross-sectional and
time-series variation.
3
  As such, this study complements a much larger literature on the reduced form impact of R&D on TFP growth (Coe

                                                          4
number of intermediate measures (or proxies) which do not capture the underlying drivers
directly but measure important economic outcomes associated with their strength.
        Our results suggest that the production function for international patents is surprisingly
well-characterized by a small number of observable factors which describe a country’s national
innovative capacity. In particular, we find decisive and robust effects on international patenting
from R&D manpower and spending, aggregate policy choices such as the extent of IP protection
and openness to international trade, and the share of research performed by the academic sector
and the share funded by the private sector. We demonstrate that the production function for
international patents depends on each individual country’s knowledge stock (using either GDP
per capita or the country-specific patent stock). Finally, we show that the predicted level of
national innovative capacity has a substantial impact on more downstream commercialization
and diffusion activities (such as achieving a high share of high-technology export markets).
        Our framework provides insight into the nature of country-level R&D productivity
differences. In particular, R&D productivity differences result from factors associated with each
of the distinct sources of national innovative capacity. On the one hand, a number of different
elements of the economic environment vary across countries, including the access to cutting-edge
knowledge, the degree to which R&D expenditures are driven by private sector investment, and
the presence of mechanisms such as universities which link innovative efforts across the
economy. On the other hand, R&D productivity differences are associated with political factors,
such as policy choices and government resource commitments. Consequently, though models of
ideas-driven growth abstract away from these phenomena, accounting for nuanced sources of
variation in the economic and political environment is important for understanding why countries
differ in their R&D productivity. As well, our results suggest that a small set of observable
measures usefully characterizes the determinants of national innovative capacity. While the
national innovation systems literature has tended to rely on detailed qualitative descriptions of
the differences across countries, our results suggest that the consequences of these differences
can be captured by nuanced but observable measures of variation.
        Further, our results have counterfactual implications in terms of trends in the predicted


and Helpman, 1995; Jones, 1995; Park, 1995; Keller, 1997).
                                                       5
values of international patenting.4 We examine how countries differ over time in their predicted
flow of international patents per capita and find that there has been substantial convergence in the
level of per capita national innovative capacity across the OECD since the mid-1970s. During
the 1970s and early 1980s, the predicted level of per capita international patenting by the United
States and Switzerland was substantially above the level of other members of the OECD. Since
that time, several countries (most notably Japan, some Scandinavian countries, and Germany)
have achieved levels of predicted per capita international patenting similar to that of the United
States. Interestingly, there are several exceptions to this overall pattern of convergence;
specifically, the United Kingdom and France have shown little change in their measured level of
national innovative capacity over the past quarter century.
           The remainder of the paper proceeds by first motivating and developing our theoretical
framework. We then outline the relationship between visible innovative output and the elements
of national innovative capacity. After a discussion of the data, we turn to the principal empirical
results of the paper. A final section concludes.



II.        THEORIES OF NEW-TO-THE-WORLD INNOVATION PRODUCTION
           The national innovative capacity framework seeks to integrate several perspectives
regarding the sources of innovation at the national level: (1) theories of ideas-driven growth
(Romer, 1990); (2) microeconomic models of national competitive advantage and industrial
clusters (Porter, 1990); and (3) the literature on national innovation systems (Nelson, 1993).
While these perspectives contain some comment elements, each also identifies some distinct
drivers of the innovation process.
           Ideas-driven growth theory, the most abstract conceptualization, focuses at an aggregate
level, emphasizing the quantifiable relationships among a small set of factors which determine
the flow of new ideas in an economy. While the centrality of technological innovation in
economic growth has been appreciated since the seminal contributions of Solow (1956) and
Abramovitz (1956), it was only in the late 1980s that technological change was treated


4
    Porter and Stern (1999b) review these counterfactuals in much greater detail than is presented here.

                                                            6
endogenously in such models. In particular, the Romer growth model (1990) contributes to this
literature by articulating the economic foundations for a sustainable rate of technological
            ) through the introduction of an ideas sector of the economy. This operates
progress ( A
according the national ideas production function:
         A t =δ H Aλ ,t Atφ .               (1)

According to this production structure, the rate of new ideas production is simply a function of
the number of ideas workers ( H A ) and the stock of ideas available to these researchers ( At ) (see
Figure A). This function makes the rate of technological change endogenous in two distinct
ways. First, the share of the economy devoted to the ideas sector is a function of the R&D labor
market (which determines HA); allocation of resources to the ideas sector depends on R&D
productivity and the private economic return to new ideas. Second, the productivity of new ideas
generation is sensitive to the stock of ideas discovered in the past. When φ > 0, prior research
increases current R&D productivity (the so-called “standing on shoulders” effect); when φ < 0,
prior research has discovered the ideas which are easiest to find, making new ideas discovery
more difficult (the “fishing out” hypothesis). Though there is a sharp debate over the precise
value of these parameters (Jones, 1995; Porter and Stern, 1999a),5 there is relatively broad
agreement that these two factors are, indeed, crucial in explaining the realized level of
economywide innovation.
         Whereas ideas-driven growth theory focuses almost exclusively on this critical but
narrow set of factors, Porter (1990) also incorporates a more nuanced treatment of the impact of
the microeconomic environment in evaluating the relationship between competition, innovation,
and realized productivity growth (Figure B).6 This framework suggests that the microeconomic


5
  In Romer’s model of sustainable long-term growth from new ideas, φ = λ =1, implying that a given percentage
increase in the stock of ideas results in a proportional increase in the productivity of the ideas sector. Under this
assumption, the growth rate in ideas is a function of the level of effort devoted to ideas production ( A = δ H ),
                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                     A
ensuring a sustainable rate of productivity growth. In contrast, Jones (1995) suggests that φ and λ may be less than
one, with the potential consequence of eliminating the possibility of sustainable long-term growth. However, in a
companion paper, we suggest that, at least for explaining the dynamic process of producing visible innovation (i.e.,
patents), the hypothesis that φ = 1 cannot be rejected (Porter and Stern, 1999a).
6
  Rosenberg (1963) was perhaps the first to identify the critical interdependencies between nuanced microeconomic
forces, including the nature of the local competitive environment and the composition of demand, and the realized
                                                          7
environment in a nation’s industrial clusters will be an essential determinant of the rate of
innovation in the private sector. As shown in Figure B, the first determinant of cluster-level
innovative activity is the availability of high-quality and specialized innovation inputs. Above
and beyond the simple availability of trained scientists and engineers (as emphasized in ideas-
driven growth theory), R&D productivity depends on the degree to which R&D personnel are
specialized in disciplines and fields congruent with emerging innovation opportunities in the
local environment. This “matching” process is more likely in the presence of institutions such as
research universities and allocation mechanisms such as efficient labor markets for newly trained
PhDs. A second determinant is the extent to which the local competitive context is both intense
and rewards successful innovators. This depends on innovation incentives such as intellectual
property protection but also consistent pressure from intense local rivalry and openness to
international competition. This stimulates innovation by raising the bar for product and
processes while the inflow of ideas (Sakakibara and Porter, 1998). A third determinant of
cluster-level innovation is the nature of domestic demand for innovative products and services,
which depends in turn on the presence of a sophisticated, quality-sensitive local customer base
for the cluster’s goods. Through increasingly demanding purchasing behavior, such customers
drive domestic commercialization activities toward best-in-the-world technologies, raising the
incentives to pursue globally novel innovative investments. The final element in the cluster
framework is the availability, density and interconnectedness of vertically and horizontally-
related industries within the cluster. The presence of related industries generates positive
externalities both from knowledge spillovers and cluster-level scale economies, which are
particularly salient when clusters are concentrated geographically. Overall, this framework
suggests that the level of realized innovation in an economy depends upon the degree to which
the private R&D enterprise is fueled by domestic competitive pressures.
        Finally, the national innovation systems approach focuses on textured description of the
organization and patterns of activity that contribute to innovative behavior in specific countries,
and identifies those institutions and actors who play a decisive role in particular industries (see




rate of economywide productivity growth.
                                                  8
Nelson, 1993, for the most comprehensive account in this literature).7 While both the ideas-
driven growth models and theories of national industrial competitive advantage incorporate the
role of public policies in shaping the rate of innovation (at least to some degree), the national
innovation systems literature emphasizes the active role played by government policy and
specific institutional actors. Particular institutional and policy choices highlighted by this
literature include the nature of the university system (Nelson and Rosenberg, 1994), the extent of
intellectual policy protection (Merges and Nelson, 1991), the historical evolution of industrial
R&D organization (Mowery, 1984) and the division of labor between private industry,
universities and government in R&D performance and funding (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998).8
         The national innovation systems approach stresses the diversity in national approaches to
innovation. Indeed, a particular goal of this literature is to provide detailed comparisons of
national structures, policies, and institutions. For example, Figures C-1 and C-2 sketch some of
the important components and linkages in the national innovation system of the United States
and Germany, as described in Nelson (1993).
         These three perspectives offer common insights about the innovative process. For
example, all three perspectives agree about the centrality of R&D manpower and the need for a
deep, local technology base. Without skilled scientists and engineers operating in an
environment with access to cutting-edge technology, it is unlikely that a country will produce an
appreciable amount of new-to-the-world innovative output. Beyond these common elements,
Porter highlights how the flow of innovation is shaped by specialized inputs and knowledge,
demand-side pressures, competitive dynamics and externalities across related firms and
industries; in contrast, the national innovation systems literature stresses the role played by a
nation’s common institutions and policies in affecting innovative output. Whereas ideas-driven
growth and cluster theory focus on the economic impact of geography (i.e., spillovers tend to be
localized), the national innovation systems literature focuses more on the political implications of
geography (i.e., the impact of policies and institutions is circumscribed by national borders).


7
 Early articulations of this perspective can be found in Part V of Dosi, et al., (1988).
8
 More generally, this literature builds on insights about the historical relationship between the resource endowments
and geographic structure of the United States and the evolution of its institutions and industries relative to that of
Great Britain and the rest of Europe (Rosenberg, 1969; 1972; Nelson and Wright, 1991; Romer, 1996).
                                                          9
While the national industrial competitive advantage framework acknowledges the importance of
both political and economic factors, prior work has not provided an assessment of how these
areas interact in shaping the realized rate of innovation at the economywide level. For example,
Patel and Pavitt (1994) call for both more qualitative and quantitative analysis in order to
understand “the essential properties and determinants of national systems of innovation,” with an
emphasis on a connection with models of endogenous technical change and underlying
microeconomic forces. It is useful to keep the differences between these three theoretical
perspectives in mind as we introduce and empirically explore an integrated framework based on
the concept of national innovative capacity, the task to which we now turn.


III.   NATIONAL INNOVATIVE CAPACITY
       National innovative capacity is defined as an economy’s potential – as both an economic
and political entity – to produce a stream of commercially relevant innovations. Innovative
capacity depends in part on the overall technological sophistication of an economy and its labor
force, but also an array of investments and policy choices by both government and the private
sector. Innovative capacity is related to but distinct from non-commercial scientific and technical
advances, which do not necessarily involve the economic application of new technology.
Innovative capacity is also distinct from current national industrial competitive advantage or
productivity, which can result from many factors in addition to the development and application
of new technologies. Differences in national innovative capacity reflect variation in both
economic geography (e.g., the level of spillovers between firms) and innovation policy (e.g., the
level of public support for basic research or legal protection for intellectual property).
       Technological opportunities are most likely to be first exploited in those countries with
environments that are conducive to the development of new-to-the-world technology. Given the
sustained investment in innovative capacity in the United States in the two decades after World
War II, for example, it should not be surprising that many of the most important scientific and
technological breakthroughs of that era – including the transistor, the laser, electronic computing,
and gene splicing – were developed and initially exploited by American universities and
companies. Even though some technical or scientific advances may occur in countries with

                                                  10
lower levels of innovative capacity because technological change is at least partly serendipitous,
the development and commercialization of such advances is likely to take place in those
countries that have policies which encourage the application of new technology for industrial use.
Consider the evolution of the chemical sector in the second half of the 19th century. While the
underlying technology was due to the (somewhat accidental) discoveries of the British chemist
Perkins, the sector quickly developed and became a major exporting area for Germany. At least
in part, this migration of the fruits of scientific discovery to Germany was due to that country’s
stronger university-industry relationships and the greater availability of capital for technology-
intensive ventures (Murmann, 1998; Arora, Landau and Rosenberg, 1998).
         We propose a novel framework for organizing the determinants of national innovative
capacity into the common pool of institutions, resource commitments, and policies that support
innovation across the economy, the particular innovation environment in the nation’s industrial
clusters, and the linkages between them. The overall innovative performance of an economy
results from the interplay between the common infrastructure, which benefits a wide array of
fields, and the specific factors that shape innovation in particular clusters.9
         Figure D illustrates the framework. The left-hand side represents the cross-cutting factors
that support innovation in most, if not all, industries. These include such elements as the overall
level of technological sophistication in the economy, the supply of scientifically and technically
trained workers, the extent of overall investments in basic research and higher education, and the
policies that affect the incentives for innovation in any industry. The diamonds on the right side
represent the innovative environment in a nation’s clusters.10 The influences identified by Porter
(1990) shape the ability of firms in a cluster to pursue innovation-oriented strategies and the
pressures on them to do so. Finally, the last part of the framework represents the extent and
quality of linkages between the common innovation infrastructure and the clusters – each cluster
both draws on the common infrastructure while its investments and competitive choices


9
  While the current discussion is focused at the country level, we recognize that one could also conduct such an
analysis at the regional level, particularly for countries (e.g., Italy) with substantial heterogeneity across regions.
10
   We focus on clusters (e.g., information technology) rather than individual industries (e.g., printers) because of the
powerful spillovers connecting the competitiveness and rate of innovation of clusters as a whole. As well, previous
research has suggested that many of the most dynamic industrial clusters are quite local in nature and should be
understood to operate at the regional or even city level (see, in particular, Porter, 1990, 1998).
                                                          11
contribute in part to that infrastructure.


Common Innovation Infrastructure
        Some of the most important investments and choices that support innovative activity
operate across all innovation-oriented sectors in an economy and so belong to the common
innovation infrastructure. Figure E portrays some of its elements. These begin with the two
factors identified by endogenous growth theory as important to the production of ideas in an
economy: an economy’s aggregate level of technological sophistication (A) and the size of the
available pool of scientists and engineers who may be dedicated to the production of new
technologies (HA). We expand on this conception with additional cross-cutting elements that
may be important for explaining the level of innovative output by a country at a point in time
(these factors are denoted XINF in Figure E). Specifically, we include the extent to which an
economy invests in higher education and the funding of basic research. In Germany, for
example, a set of basic research organizations, including the Helmholtz research centers, Max
Planck institutes, and the “Blue List” institutes, complement the work of universities by
performing basic scientific research. Together, these institutions contribute to the pool of
knowledge available for commercial innovation. For our current purpose, the precise
interactions among these actors is less important than their net impact on the aggregate level and
productivity of resources devoted to innovative activity. Conditional on an economy’s overall
technological sophistication and science and technical labor force, spending on higher education
and R&D will boost the potential for and productivity of innovation throughout the economy.
        Public policy choices can also importantly impact the overall incentives and pressures for
innovation an economy, including patent and copyright laws, the extent of R&D tax credits, the
nature of antitrust laws, the rate of taxation of capital gains, and the openness of the economy to
international competition. While some of these policies have stronger impact on some industries
than others – intellectual property protection is especially salient for pharmaceutical innovation,
for example –such policies support innovation across all sectors.




                                                 12
The Cluster-Specific Innovation Environment
         While the common innovation infrastructure sets the general context for innovation in an
economy, it is ultimately firms, influenced by their microeconomic environment, that introduce
and commercialize innovations. Indeed, the innovative performance of an economy ultimately
rests on the behavior of individual firms and clusters. Despite a strong infrastructure supporting
biological and chemical sciences and related technical training in France, for example, the
particular regulatory policies towards pharmaceuticals have limited innovation in the French
cluster through the 1970s and 1980s (Thomas, 1994).
         In thinking about the overall innovative performance of an economy, then, one must
examine the extent to which innovation is supported by the specific environments of a country’s
industrial clusters (see Figure B).11 Measuring these conditions comparably across countries is
difficult. In our empirical work, we employ a proxy measuring the extent of financing of R&D
by a nation’s private sector.


The Quality of Linkages
         The relationship between the common innovation infrastructure and industrial clusters is
reciprocal: for a given cluster innovation environment, innovative output will tend to increase
with the strength of the common innovation infrastructure (and vice versa). While the
microeconomic structure of the environmental technologies cluster in Sweden may encourage
innovation-oriented competition, for example, the ability of the Swedish cluster to generate and
commercialize environmental innovations depends on the overall availability of trained scientists
and engineers, access to basic research, and overall policies which reward the development and
commercialization of new technologies in the economy.
         The strength of linkages determines the extent to which the potential for innovation
induced by the common innovation infrastructure is translated into specific innovative outputs in
a nation’s industrial clusters. While there have been some attempts to understand the role played
by these linking mechanisms, most international comparative studies have confined themselves


11
  Following Porter (1990, 1998), these industrial clusters are the sources of the geographic and cross-industry
spillovers which shape and reinforce productivity and with it national industrial competitive advantage.
                                                         13
to carefully identifying and highlighting the existence of institutions that play such roles in
particular countries (from the Fraunhofer Institutes in Germany to MITI in Japan to the use of
Cooperative Research and Development Associations (CRADAs) in the United States).
         In the absence of strong linking mechanisms, upstream scientific and technical activity
may spill over to other countries more quickly than opportunities can be exploited by domestic
industries. Germany took advantage of British discoveries in chemistry, for example, while three
Japanese firms were the ones to successfully commercialize VCR technology initially developed
in the United States (Rosenbloom and Cusumano, 1987).
         It is difficult to identify comparable measures of the strength of overall linkages across
countries, given the myriad forms such linkages may take. In our empirical work, we do not
attempt to construct a summary measure but focus on two specific but important linkage
mechanisms -- higher education and venture capital – for which data is available.


IV.      MODELING NATIONAL INNOVATIVE CAPACITY
         The national innovative capacity framework highlights several issues which have not
been adequately addressed in prior empirical research on cross-country R&D productivity
differences. First, our framework allows the incorporation of a wide set of both the economic and
political influences of national boundaries. We draw on the stream of prior research that focuses
on the impact of geography on knowledge spillovers and differential access to human capital,12 as
well as the work that emphasizes how regional differences may be driven by differential public
policies and institutions (Nelson, 1993; Ziegler, 1997). Second, our framework suggests that
while formal ideas-driven growth models highlight broad determinants of innovative activity,
cross-country differences in R&D productivity may also be related to more nuanced factors (such
as those related to industrial organization, the composition of funding, and public policy) which
have not been incorporated into formal models but are important to evaluate. Finally, the
framework highlights the potential importance of the composition of research funding and
performance. For example, while public R&D spending adds to the innovative process by


12
 In addition to Porter (1990), see Jaffe, et al., 1993; Krugman, 1991; Saxenian, 1994; Zucker, et al., 1998;
Audretsch and Stephan, 1996; Glaeser, et al., 1992; and Bostic, et al, 1996.
                                                         14
reinforcing the common innovation infrastructure, private R&D spending is a more direct
reflection on the environments for innovation in a nation’s industrial clusters.
        To estimate the relationship between the production of international patents and a set of
key observables which contribute to national innovative capacity, we adopt the ideas production
function of endogenous growth theory as a baseline (recall (1)). The national innovative capacity
framework suggests that a broader set of influences determine innovative performance; hence,,
our framework suggests a slightly more general production function for new-to-the-world
technologies than the Romer formulation:
         =δ (X INF , Y CLUS , ZLINK ) H A λ Aφ
        A                                                       (2)
          j,t j,t j,t  j,t      j,t      j,t  j,t

            is the flow of new-to-the-world technologies from country j in year t, H A is the
As before, A j,t                                                                      j,t


total level of capital and labor resources devoted to the ideas sector of the economy, and A j,t is

the total stock of knowledge held by an economy at a given point in time to drive future ideas
production. In addition, XINF refers to the level of cross-cutting resource commitments and
policy choices which constitute the common innovation infrastructure, YCLUS refers to the
particular environments for innovation in a countries’ industrial clusters, and ZLINK captures the
strength of linkages between the common infrastructure and the nation’s industrial clusters.
Under (2), we are assuming that the various elements of national innovative capacity are
complementary with one another in the sense that the marginal boost to production from
increasing one factor is increasing in the level of all of the other factors.
        Deriving an empirical model from (2) requires addressing three issues: the source of
statistical identification, the precise specification of the innovation output production function,
and the source of the econometric error. Our choices with respect to each of these issues reflects
our overarching goal of letting the data speak for itself as much as possible.
        First, the parameters associated with (2) are estimated using a panel dataset of 17 OECD
countries over twenty years. These estimates can therefore depend on cross-sectional variation,
time-series variation, or both. Choosing among these potential sources of identification depends
on what production relationships we would like to highlight in our analysis. On the one hand,
while comparisons across countries can easily lead to problems of unobserved heterogeneity,

                                                    15
cross-sectional variation provides the direct inter-country comparisons that can reveal the
importance of specific drivers of national innovative capacity. On the other hand, while time-
series variation may be subject to its own sources of endogeneity (e.g., shifts in a country’s
fundamentals may reflect idiosyncratic circumstances in its environment), time series variation
provides insight into how countries’ choices manifest themselves in terms of observed innovative
output. Recognizing the benefits (and pitfalls) associated with each identification strategy, our
analysis explicitly compares how estimates vary depending on the source of identification used.
In most (but not all) of our analysis, we include either year dummies or a time trend, in order to
account for the evolving differences across years in the overall level of innovative output. Much
of our analysis also includes either country dummies or measures which control for aggregate
differences in technological sophistication (e.g., as reflected in GDP per capita).13
         Second, our analysis is organized around a log-log specification, except for qualitative
variables or variables expressed as a percentage. The estimates therefore have a natural
interpretation in terms of elasticities, are less sensitive to outliers, and are consistent with the
majority of prior work in this area (Jones, 1998).
         Finally, with regard to the sources of error, we assume that the observed difference from
the predicted value given by (2) (i.e., the disturbance) arises from an idiosyncratic country/year-
specific technology shock unrelated to the fundamental drivers of national innovative capacity.
         Integrating these choices and letting L X be defined as the natural logarithm of X, our
main specification takes the following form:
  =δ
       YEAR Yt + δ COUNTRYCj + δ INF LX j,t + δ CLUS LYj,t  + δLINK LZLINK + λ LHAj,t + φ LAj,t + ε j,t (3)
                                       INF             CLUS
LA j,t                                                                j,t


Implementing (3) requires that each of the concepts underlying national innovative capacity be
                                 , measured by the level of international patenting, is only
tied to observable measures. As A j,t


observed with delay, our specification imposes a lag between the measures of innovative capacity
and the observed realization of innovative output (the details of which are reviewed in the next
section).

13
  By controlling for year and country effects in most of our analysis, we address some of the principal endogeneity
and autocorrelation concerns. However, we have extensively checked that the results reported in Section V are
robust to various forms of autocorrelation (results available on request) and have investigated the potential for
                                                         16
V.      THE DATA
        This paper employs a novel dataset of patenting activity and its determinants in a sample
of 17 OECD countries from 1973 through 1996. Our results, then, describe the relationship
between innovative inputs and outputs in highly industrialized economies. Table 1 lists all
included countries, and Table 2 defines and provides sources for all variables. We drew on
several public sources in assembling and checking the comparability of these data; the bulk have
been taken from the patent statistics of CHI Research and the most recent publications of the
OECD Basic Science & Technology Statistics, the World Bank, and the NSF Science &
Engineering Indicators.14 We first describe the measures of visible innovative output – most
notably, international patenting – and then discuss our measures of contributors to national
innovative capacity.


The Measurement of Visible Innovative Output
        To conduct empirical analyses of the determinants of visible innovative output, we
required a measure comparable across countries that provides an indicator of commercially
valuable innovative output. We satisfy both objectives by building on the literature that utilizes
patenting activity as an summary statistic for the level of innovative output (Pavitt, 1982;
Griliches, 1984; 1990; Kortum, 1997). While no measure derived from patenting statistics
provides a perfect index of the level of new-to-the-world technological innovation, we use the
number of “international patents” as the best available indicator of the country-specific level of
realized, visible innovative output at one point in time. For this study, we define international
patents (PATENTS) as the number of patents granted to inventors from a particular country by
the USPTO in a given year. For the United States, we utilize the number of patents granted to
establishments in the United States and one additional jurisdiction outside of the US (thus


endogeneity more fully in related work (Porter and Stern (1999a)).
14
   To ensure comparability across countries and time, we subjected each measure to extensive analysis and cross-
checking, including confirming that OECD data conformed with comparable data provided by individual national
statistical agencies. When appropriate, we interpolated missing values for individual variables. For example, most
countries report educational expenditure data only once every other year; our analysis employs the average of the
years just preceding and following a missing year. Financial variables are in PPP-adjusted 1985 $US.
                                                        17
ensuring symmetry with the patenting numbers from other countries).
           Four factors drive our decision to focus our analysis around PATENTS. First, patenting,
by its very nature, reflects an important portion of the innovative output by a country, which as
also be correlated with other innovative outputs, such as protected copyrights and trade secrets.
Second, because USPTO approval requires that patents constitute novel, non-obvious inventions,
patenting captures a sense of the degree to which a national economy is developing and
commercializing new-to-the-world technologies. By only including inventions that are granted
patent protection in the United States, we can be confident both that a relatively common
standard has been applied and that the counted inventions are, in fact, near the global
technological frontier.
           Third, PATENTS measures both technological and economic significance Obtaining a
patent in a foreign country is a costly undertaking, which is only worthwhile for an organization
that anticipates a commercial return in excess of these costs.15 Finally, our use of international
patents draws on an extensive body of prior work (building on the foundations developed in
Griliches (1984)) which has established the advantages (as well as the limitations) of using patent
data relative to other measures of innovation (Evenson, 1984; Dosi, Pavitt and Soete, 1990;
Cockburn and Henderson, 1995; Eaton and Kortum, 1996; 1998). Like these prior studies, we
recognize that patents are but an imperfect measure for the total level of innovation in a given
country. For example, the propensity to apply for patent protection may reflect differences in
countries’ industrial composition (e.g., having a large pharmaceutical sector) or differences in
countries’ internal intellectual property institutions. In part, we address these concerns by
including comparisons with alternative measures of innovative outputs (such as the level of
scientific publication and international high-technology industrial success which we discuss
below) and by examining the robustness of our results to the use of regional subsets and country-
level dummies. Ultimately, our approach is justified by the fact that patents are the most concrete
and comparable measure of innovative output across countries and time. Simply put, patenting
rates constitute “the only observable manifestation of inventive activity with a well-grounded



15
     See Eaton and Kortum (1996, 1998) for a thorough discussion of the economics of international patenting.
                                                          18
claim for universality” (Trajtenberg, 1990: p. 183).16
         For the current sample, the average number of PATENTS produced by a country in a
given year in our sample is 3986 (with a standard deviation of 8220). As can be seen in Figure F,
there has been a temporal increase in PATENTS over the past 20 years, reaching a peak in the
final year of the sample (which corresponds to patents issued in 1996). Figures G shows “per-
capita” patenting rates (i.e., PATENTS / MILLION POP) for different countries over the sample.
Three facts about observed rates of international patenting are of interest. First, there are
substantial differences among countries in realized patenting intensity. Second, at the beginning
of the sample, the only country with a per-capita patenting rate similar to the United States’ rate
is Switzerland.17 Third, over time there is noticeable narrowing of the gap in the realized level of
per capita international patenting across countries. This convergence in per capita international
patenting is most apparent for Japan, but is also characteristic of a substantial number of OECD
countries (although this phenomenon does not hold for countries such as Italy and the U.K.).
         We also explored several potential alternatives to PATENTS which are both less
comparable across countries and less closely linked to the level of innovative output. For
example, the extent of publication in scientific journals (JOURNALS), although a product of
inventive effort, is a more upstream indicator of scientific exploration than an indicator of
commercial significance. Our analysis also includes two more downstream measures of the
impact of national innovative capacity: the realized market share of a country in “high-
technology” industries (MARKET SHARE) and a measure of total factor productivity (TFP),
defined as the level of GDP controlling for the levels of CAPITAL and LABOR. Both
MARKET SHARE and TFP should depend on national innovative capacity over the long run;
however, in the near term, both of these measures will be affected by trade agreements, the rate
and character of the diffusion of innovations, currency rates, and other macroeconomic factors



16
   Trajtenberg (1990) and Griliches (1998) provide a thorough discussion of the role of patents in understanding
innovative activity, stretching back to their use by Schmookler (1966) and noting their ever-increasing use by scholars
in recent years (Griliches, 1984; 1990; 1994). Our use of international patents also has precedent in prior work
comparing international inventive activity (see Dosi, Pavitt, and Soete, 1990; Eaton and Kortum, 1996; 1998).
17
   Recall that the U.S. patenting level is determined by the number of patents issued to U.S. inventors associated with
an institution such as a company, governmental body, or university.

                                                         19
that affect patterns of international trade and productivity growth but are only indirectly related to
the level of innovation realized by a given country.
           Several measures of technological output are neither available nor usefully comparable
across countries or time. For example, the level of technology licensing revenues realized by a
country captures activity in some technology areas, but in practice is not nearly broad-based
enough to have a well-founded claim for comparability. While measures such as copyrights and
trademarks are direct indicators of innovative output in certain industries (e.g., software), the lack
of comparability of these data across countries limits their usefulness for our analysis.


Measuring the Contributors to National Innovative Capacity
           To estimate our model, we require measures of a nation’s common innovation
infrastructure, the innovation environment in its industrial clusters, and the quality of linkages
between them. Especially in the area of common innovation infrastructure, direct measures are
available. More subtle and multi-faceted concepts, such as the cluster-specific innovation
environment, cannot be quantified directly from available international data. We address this
challenge by employing intermediate measures or proxies that do not capture the underlying
drivers but measure important economic outcomes associated with strength in specific areas.
           The common innovation infrastructure consists broadly of a country’s knowledge stock,
the overall level of labor and capital resources devoted to innovative activity, and the other
broad-based policies and resource commitments supporting innovation. Our analysis explores
two distinct measure for a country’s relative knowledge stock at a given point in time (Aj,t):
GDP PER CAPITA and the sum of PATENTS from the start of the sample up until the year of
observation (PATENT STOCK).18 Although both measure the overall state of a country’s
technological development, they differ in important ways. GDP PER CAPITA captures the
ability of a country to translate its knowledge stock into a realized state of economic
development (and so yields an aggregate control for a country’s technological sophistication). In
contrast, PATENT STOCK constitutes a more direct measure of the country-specific pool of


18
     See Porter and Stern (1999a) for a derivation and thorough discussion of differences between these two measures.

                                                           20
new-to-the-world technology.
       We capture the level of capital and labor resources devoted to the ideas-producing sector
using each country’s number of full-time-equivalent scientists and engineers (FT S&E) and
gross expenditures on R&D (R&D $). While individual R&D and engineering efforts will tend
to be specialized in particular technical and scientific areas, the outputs of R&D (either via direct
application or as a basis for future efforts) will impact a wide variety of economic sectors
(Rosenberg, 1963; Glaeser, et al., 1992). Hence, we classify the overall supply of innovation-
oriented labor and capital as a key element of the common innovation infrastructure.
       Similar to the convergence in PATENTS, there is evidence for convergence in the level
of resources devoted to R&D activity. While FT S&E per capita has generally increased among
OECD countries (Figure H), this growth has been higher for those countries whose initial levels
were lower. As a result, disparities in this ratio have decreased over the sample period. In
particular, whereas growth in FT S&E per capita has been particularly substantial in Japan and
the Scandinavian countries, the United Kingdom and United States experienced small declines in
FT S&E per capita. R&D $ also displays a similar pattern of convergence, though somewhat less
dramatically than FT S&E.
       The common innovation infrastructure also encompasses the resources devoted to human
capital investment and policies providing innovation incentives. We include the fraction of GDP
spent on secondary and tertiary education (ED SHARE) as a measure of the intensity of human
capital investment; a high level of ED SHARE creates a base of highly skilled personnel upon
which firms and other institutions across the economy can draw, both for formal R&D activities
as well as other innovation-related activities involving complex problem solving. We include
measures of general broad-based policy choices that particularly affect the environment for
innovative activity, including the relative strength of intellectual property protection (IP), the
relative stringency of country’s antitrust policies (ANTITRUST), and the relative openness of a
country to international trade and competition (OPENNESS). Each of these three policy
variables (measured on a 1-10 Likert Scale from the IMD World Competitive Report for various




                                                  21
years, beginning in the late 1980s)19 should increase the productivity of international patenting
activity for a given level of resources, and so we expect a positive relationship between each and
the rate of international patenting.20 Given that these variables are drawn from an imperfect
survey instrument, however, each can capture the underlying concept with inevitable noise.
         While the common innovation infrastructure is quite amenable to measurement, capturing
the aggregate environment for innovation in a nation’s industrial clusters is quite difficult, due
both to the subtlety of the concepts involved as well as the lack of systematic international data.
We address this challenge by employing intermediate measures that do not capture the
environment directly but measure an outcome associated with the quality of that environment,
namely the intensity of privately financed R&D activity in a nation’s clusters. We measure the
share of overall R&D expenditures which are privately financed (PRIVATE R&D FUNDING).21
Figure I shows the variance in this measure. In 1990, for example, companies financed between
40 to 60 percent of R&D in most countries. Only in Japan and Switzerland did companies fund
more than 70 percent of R&D expenditure. Interestingly, the social market economies of Sweden
and Finland are among the highest countries in terms of company funding of R&D.
         The final element of the framework, the strength of linkages between industrial clusters
and the common innovation infrastructure, is similarly difficult to quantify. The mechanisms for
scientific and technological transfer vary both across countries and over time. Our analysis
considers two mechanisms which more qualitative research suggests are relatively consistent
contributors to the strength of linkages: the share of R&D performed by the university sector
(UNIV R&D PERFORMANCE) and the availability of venture-backed financing (VC). By
many accounts, strength in these areas will translate to a more effective transfer of knowledge
and commercially relevant technologies from the common innovation infrastructure to specific


19
   IP, OPENNESS, and ANTITRUST are average (1-10) Likert score variables from an annual survey in which
executives rank their perceptions of countries’ orientations on a variety of dimensions relevant to international
business. It is important to note that these variables enter the data in the late 1980s (between 1986-1989 depending
on the variable) and so the analysis corrects for the “missing values” for this variable prior to these years.
20
   As well, each of these policy measures may increase the level of resources devoted towards innovation; however,
our analysis focuses on the productivity effects of these policies, above and beyond the measured level of resources.
21
   We abstract away from higher-order terms in our analysis. While including such measures would allow us to
incorporate concavity into the analysis, our focus is on these measure’s first-order impact rather than their predicted
impact outside of their observed range.
                                                          22
industrial clusters (and vice versa). For example, relative to government laboratories, university
research will tend to be more accessible to researchers in industry (i.e., universities provide a
forum for the exchange of ideas between different R&D communities). Further, the unique role
that universities play in training future industrial researchers suggests another way in which
common resources for innovation (i.e., S&E graduate students) are mobilized in a nation’s
industrial clusters. Similarly, VC (measured as a 1-10 Likert scale variable by the IMD
Competitiveness Report) reflects the degree to which risk capital is available to translate
scientific and technological outputs into domestic opportunities for further innovation and
commercialization.


VI.      EMPIRICAL RESULTS
         Our empirical results are presented in three parts. First, we present the primary results of
the paper, estimating the determinants of the production of new-to-the-world technologies. The
second section explores the relationship between national innovative capacity and more upstream
basic scientific activity (JOURNALS), as well as the downstream consequences of innovative
capacity, including TFP and high-technology MARKET SHARE. The final section discusses the
patterns in national innovative capacity implied by the estimates over the sample period.


Determinants of the Production of New-to-the-World Technologies
         The results of estimating the relationship between innovative output (PATENTSt+3)22 and
the drivers of national innovative capacity ( A j,t , H Aj,t , X INF    CLUS
                                                                 j,t , Yj,t  , ZLINK
                                                                                j,t  ) are presented in Tables

4, 5, and 6. We present a broad range of results, in order to highlight the main relationships in
the data as well as the source of variation underlying particular findings. Tables 4 and 5 each use
a different measure of a country’s knowledge stock (Aj,t) with a similar battery of specifications;
Table 4 uses GDP PER CAPITA while Table 5 is based on the PATENT STOCK variable.
Table 6 explores the robustness of the results from these two prior tables to alternative
specifications and different sample subsets. Overall, we find a robust relationship between


22
  Recall that we evaluate the relationship of PATENTS in year t+3 to the level of the contributors to innovative
capacity in year t and that our main results are robust to changes in this lag structure.
                                                         23
PATENTS and measures associated with each source of national innovative capacity: the
common innovation infrastructure, the cluster-specific innovation environment, and the linkages
between these two areas.
        Table 4 begins with a specification which is analogous to the formal model of the
national ideas production function suggested by Romer (1990) and Jones (1995). In the first
regression (4-1), we see that PATENTS is increasing in the variables suggested by endogenous
growth theory, L GDP PER CAPITA and L FTE S&E. Interpreting these coefficients as
elasticities, (4-1) implies that a 10 percent increase in GDP per capita is associated with over a 13
percent rise in international patent output.23 As suggested by proponents of endogenous growth, a
country’s existing level of technological sophistication and the extent of resources devoted to
R&D play key roles in determining innovative output.
        Though striking, (4-1) does not imply that A and HA are the only decisive factors in the
production function for observable innovative output. In (4-2), we include the remainder of the
measures of HA and XINF , which describe the quality of the common innovative infrastructure.
This specification (along with (4-3) and (4-4)) also includes year-specific fixed effects to control
for variation arising from changes in the rate of patent grants per year. With the exception of
ANTITRUST, each of the elements representing the common innovation infrastructure impacts
international patenting significantly, with the expected sign, and with an economically important
magnitude. In addition, these regressors have only a modest impact on the coefficients
associated with L GDP PER CAPITA and L FT S&E. Perhaps more interestingly, the sum of
the coefficients on L R&D $ and L FT S&E in (4-2) is approximately equal to the single
coefficient on L FT S&E in (4-1). In other words, the total impact of employment and financial
resources is similar whether we focus on a single variable (e.g., FT S&E in (4-1)) or include both
measures (e.g., FT S&E and R&D $ in (4-2)).



23
  It is interesting to note that, by themselves, the two regressors in (4-1) explain nearly 94 percent of the total
variance in PATENTS. However, further analysis (available from the authors) suggests that, using our measures of
national innovative capacity, an extremely high overall proportion of the variance associated with PATENTS can be
explained through the inclusion of only two or three regressors. In other words, a number of different measures
associated with our framework are effective in distinguishing the relatively persistent cross-sectional variation
between countries.

                                                        24
         The elements of XINF are expressed as Likert scale measures (IP, OPENNESS, and
ANTITRUST) and as shares (ED SHARE). The coefficients associated with the Likert scale
measures are equal to the predicted percentage change in PATENTS which would result from a
one unit change in that variable (e.g., from a value of 3 to 4). For example, the coefficients on IP
(0.22) and OPENNESS (0.10) imply that a one-point increase in these Likert measures is
associated, on average, with a 22 percent and 10 percent increase in PATENTS, respectively.
Given the relative crudeness and paucity of these measures, it is striking that these variables enter
significantly, suggesting their potential importance for understanding national innovative
capacity.24 Given that it is specified as a share between 0 and 100, the ED SHARE coefficient
(0.11) implies that an increase of 1 percentage point in ED SHARE (approximately a standard
deviation) is associated with an 11 percent increase in the level of PATENTS.
         In (4-3), we add the remaining measures of the determinants of national innovative
capacity, the cluster-specific innovation environment (YCLUS) and the quality of linkages between
the common infrastructure and clusters (ZLINK) The fraction of R&D funding provided by
industry and the fraction of R&D performed by universities enter with a positive sign and are
significant at the 5 percent level. In other words, controlling for the level of R&D spending in an
economy, the composition of such spending is associated with the level of realized international
patenting. Strikingly, the significant impact of UNIV R&D PERFORMANCE suggests that
countries who have located a higher share of their R&D performance in the educational sector (as
opposed to the private sector or in intramural government programs) have been able to achieve
significantly higher patenting productivity. VENTURE CAPITAL, while it does enter positively
into the equation, is not significant (perhaps reflecting the relatively low level of variation of VC
across the world outside the United States and the existence of non-VC channels of risk capital in
many OECD countries). Finally, consistent with prior studies, the coefficients on the year
dummies decline over time, suggesting that average global R&D has declined since the mid
1970s. In other words, while PATENTS has been increasing over time as a result of increased
investments in innovation and improvements in the policy environment, countries have also

24
  Indeed, given the noisy nature of the Likert variables and the fact that overly rigorous enforcement of antitrust
policies can stifle rather than stimulate innovation (e.g., by expropriating the returns from successful R&D efforts), it

                                                           25
tended to experience a “raising the bar” effect, in which ever-more R&D resources must be
devoted in order to yield a constant flow of visible innovative output.
         Equation (4-4) presents our preferred model of national innovative capacity, which
includes only those contributors to national innovative capacity that enter significantly in prior
models. This specification (along with (4-1) through (4-3)) documents a robust relationship
between PATENTS and measures that reflect the quality of the common innovation
infrastructure, the cluster-specific innovation environment, and the linkages between them. As
well as being statistically significant, each of the included regressors has a quantitatively
important impact. While at one level the results are consistent with a central tenet of science and
technology policy emphasizing the centrality of R&D manpower (FT S&E), the more general
conclusion is that high levels of innovative output are associated with coordinated investments
across each of the sources of national innovative capacity.
         In Table 5, we evaluate a set of regressions which resemble Table 4, except in two
respects. First, throughout Table 5, we use the alternative measure of Ajt, PATENT STOCK,
rather than GDP PER CAPITA.25 Whereas GDP PER CAPITA is a comprehensive, composite
measure of a country’s technological sophistication, PATENT STOCK provides a more direct
(but less inclusive) measure of the knowledge stock upon which a country draws for
technological innovation. Second, the specifications experiment with alternative structures to
control for year and country effects; while (5-1) includes dummies for every country and year, (5-
2) through (5-4) rely on the use of a control for the “baseline” knowledge stock, GDP 1967, to
account for country-level heterogeneity, as well as a time trend.26 By exploring differences in the
measure of the knowledge stock as well as by varying the means of identification, Table 5
highlights results robust to alternative assumptions about the nature of heterogeneity and the


is perhaps not surprising that the model does not identify a separate impact for the ANTITRUST variable.
25
   By including PATENT STOCK in the specification which includes FT S&E and controls for year and country
effects, (5-1) serves as an empirical test of a key parametric restriction associated with ideas-driven growth models.
In particular, in order for ideas production to be a sustainable source of equilibrium long-term growth, φ = 1 (a
hypothesis which cannot be rejected in (5-1)). Such parametric restrictions for ideas-driven growth models are
explored much more extensively (and derived formally) in Porter & Stern (1999a).
26
   This contrasts with our use of year-specific fixed effects from Table 4. However, note that because the Likert
variables are not observed until the late 1980s, we include separate dummy variables to denote whether such
variables are included in the regression.
                                                          26
specification for the country-specific level of technological knowledge.
       Though there are differences in the magnitude of some variables and the significance of
others, the results obtained using PATENT STOCK are in broad agreement with those of Table
4. Perhaps the most important difference is that the coefficient on FT S&E is much smaller in
the equations of Table 5, suggesting a higher degree of concavity in the patent production
function than the prior models. In addition, the coefficient on R&D $ is insignificant (though of
similar magnitude to Table 4), implying that PATENT STOCK incorporates much of the
statistical information embedded in R&D $. Further, OPENNESS becomes negative and
insignificant, perhaps because of the small number of observations for this variable.
Nonetheless, the basic elements of our framework, including the cluster-specific innovation
environment and the quality of linkages, continue to be significant and economically important in
this alternative formulation. Finally, the coefficients on the YEAR trend again exhibit the overall
declining trend for PATENTS for a given level of resources. With each passing year, a constant
level of the elements of national innovative capacity results in approximately 6 percent fewer
PATENTS.
       Table 6 further explores the empirical robustness of the determinants of national
innovative capacity. Equations (6-1) and (6-2) simultaneously include GDP PER CAPITA and
PATENT STOCK. Both measures of the knowledge stock are significant in these models;
however, the relative magnitudes of each depend on the inclusion of other regressors.
Specifically, whereas the magnitude on GDP PER CAPITA is almost one when only PATENT
STOCK and FT S&E are included, the magnitude of GDP PER CAPITA decreases (to 0.11)
while the coefficient on PATENT STOCK increases (to 0.78) when the remaining variables from
(4-4) are included. Together with the relatively consistent results from Tables 4 and 5, we
interpret this as suggesting that both PATENT STOCK and GDP PER CAPITA provide useful
measures of a nation’s knowledge stock, but that it is difficult to identify their separate effects.
       To establish the precise role of cross-sectional variation in our results, equation (6-3)
includes country-specific fixed effects along with the regressors of our preferred model (4-4).
Most of the results are robust to this modification: GDP per capita, R&D expenditure, FTE
R&D, and higher education spending remain significant and of the expected sign in explaining

                                                 27
patent output. It is interesting to note that the magnitude of the coefficient on FT S&E increases,
suggesting that the level of innovative output is quite sensitive to changes in the level of the
scientific workforce within a given country. However, the R&D composition variables become
insignificant. In part, this occurs because UNIV R&D PERFORMANCE and PRIVATE R&D
FUNDING tend to change only very slowly over time; we therefore cannot estimate their impact
by relying only on time-series variation. As well, the coefficient on OPENNESS becomes
significant and negative, though it seems that this result depends on the short time-series for
which this variable is observed (1989 – 1993) and the existence of a few outlying observations.
       Finally, in (6-4) and (6-5), we check for robustness to restricting the sample to specific
sample subsets. In (6-4), we restrict the sample only to post-1984 data, highlighting a period of
relatively higher macroeconomic stability and in which the reliability of the data is most likely
improved. Interestingly, all of the results remain significant, though the sensitivity of
international patent output to GDP PER CAPITA is slightly lower in this period, while the
sensitivities to other factors, including PRIVATE R&D FUNDING and UNIV R&D
PERFORMANCE increase. Equation (6-5) evaluates whether the results obtain when restricting
attention to only European countries. Again, the results remain largely the same. The impact of
GDP PER CAPITA on innovative output is somewhat lower in these countries, while the relative
influence of ED SHARE is somewhat higher. Similar to earlier results, OPENNESS loses its
significance in this sub-sample, suggesting that this result is driven by variation outside of the
European data.


Scientific Inputs, Innovative Outputs, and Productivity
       Our analysis so far has focused exclusively on the sensitivity of PATENTS to measures
of the strength of national innovative capacity. In this sub-section, we extend our analysis in two
distinct ways. First, we consider an alternative measure of the output of national innovative
capacity, the level of publication in academic journals (JOURNALS). Here we find that the
determination of JOURNALS is not as easily characterized by the national innovative capacity
framework as PATENTS. After this brief analysis, we consider more downstream consequences
of innovative capacity, where we establish that the elements of national innovative capacity play

                                                 28
an important role in shaping downstream consequences, such as TFP and MARKET SHARE.
        In Table 7, we consider the relationship between JOURNALS and the other elements of
our national innovative capacity framework. Whereas PATENTS constitutes a measure of
commercializable output, JOURNALS embodies the realization of more basic scientific and
engineering activity. Scientific achievement will be an important byproduct (though not the
central consequence) of national innovative capacity, and the degree to which the two are related
is subject to debate. Indeed, (7-1) suggests that many of the key drivers of PATENTS do not
significantly enter the JOURNALS production function. While there are some common factors
(such as GDP PER CAPITA, FT S&E, and ED SHARE), the remainder of the variables are
either insignificant or of the opposite sign from the results in Tables 4 through 6. In other words,
JOURNALS is less closely associated with the foundations of national innovative capacity than
the realized level of international patent production.
        As well, in (7-2), we explore the impact of JOURNALS in our preferred PATENTS
specification, (4-4). Although this specification is obviously subject to endogeneity (and we
leave separating out the separate exogenous drivers of each to future work), the results suggest
that while JOURNALS is positively correlated with PATENTS, its inclusion does not
substantially change our earlier qualitative conclusions, except for reducing OPENNESS to
insignificance (consistent with some of our other robustness checks), and reducing the coefficient
on GDP PER CAPITA. In other words, the empirical relationship between international
patenting and key drivers of commercially-oriented innovative output is relatively unaffected, at
least in the short to medium term, by the level of abstract scientific knowledge produced by a
country.
        Table 8 turns attention to more downstream outcomes and, in particular, the
consequences of PATENTS. We begin with an overall assessment of the sensitivity of TFP to
cumulative ideas production (PATENT STOCK). Specifically, (8-1) evaluates the sensitivity of
GDP to PATENT STOCK, conditional on the level of LABOR AND CAPITAL. As such, we
can interpret the coefficient on PATENT STOCK as a contributor to the level of TFP.27 As


27
 Alternatively, we could have simply imposed factor shares on LABOR and CAPITAL and computed TFP directly;
while we experimented with this formulation, the less restrictive specification in (8-1) is more consistent with the
                                                        29
discussed more fully in Porter and Stern (1999a), this relationship is critical for establishing the
role of “ideas production” in long-run economic growth. Theoretical growth models assume that
there is a strong R&D productivity advantage associated with technological sophistication (see
Tables 4 and 5) that translates into a proportional advantage in the realized level of TFP. In
contrast, (8-1) suggests that while the PATENT STOCK has a significant effect on TFP, this
effect is much smaller than proportionality (which would require that the coefficient be equal to
unity). While this modest relationship lends support to the idea that national innovative capacity
plays a significant role in shaping the medium-term level of productivity, (8-1) also raises the
possibility that the linkage between national innovative output and productivity growth may be
more subtle than commonly assumed.
         Finally, (8-2) through (8-4) examine whether MARKET SHARE can be explained in the
context of the national innovative capacity framework. First, equation (8-2) shows that (lagged)
PATENT STOCK and a time trend explain nearly 80 percent of the variance in MARKET
SHARE across countries. This demonstrates that countries which accumulate advanced
knowledge stocks also achieve high shares in worldwide high-technology markets. Equation (8-
3) replaces PATENT STOCK with the predicted level of PATENTS, where the weights are
derived from (4-4). Not surprisingly, given how closely we characterize PATENTS in (4-4), this
measure provides precise predictive value in explaining MARKET SHARE. Finally, in (8-4), we
include the measures incorporated into our preferred model of national innovative capacity (4-4).
 This exercise also fits the data similarly well. However, while several elements of national
innovative capacity are strongly significant in the analysis (L FT S&E, ED SHARE,
OPENNESS, PRIVATE R&D FUNDING, and UNIV R&D PERFORMANCE), others show no
association, such as GDP PER CAPITA and the IP measure. In other words, national innovative
capacity can usefully provide insight into the evolution of international trade patterns in high-
technology areas.
Trends in Innovative Capacity28
         We now turn to our final empirical exercise, exploring the quantitative implications of



exploratory nature of the exercise in this paper (but see Porter and Stern (1999a) for further details).
28
   This material is drawn from Porter and Stern (1999b).
                                                           30
our findings by deriving an “index” of innovative capacity which is consistent across countries
and over time. This was based on applying the coefficients from our preferred model (4-4) to the
realized values of resource and policy choices for each country in each year; this predicted
PATENTS value is then converted into a per capita measure by dividing by the contemporaneous
level of POPULATION. In effect, we compute the predicted value for a country’s level of
international patenting per capita based on its fundamental resource and policy commitments,
and so provide a useful benchmark to compare the relative ability of countries to produce
innovations at the international frontier.
         The results of this exercise are presented in Figure J. Consistent with the historical data,
the United States and Switzerland are in the top tier throughout the sample period. As a result of
sustained investments in fundamentals, Japan, Germany, and Sweden join this top group over the
course of the 1980s. A second set of countries, including the remaining Scandinavian countries,
France, and the UK, comprise a “middle tier,” while a third group, including Italy, New Zealand
and Spain, lags behind the rest of the OECD over the full time period.29
         The most striking finding of this exercise is the convergence in measured innovative
capacity among OECD countries over the past quarter century. Not only has the top tier
expanded to include Japan, Germany, and Sweden, but some middle tier countries, such as
Denmark and Finland, have achieved substantial gains in innovative capacity. Moreover, this
convergence seems to be built on fundamentals rather than transient changes. This is
exemplified by the case of Germany, in which innovative capacity grew strongly throughout the
1980s. Despite a drop-off resulting from reunification with the East beginning in 1990, Germany
maintained a relatively high level of innovative capacity throughout the 1990s. In general, there
has been a slow but steady narrowing of the gap between the innovation leaders in the OECD and
nations with historically lower levels of innovative capacity. It is important to note, however,
that some major countries, most notably France and the United Kingdom, have remained at a
constant level. Compared to others, these countries have eroded their relative innovative


29
   It is important to bear in mind that these results are in part affected by the industrial composition of national
economies. Our choice of PATENTS implies that innovative in countries whose clusters are concentrated in
industries with low patent intensities (such as Italy in textiles) will be understated relative to those with clusters in
patent-intensive industries (such Switzerland in pharmaceuticals).
                                                            31
capacity over the past quarter century by neglecting investments in common innovation
infrastructure, supportive cluster environments, and/or linkage mechanisms. While this approach
cannot provide a forecast of the ability of a country to commercialize new technologies in the
short term, our results do suggest that that both Japan and Scandinavia have already established
themselves as important innovation centers and that the sources of new-to-the-world innovation
are likely to become more diverse over time.


VII.   CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
       Evaluating the sources of differences in R&D productivity across countries serves the
dual purpose of informing science and technology policy and illuminating the factors that
underlie national productivity growth. We draw on several distinct research streams which
inform this debate, including ideas-driven endogenous growth theory (Romer, 1990), cluster-
based models of national competitive advantage (Porter, 1990), and the literature on national
innovation systems (Nelson, 1993). Although these perspectives share common elements, each
emphasizes different factors in the realization of national innovative output. We introduce the
concept of national innovative capacity to integrate these previous perspectives and provide a
framework for empirical testing across countries.
       Using this framework, we explore the country-level determinants of innovative output in
OECD countries between 1973 and 1993. Our results suggest that the empirical determinants of
international patenting activity are (a) amenable to systematic empirical analysis motivated by
our framework yet (b) more nuanced than the limited factors highlighted by ideas-driven growth
theory. We find a small but important set of additional factors also plays an important role in
realized R&D productivity. Further theoretical and empirical research in growth theory may
benefit from incorporating the role of industrial organization and the national policy environment
(e.g., the role of the university system or the composition of private versus public funding).
       To the extent that we found a parsimonious set of regressors which usefully characterizes
the production function for international patents, country-level R&D productivity seems to be
amenable to quantitative analysis. This finding should be of particular interest to researchers in
the tradition of the national innovation systems literature. In particular, it would seem that future

                                                 32
research should distinguish carefully between those phenomena which are reflected in observable
measures of innovative output (such as the patenting activities we examine here) versus more
subtle effects which may not be subject to direct observation (such as institutions or mechanisms
encouraging non-patented process innovations). At the very least, our results suggest that
qualitative studies may benefit from articulating the potential impact of specific institutions on
observed national R&D productivity as well as on observables associated with national
innovative capacity.
       Our results suggest that public policy plays an important role in shaping a country’s
national innovative capacity. Beyond simply increasing the level of R&D resources available to
the economy, the government’s policy agenda plays an important role in shaping human capital
investment and innovation incentives. Each of the countries that have increased their estimated
level of innovative capacity over the last quarter century – Japan, Sweden, Finland, Germany –
have implemented policies which encourage human capital investment in science and
engineering (e.g., by establishing and investing resources in technical universities) as well as
competition on the basis of innovation (e.g., through the adoption of R&D tax credits and the
gradual opening of markets to international competition).
       Finally, the United States, which since World War II has been the dominant supplier of
new technologies to the rest of the world, has been less proactive in its investment in innovative
capacity since the late 1980s. With the conclusion of the Cold War, the traditional American
rationale for investing in its national innovation infrastructure was reduced, and U.S. policy has
consequently become less focused. Convergence in innovative capacity across the OECD is
therefore should not be surprising. However, this convergence holds important implications for
the future distribution of innovative activity: specifically, it suggests that the commercial
exploitation of emerging technological opportunities (from biotechnology to robotics to Internet
technologies) may well be less geographically concentrated than was the case during the post
World War II era.




                                                 33
                                         REFERENCES

Ambramovitz, M. (1956). “Catching Up, Forging Ahead and Falling Behind,” Journal of Economic
     History, 46, 385-406.

Audretsch, D. and P. Stephan (1996). "Company-Scientist Locational Links: The Case of
       Biotechnology," American Economic Review, 86(3), 641-652.

Arora, A., Landau, R., Rosenberg, N. (1998). Chemicals And Long-Term Economic Growth :
       Insights from the Chemical Industry. New York (NY): Wiley.

Bostic, R., J. Gans, and S. Stern. (1996). “Urban Productivity and Factor Growth in the Late
        Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Urban Economics.

Coe, D. and E. Helpman (1995). “International R&D Spillovers,” European Economic Review, 39,
       859-887.

Cockburn, I. and R. Henderson (1994). “Racing to Invest? The Dynamics of Competition in Ethical
      Drug Discovery,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 3 (3), 481-519.

Dosi, G.; C. Freeman; G. Silverberg; and L. Soete (1988). Technical Change and Economic Theory.
        London (UK): Pinter Publishers.

Dosi, G., K. Pavitt and L. Soete (1990). The Economics of Technical Change and International
       Trade. New York (NY): Columbia University Press.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (1996). “Trade in Ideas: Patenting & Productivity in the OECD,” Journal
        of International Economics, 40(3-4), 251-278.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (1998). “International Technology Diffusion: Theory and Measurement,”
        International Economic Review, forthcoming.

Evenson, R. (1984). “International Invention: Implications for Technology Market Analysis," in
      Zvi Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents, and Productivity. Chicago (IL): University of Chicago
      Press: 89-126.

Glaeser, E., H. Kallal, J. Scheinkman, A. Shleifer. (1992). "Growth in Cities," Journal of Political
       Economy, 100(6), 1126-1152.

Griliches, Z., ed. (1984). R&D, Patents and Productivity. Chicago (IL): Chicago University Press.

                                                34
Griliches, Z. (1990). “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey,” Journal of Economic
       Literature, 92, 630-653.

Griliches, Z. (1994). "Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint," American Economic Review,
       84, 1-23.

Griliches, Z. (1998). R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence. Chicago (IL): University
        of Chicago Press.

IMD, World Competitiveness Yearbook, Lausanne, Switzerland, 1989-1999.

Jones, C. (1995). “R&D Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 103,
       739-784.

Jones, C. (1998). Introduction to Economic Growth. New York (NY): W.W. Norton & Company.

Keller, W. (1997). “Trade and the Transmission of Technology,” NBER Working Paper #6113.

Kortum, S. (1997). “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica, 65(6), 1389-
      1419.

Krugman, P. (1993). Geography and Trade. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.

Merges, R.P. and R. Nelson (1990). “On the Complex Economics of Patent Scope,” Columbia Law
      Review 90 pp. 839-916.

Mowery, D. (1984). “Firm Structure, Government Policy, and the Organization of Industrial
     Research: Great Britain and the United States, 1900-1950,” Business History Review, 58,
     504-531.

Mowery, D. and N. Rosenberg (1998). Paths to Innovation. Cambridge (UK): Cambridge
     University Press.

Murmann, J. P. (1998). Knowledge and Competitive Advantage in the Synthetic Dye Industry, 1850-
     1914: The Coevolution of Firms, Technology, and National Institutions in Great Britain,
     Germany, and the United States. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Columbia University.

Nelson, R., ed. (1993). National Innovation Systems: A Comparative Analysis New York (NY):
        Oxford University Press.

Nelson R., and R. Rosenberg (1994). “American Universities and Technical Advance in Industry,”
       Research Policy 23(3) pp. 323-348.


                                              35
Nelson R.R. and G. Wright (1992). “The Rise and Fall of American Technological Leadership: The
       Postwar Era in Historical Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature 30 (4) pp. 1931-64.

Park, W. (1995). “International R&D Spillovers and OECD Economic Growth,” Economic Inquiry
       33, 571-591.

Patel, P. and K. Pavitt. (1994). “National Innovation Systems: Why They Are Important, and How
        They Might Be Measured and Compared,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
        3(1), 77-95.

Pavitt, K. (1982). “R&D, Patenting, and Innovative Activities: A Statistical Exploration,” Research
        Policy, 11(1), 33-51.

Porter, M.E. (1990). The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York (NY): Free Press.

Porter, M.E. (1998). “Clusters and Competition: New Agendas for Companies, Governments, and
        Institutions,” On Competition. Boston (MA): Harvard Business School Press.

Porter, M.E., and S. Stern (1999a). “Measuring the ‘Ideas’ Production Function: Evidence from
        International Patent Output,” mimeo, MIT Sloan School of Management.

Porter, M.E., and S. Stern (1999b). The New Challenge to America’s Prosperity: Findings from the
        Innovation Index. Washington (DC): Council on Competitiveness.

Romer, P. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, S71-
      S102.

Romer, P. (1996). “Why, Indeed, in America?” American Economic Review 86 (2) pp. 202-206.

Rosenberg, N. (1963). “Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910,” Journal
      of Economic History, 23, 414-443.

Rosenberg, N. ed., (1969). The American System of Manufactures. Edinburgh (GB): Edinburgh
      University Press.

Rosenberg, N.(1972). Technology and American Growth. New York (NY): Harper.

Rosenbloom, R. and M. Cusumano (1997). "Technological Pioneering and Competitive Advantage:
      The Birth of the VCR Industry," California Management Review, 29(4), 51-76.

Sakakibara, M. and M. Porter (1998). "Competing at Home to Win Abroad: Evidence from
       Japanese Industry," Harvard Business School Working Paper 99-036.


                                                36
Saxenian, A. (1994) Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128.
       Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press.

Schmookler, J. (1966). Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge (MA): Harvard University
     Press.

Solow, R.M. (1956). “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 70, 65-94.

Thomas, L.G. (1994). “Britain vs. France in Global Pharmaceuticals,” Industrial and Corporate
     Change, 3 (2).

Trajtenberg, M. (1990). “Patents as Indicators of Innovation,” Economic Analysis of Product
       Innovation. Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press.

Ziegler, N. (1997). Governing Ideas: Strategies for Innovation in France and Germany. Cornell
        (NY): Cornell University Press.

Zucker, L. and M. Darby (1998). “Intellectual Human Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology
       Enterprises,” American Economic Review, 88 (1), 290-306.




                                              37
                                         TABLE 1
                                SAMPLE COUNTRIES (1973-1995)

Australia              France                  Netherlands             United Kingdom
Austria                Germany*                Norway                  United States
Canada                 Italy                   Spain
Denmark                Japan                   Sweden
Finland                New Zealand             Switzerland



* Prior to 1990, data for the Federal Republic of Germany include only the federal states of West
  Germany; beginning in 1991, data for Germany incorporate the New Federal States of the former
  German Democratic Republic.




                                                  38
                                                           TABLE 2
                                                   VARIABLES* & DEFINITIONS

        VARIABLE              FULL VARIABLE                                  DEFINITION                                     SOURCE
                                  NAME
INNOVATIVE OUTPUT
PATENTSj,t+3    International Patents                   Patents granted in the US to establishments in country j      CHI US patent database
                                                        in year (t+3); for the United States, the number of
                                                        patents granted both domestically and in at least one
                                                        other CHI-documented country
PATENTS /                   International Patents per   PATENTS divided by million persons in the population          CHI US patent database
MILLION POPj,t+3            Million Persons
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A    GDP PER      GDP Per Capita            Gross Domestic Product in thousands of PPP-adjusted                       World Bank
     CAPITAj,t                              1985 US$
A    PATENT       Stock of International    Cumulative PATENTS from 1973 until (t-1)                                  CHI US patent database
     STOCKj,t     Patents
HA   FT S&Ej,t    Aggregate Employed        Full Time Equivalent scientists and engineers in all                      OECD Science &
                  S&T Personnel             sectors                                                                   Technology Indicators
HA   R&D $j,t     Aggregate R&D             R&D expenditures in all sectors in millions of PPP-                       OECD Science &
                  Expenditures              adjusted 1985 US$                                                         Technology Indicators
XINF OPENNESSj,t  Openness to               Average survey response by executives on a 1-10 scale                     IMD World
                  International Trade &     regarding relative openness of economy to international                   Competitiveness Report
                  Investment                trade and investment
XINF IPj,t        Strength of Protection    Average survey response by executives on a 1-10 scale                     IMD World
                  for Intellectual Property regarding relative strength of IP                                         Competitiveness Report
XINF ED SHAREj,t  Share of GDP Spent on     Public spending on secondary & tertiary education                         World Bank
                  Higher Education          divided by GDP
XINF ANTITRUSTj,t Stringency of Antitrust   Average survey response by executives on a 1-10 scale                     IMD World
                  Policies                  regarding relative strength of national antitrust policies                Competitiveness Report
CLUSTER-SPECIFIC INNOVATION ENVIRONMENT
YCLUS PRIVATE     Percentage of R&D R&D expenditures funded by industry divided by total                              OECD Science &
      R&D         Funded by Private R&D expenditures                                                                  Technology Indicators
      FUNDINGj,t  Industry
QUALITY OF LINKAGES
ZLINK UNIV R&D   Percentage of R&D                      R&D expenditures performed by universities divided by         OECD Science &
      PERFOR-    Performed by                           total R&D expenditures                                        Technology Indicators
      MANCEj,t   Universities
 LINK
Z     VCj,t      Strength of Venture                    Average survey response by executives on a 1-10 scale         IMD World
                 Capital Markets                        regarding relative strength of venture capital availability   Competitiveness Report
CONTRIBUTING AND RELATED OUTCOME FACTORS
JOURNALSj,t     Publications in Academic Number of publications in international academic                             CHI database of
                Journals                 journals, using 1981 journal set                                             Science Citation Index
GDPj,t          Gross Domestic Product   Gross domestic product in billions of PPP-adjusted 1985                      Penn World Tables
                                         US$
LABORj,t        Labor Force              Number of full time equivalent persons employed in the                       Penn World Tables
                                         labor force
CAPITALj,t      Capital                  Non-residential capital stock in billions of PPP-adjusted                    Penn World Tables
                                         1985 US$
MARKET SHAREj,t Market Share             Share of exports in high technology industries (among                        National Science
                                         countries in our sample)                                                     Foundation
   *
       The natural logarithm of a variable, X, is denoted L X.
                                                                      39
                                 TABLE 3
                       MEANS & STANDARD DEVIATIONS

                                 N         MEAN         STANDARD
                                                        DEVIATION
INNOVATIVE OUTPUT
PATENTS                      378          3986.23          8219.89
PATENTS / MILLION POP        378             3.73             1.02
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A       GDP / POP                357           18.66          5.10
A       PATENT STOCK             357        38016.59      98252.46
HA      FT S&E                   353       226344.60     407124.50
HA      R&D $                    355        12859.86      27930.46
XINF    ED SHARE                 351            3.08          1.20
XINF    IP                       162            6.87          0.97
XINF    OPENNESS                 216            7.00          1.10
XINF    ANTITRUST                162            5.75          1.09
CLUSTER-SPECIFIC INNOVATION ENVIRONMENT
YCLUS PRIVATE R&D                355           48.60         12.88
      FUNDING
THE QUALITY OF LINKAGES
ZLINK   UNIV R&D                 355           21.50          6.20
        PERFORMANCE
ZLINK   VENTURE CAPITAL          214            5.45          1.32
CONTRIBUTING AND RELATED OUTCOME FACTORS
JOURNALS                         378        17446.39      28621.21
GDP                              357          772.44       1161.64
LABOR                            321           18.10         25.60
CAPITAL                          306          550.00        795.00
TFP                              304            1.42          0.21
MARKET SHARE                     357            5.88%         6.85%




                                     40
                                   TABLE 4
                    DETERMINANTS OF THE PRODUCTION OF
                     NEW-TO-THE-WORLD TECHNOLOGIES
                       (GDP/POP AS KNOWLEDGE STOCK)

                                      Dependent Variable = ln(PATENTS)j,t+3
                              (4-1)            (4-2)           (4-3)           (4-4)
                            Baseline        Common           National        National
                        Ideas Production   Innovation       Innovative      Innovative
                            Function      Infrastructure     Capacity:      Capacity:
                                                           including all Preferred Model
                                                             variables
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A      L GDP PER CAPITA        1.384            1.252           0.746           0.783
                              (0.086)         (0.086)          (0.098)        (0.096)
HA     L FT S&E                1.160            0.878           0.870           0.883
                              (0.016)         (0.046)          (0.046)        (0.045)
HA     L R&D $                                  0.327           0.284           0.272
                                              (0.047)          (0.044)        (0.044)
XINF ED SHARE                                   0.110           0.154           0.152
                                              (0.016)          (0.016)        (0.016)
XINF IP                                         0.254           0.226           0.221
                                              (0.056)          (0.051)        (0.045)
XINF OPENNESS                                   0.095           0.053           0.061
                                              (0.033)          (0.032)        (0.030)
XINF ANTITRUST                                -0.051           -0.040
                                              (0.050)          (0.045)
CLUSTER-SPECIFIC INNOVATION ENVIRONMENT
YCLUS PRIVATE R&D                                               0.016           0.016
       FUNDING                                                 (0.002)        (0.002)
QUALITY OF THE LINKAGES
ZLINK UNIV R&D                                                  0.009           0.009
       PERFORMANCE                                             (0.003)        (0.003)
ZLINK VENTURE CAPITAL                                           0.032
                                                               (0.021)
CONTROLS
Year fixed effects                         Significant      Significant    Significant
US dummy                                      -0.249           -0.014           0.001
                                              (0.092)          (0.090)        (0.088)
Constant                    -10.327
                              (0.307)
R-Squared                      0.9378           0.9979          0.9983          0.9983
Adjusted R-Squared             0.9375           0.9977          0.9981          0.9981
Observations                353             347              347             347


                                            41
                                         TABLE 5
                           DETERMINANTS OF THE PRODUCTION OF
                             NEW-TO-THE-WORLD TECHNOLOGIES
                        (USING PATENT STOCK AS KNOWLEDGE STOCK)

                                                 Dependent Variable = ln(PATENTS)j,t+3
                                    (5-1)               (5-2)                 (5-3)                 (5-4)
                                  Baseline        Common Innovation    National Innovative National Innovative
                              Ideas Production      Infrastructure          Capacity:            Capacity:
                                  Function                            including all variables Preferred Model
                               (with year FE)
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A    L PATENT STOCK     1.174        0.644                                  0.593                0.589
                       (0.072)      (0.028)                                (0.029)              (0.028)
HA   L FT S&E           0.431        0.420                                  0.464                0.464
                       (0.062)      (0.025)                                (0.024)              (0.024)
HA   L R&D $                         0.038                                  0.025                0.029
                                    (0.034)                                (0.033)              (0.032)
XINF ED SHARE                        0.039                                  0.067                0.068
                                    (0.011)                                (0.013)              (0.012)
XINF IP                              0.066                                  0.067                0.073
                                    (0.038)                                (0.035)              (0.029)
XINF OPENNESS                       -0.026                                 -0.025               -0.026
                                    (0.023)                                (0.022)              (0.021)
XINF ANTITRUST                      -0.009                                  0.012
                                    (0.035)                                (0.033)

YCLUS PRIVATE R&D                                                           0.009                0.009
      FUNDING                                                              (0.001)              (0.001)

ZLINK UNIV R&D                                                              0.009                0.009
      PERFORMANCE                                                          (0.002)              (0.002)
 LINK
Z     VENTURE                                                              -0.009
      CAPITAL                                                              (0.015)

Year fixed effects             Significant
Y0                                                      0.961               0.884                0.883
                                                       (0.085)             (0.080)              (0.080)
YEAR                                                   -0.062              -0.065               -0.065
                                                       (0.003)             (0.003)              (0.003)
Country fixed effects          Significant
L GDP 1967                                              0.418              0.247                0.241
                                                       (0.053)            (0.055)              (0.054)
US dummy                                               -0.245             -0.054               -0.057
                                                       (0.068)            (0.068)              (0.067)
R-Squared                        0.9997                 0.9989             0.9989               0.9990
Observations                   353                    347                347                  347




                                                 42
                                   TABLE 6
                            EXPLORING ROBUSTNESS

                                         Dependent Variable = ln(PATENTS)j,t+3
                            (6-1)         (6-2)          (6-3)          (6-4)            (6-5)
                       Baseline Ideas    National     (4-4), with   (4-4), using     (4-4), using
                         Production    Innovative    country fixed only post-1984   only European
                        Function with Capacity with     effects     observations      countries
                       GDP per Capita GDP per Capita
                         and Patent     and Patent
                           Stock          Stock
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A     L GDP PER CAPITA       0.966         0.118          0.827          0.538           0.641
                            (0.122)       (0.056)        (0.219)        (0.133)         (0.102)
A     L PATENT STOCK         0.180         0.780
                            (0.038)       (0.027)
HA    L FT S&E               0.945         0.209          0.558          0.890           0.857
                            (0.048)       (0.034)        (0.090)        (0.073)         (0.049)
HA    L R&D $                              0.057          0.113          0.309           0.331
                                          (0.024)        (0.042)        (0.070)         (0.048)
XINF ED SHARE                              0.046          0.044          0.153           0.244
                                          (0.009)        (0.021)        (0.025)         (0.025)
XINF IP                                   -0.005         -0.008          0.229           0.239
                                          (0.025)        (0.026)        (0.044)         (0.051)
XINF OPENNESS                                            -0.050          0.066           0.040
                                                         (0.017)        (0.028)         (0.037)
CLUSTER-SPECIFIC INNOVATION ENVIRONMENT
YCLUS PRIVATE R&D                          0.004          0.002          0.019           0.013
      FUNDING                             (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.002)
QUALITY OF THE LINKAGES
ZLINK UNIV R&D                             0.0031        -0.005          0.015           0.015
      PERFORMANCE                         (0.0018)       (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.004)
CONTROLS
Year fixed effects                        Significant   Significant   Significant    Significant
Country fixed effects                                   Significant
US dummy                                      -0.062                      0.042
                                              (0.047)                    (0.123)
Constant                       -8.284
                               (0.523)
R-Squared                       0.9416       0.9995        0.9996        0.9986         0.9979
Adjusted R-Squared              0.9411       0.9995        0.9995        0.9984         0.9976
Observations                  353          347           347           153            267




                                         43
                             TABLE 7
          EXPLORING RELATIONSHIP TO SCIENTIFIC PUBLICATION

                                  (7-1)                         (7-2)
                        Explaining journal articles         Base Model
                                                      Including journal articles
Dependent Variable        ln(JOURNALS)j,t+3              ln(PATENTS)j,t+3
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A    L GDP/POP                   0.224                          0.561
                                (0.067)                        (0.098)
A    L JOURNALS                                                 0.473
                                                               (0.076)
HA   L FT S&E                0.832                              0.474
                            (0.031)                            (0.079)
HA     L R&D $              -0.032                              0.300
                            (0.030)                            (0.044)
XINF ED SHARE                0.106                              0.099
                            (0.011)                            (0.018)
XINF IP                     -0.042                              0.228
                            (0.034)                            (0.042)
XINF OPENNESS                0.030                              0.040
                            (0.023)                            (0.028)
CLUSTER-SPECIFIC INNOVATION ENVIRONMENT
YCLUS PRIVATE R&D           -0.010                              0.023
       FUNDING              (0.001)                            (0.002)
QUALITY OF THE LINKAGES
ZLINK UNIV R&D              -0.001                              0.011
       PERFORMANCE          (0.002)                            (0.003)
CONTROLS
Year fixed effects         Significant                      Significant
US dummy                     0.272                            -0.107
                            (0.062)                           (0.089)
R-Squared                    0.9995                            0.9985
Adjusted R-Squared           0.9995                            0.9983
Observations              330                               323




                                      44
                                   TABLE 8
            EXPLORING RELATIONSHIP TO TFP AND INTERNATIONAL TRADE

                               (8-1)                 (8-2)                 (8-3)                 (8-4)
                       Sensitivity of TFP to Sensitivity of Market Sensitivity of Market Sensitivity of Market
                         Ideas Production    Share to Patent Stock Share to predicted    Share to elements of
                                                                   National Innovative National Innovative
                                                                         Capacity              Capacity
Dependent Variable         ln(GDP)j,t+3      MARKET SHAREj,t+3 MARKET SHAREj,t+3 MARKET SHAREj,t+3
MEASURES OF NATIONAL INNOVATIVE CAPACITY
PREDICTED PATENTSt+3                                                         0.615
                                                                            (0.062)
L PATENT STOCK             0.114          0.528
                          (0.015)        (0.052)
QUALITY OF THE COMMON INNOVATION INFRASTRUCTURE
A      L GDP/POP                                                                                   0.127
                                                                                                  (0.208)
HA     L FT S&E                                                                                    0.503
                                                                                                  (0.150)
XINF   L R&D $                                                                                    -0.151
                                                                                                  (0.094)
XINF   ED SHARE                                                                                    0.150
                                                                                                  (0.035)
XINF   IP                                                                                          0.080
                                                                                                  (0.087)
XINF   OPENNESS                                                                                    0.254
                                                                                                  (0.062)
CLUSTER-SPECIFIC INNOVATION ENVIRONMENT
YCLUS PRIVATE R&D                                                                                  0.038
      FUNDING                                                                                     (0.004)
QUALITY OF THE LINKAGES
ZLINK UNIV R&D                                                                                     0.040
      PERFORMANCE                                                                                 (0.007)
CONTROLS
L LABOR                         0.643
                               (0.040)
L CAPITAL                       0.213
                               (0.051)
Y0                              0.044                  -0.022               -0.052               -0.062
                               (0.053)                 (0.194)              (0.199)              (0.180)
YEAR                           -0.001                  -0.068               -0.016               -0.019
                               (0.003)                 (0.010)              (0.007)              (0.015)
L GDP 1967                                              0.472                0.353                0.757
                                                       (0.076)              (0.090)              (0.152)
US dummy                        0.276                                                             0.063
                               (0.055)                                                           (0.010)
Constant                                               -5.297               -8.457              -14.167
                                                       (0.766)              (0.662)              (1.603)
R-Squared                       0.9772                  0.7978               0.7962               0.7880
Adjusted R-Squared              0.9767                  0.7955              0.7938                0.7783
Observations                  304                     357                 347                   323




                                                 45
                          Figure A
         Ideas Production in Endogenous Growth Theory



Knowledge
Knowledge                         Private
                                  Privatelabor
                                           laborforce
                                                 forcedevoted
                                                      devoted
  Stock
  Stock                               to
                                       toideas
                                          ideasproduction
                                                production




   At                                             HA




        Ideas
         IdeasProduction
              ProductionFunction:
                         Function:
                             λ       φ
              A t =δ H A,t At




                             46
                                      Figure B
      The Innovation Orientation of National Industry Clusters


                                     Context
                                     Contextfor
                                              for
                                        Firm
                                         Firm
                                      Strategy
                                       Strategy
                                     and
                                     and Rivalry
                                          Rivalry

                              • A local context that
                                encourages investment in
                                innovation-related activity
      Factor                  • Vigorous competition among
       Factor                   locally based rivals                    Demand
      (Input)                                                           Demand
       (Input)                                                         Conditions
     Conditions                                                        Conditions
     Conditions

• High quality human
  resources, especially                                        •   Sophisticated and demanding
  scientific, technical, and                                       local customer(s)
  managerial personnel                                         •   Home customer needs that
• Strong basic research                                            anticipate those elsewhere
                                      Related
                                      Relatedand  and
  infrastructure in
                                       Supporting
                                       Supporting
  universities
• High quality information
                                       Industries
                                        Industries
  infrastructure
• An ample supply of risk • Presence of capable local
  capital                      suppliers and related companies
                             • Presence of clusters instead of
                               isolated industries




                                           47
                                                Figure C-1
   Some Important Elements of the National Innovation System in the United States



      Public
      PublicSector
             Sector                                                      Private
                                                                         PrivateSector
                                                                                 Sector

                Department
                of Defense                                        Aerospace          Computer
                                                                   Industry          Industry
 Department
  of Energy

                                                                        Automotive
              National             University
                                                                         Industry
             Laboratories           System


         K-12                                                                  Textile
        Public                                                                Industry
       Education
                                                             Chemical                    Financial
 National                                                    Industry                    Services
 Science                    National                                                     Industry
Foundation                  Institutes                                    Pharma-
                            of Health                                     ceutical
                                                                          Industry




                                                   48
                                Figure C-2
   Some Important Elements of the National Innovation System in Germany




  Public
  PublicSector
         Sector                Intermediate                 Private
                                                            PrivateSector
                                                                    Sector

                                                               Machine
                                                                 Tool
    Ministry for                                               Industry
    Research &                Fraunhofer
    Technology                  Society



 Public                        Vocational                           Electronics
Education                       Training                             Industry
                                System            Automotive
                                                   Industry

   Univ. &
  Technical                                                     Software
  Colleges                                                      Industry



       Max Planck                                          Chemical
        Institutes                                         Industry




                                   49
                       Figure D
         Measuring National Innovative Capacity



Common
CommonInnovation
          Innovation                  Cluster-Specific
                                      Cluster-Specific
  Infrastructure
   Infrastructure                       Conditions
                                         Conditions




                  Quality
                  Qualityof
                          ofLinkages
                             Linkages




                          50
              Figure E
The Common Innovation Infrastructure




            At


           HA,t
                             Includes resource commitments and
                             policy choices such as:
                             •Investment in education & training
          XINF,t             • Intellectual property protection
                             • Openness to international trade
                             • R&D tax policies




                 51
                                                                                             Figure F
                                                      International Patents Granted by the USPTO



                        50,000

                        45,000

                        40,000

                        35,000
International Patents




                        30,000

                        25,000

                        20,000

                        15,000

                        10,000

                         5,000

                            0
                                 5

                                       6

                                              7

                                                     8

                                                            9

                                                                   0

                                                                          1

                                                                                 2

                                                                                        3

                                                                                               4

                                                                                                      5

                                                                                                             6

                                                                                                                    7

                                                                                                                           8

                                                                                                                                  9

                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                                                              3

                                                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                               7

                                        7

                                               7

                                                      7

                                                             7

                                                                    8

                                                                           8

                                                                                  8

                                                                                         8

                                                                                                8

                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                              8

                                                                                                                     8

                                                                                                                            8

                                                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                                                 9

                                                                                                                                                        9

                                                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                                                      9

                                                                                                                                                                             9

                                                                                                                                                                                    9
                            19

                                     19

                                            19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                            Year




                                                                                                52
                             Figure G
             International Patents per Million Persons




                                                         Australia

       250                                               Austria
                                                         Canada
                                                         Denmark
       200                                               Finland
                                                         France
       150                                               Germany, FR
Year




                                                         Italy
                                                         Japan
       100
                                                         Netherlands
                                                         New Zealand
        50                                               Norway
                                                         Spain
         0                                               Sweden
                                                         Switzerland
          75

          77

          79

          81

          83

          85

          87

          89

          91

          93

          95
                                                         UK
       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19
                                                         USA

                            Patents




                                53
                                         Figure H
                  FTE Scientists & Engineers as a Percentage of Population
                                  Selected Countries (A-J)




       1.00%                                                                   Australia
       0.90%
       0.80%                                                                   Austria

       0.70%                                                                   Canada
       0.60%
Year




       0.50%                                                                   Denmark

       0.40%
                                                                               Finland
       0.30%
       0.20%                                                                   France

       0.10%
                                                                               Germany, FR
       0.00%
                                                                               Italy
              73

              75

              77

              79

              81

              83

              85

              87

              89

              91

              93

              95
           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19

           19
                                                                               Japan

                                         Patents


                                 Selected Countries (N-Z)




          1.00%                                                              Netherlands
          0.90%
          0.80%                                                              New Zealand

          0.70%
          0.60%                                                              Norway
   Year




          0.50%
                                                                             Switzerland
          0.40%
          0.30%                                                              UK
          0.20%
          0.10%                                                              USA
          0.00%
                                                                             Spain
               73

               75

               77

               79

               81

               83

               85

               87

               89

               91

               93

               95
            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19

            19




                                                                             Sweden
                                         Patents



                                            54
     N
      ew




                           0%
                                10%
                                      20%
                                            30%
                                                  40%
                                                        50%
                                                              60%
                                                                    70%
                                                                          80%
                                                                                90%
           Ze
              al
                  an
                      d
           Au
              st
                 ra
                    lia
            C
             an
                  ad
                      a
              Fr
                an
                  ce

                 Ita
                     ly
             N
              or
                w
                   ay
                Sp
     N              ai
         et
            he         n
               rla
                   nd
                      s
          D




55
             en
                 m
                    ar
                      k
                                                                                                                                      Figure I




                   U
                    K
              Au
                st
                     ria

                 U
                   SA
             Fi
               nl
                  an
                    d
           Sw
     G
                                                                                      Percent of R&D Expenditure Funded by Industry




                ed
       er          en
          m
            an
                y,
       Sw          FR
           itz
               er
                 la
                   nd
              Ja
                  pa
                     n
                           Figure J
             Trends in National Innovative Capacity




       250                                            Australia
                                                      Austria
                                                      Canada
       200                                            Denmark
                                                      Finland

       150                                            France
Year




                                                      Germany, FR
                                                      Italy
       100                                            Japan
                                                      Netherlands
                                                      New Zealand
        50
                                                      Norway
                                                      Switzerland
         0                                            UK
                                                      USA
         73

         75

         77

         79

         81

         83

         85

         87

         89

         91

         93

         95
                                                      Spain
       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19

       19
                                                      Sweden
                         Patents




                              56
