                                   (& )           




                                                    


                                           
                                            
                                        !"#"$
                                             #%


                                          &' *+,-
                                  % .//000121'/  $/0*+,-



                                  (  3          4 3 3
                                     56764$$%8$$ 8
                                       32#'94 6-5:+
                                           2-666



       
  !"#$ !  "%  &'  
" ($  )$  )  *  "   +, - ( -$ . +  
+.''/ '& %'   )$%(*
*+ ( 001% '% !  (
  0$  2    00,  %  2
003  $% $   $  #$2,30
  $   %    $$    2

45666%* .   +( /  + 0&&* * 2  
2*   3  3, 0 0%#$ , $30 0 
0 $  $ 4    $2
%'8;
99  !"#"$9# #%
  (&'  1*+,-
 2-666
< 1)-697597
                                          

       & $0#%'8;$"8 $*78$1%#$
$%82 #8$99#$%$"8 8$
22 ';1%$$;=;%'%$8$1
38$0%%'8;%%'%8 #'8$928
2>8; 82 '#$138$0%###'$
%0;'8$1%#$$$0%'8?% '%#@%$
2'8928$8 %?'22'%#@0%;'82$ $
#288$1


                                                
 $                                            $
&#(95+5+9 &                                 #$;
&$%'39-6A::                                          32#'94 6-5:+
$#B0#21'                                         # (
                                                               C B%#1#8

  !"#"$                                      #%
)#;%                                   $
#$;                                            #$;
32#'94 6-5:+                                           32#'94 6-5:+
# (                                                      # (
C !#$$B%#1#8                                  $%B%#1#8
I. Introduction.

        Countries differ significantly in the way in which they regulate the entry of new businesses. To

meet government requirements for starting to operate a business in Austria, an entrepreneur must

complete 12 procedures taking at least 154 business days and pay US$11,612 in government fees. To

do the same, an entrepreneur in Bolivia needs to follow 20 different procedures, pay US$2,696 in fees

to the government and wait at least 82 business days to acquire the necessary permits. In contrast, an

entrepreneur in Canada can finish the process in roughly 2 days by paying US$280 in government fees

and completing only 2 procedures.

        In this paper, we describe the required procedures governing entry regulation, as well as the

time and the cost of following these procedures, in seventy five countries. We focus on legal

requirements that need to be met before a business can officially open its doors, the official cost of

meeting these requirements, and the minimum time it takes to meet them if the government does not

delay the process. We then use these data to evaluate three economic theories of regulation. Our

work owes a great deal to De Soto’s (1990) path-breaking study of entry regulation in Peru. Unlike

De Soto, we look at the official requirements, official cost and official time -- and do not measure

corruption and bureaucratic delays that further raise the cost of entry.   Pigou’s (1938) now standard

theory of regulation has been recently called the helping hand view (Shleifer and Vishny 1998). It

holds that unregulated markets exhibit frequent failures, ranging from monopoly power to externalities.

A government that pursues social efficiency counters these failures and protects the public through

regulation. As applied to entry, this view holds that the government screens new entrants so as to make

sure that consumers buy high quality products from “desirable” sellers. Such regulation reduces market

                                                     1
failures such as low quality products from fly-by-night operators and externalities such as pollution. It is

“done to ensure that new companies meet minimum standards to provide a good or service. By being

registered, new companies acquire a type of official approval, which makes them reputable enough to

engage in transactions with the general public and other businesses.” (SRI 1999 -- p. 14) The helping

hand theory predicts that stricter regulation of entry, as measured by a higher number of procedures in

particular, should be associated with socially superior outcomes.

        The grabbing-hand view sees the government as less benign and regulation as socially

inefficient. It comes in two flavors. In Stigler’s (1971) theory of regulatory capture, “regulation is

acquired by the industry and is designed and operated primarily for its benefit.” Industry incumbents

are able to acquire regulations that create rents for themselves, since they typically face lower

information and organization costs than do the dispersed consumers. In this theory, the regulation of

entry keeps out the competitors and raises incumbents’ profits. Because stricter regulation raises

barriers to entry, it should lead to greater market power and profits rather than benefits to consumers.

        A second strand of the grabbing-hand view, which we call the tollbooth view, holds that

regulation is pursued for the benefit of politicians and bureaucrats (De Soto 1990). Politicians use

regulation to favor friendly firms and other political constituencies, and thereby obtain campaign

contributions and votes. In addition, “an important reason why many of these permits and regulations

exist is probably to give officials the power to deny them and to collect bribes in return for providing the

permits.” (Shleifer and Vishny 1993, p. 601).

        In principle, the collection of bribes in exchange for release from regulation can be efficient. In

effect, the government can become an equity holder in a regulated firm. In practice, however, the

                                                      2
creation of rents for the bureaucrats and politicians through regulation is often inefficient, in part because

the regulators are disorganized, and in part because the policies they pursue to increase the rents from

corruption are distortionary. The analogy to tollbooths on a highway is useful. Efficient regulation may

call for one toll for the use of a road, or even no tolls if the operation of the road is most efficiently

financed through general tax revenues. In a political equilibrium, however, each town through which the

road passes might be able to erect its own tollbooth. Toll collectors may also block alternative routes

so as to force the traffic onto the toll road. For both of these reasons, political toll collection is

inefficient.

         In this theory, the regulation of entry enables the regulators to collect bribes from the potential

entrants and serves no social purpose. “When someone has finally made the decision to invest, he then

is subjected to some of the worst treatment imaginable...In a few cases this treatment consists of

outright extortion: presenting the investor with insurmountable delays or repeated obstacles unless he

makes a large payoff...” (World Bank 1999, Administrative Barriers to Investment in Africa: The Red

Tape Analysis, p. 10). More extensive regulation should be associated with socially inferior outcomes,

particularly corruption.

         We assess the regulation of entry around the world from the perspective of these three theories

by addressing two broad sets of questions. First, what are the consequences of the regulation of entry,

and in particular, who gets the rents? On the helping hand view, stricter regulation is associated with

higher quality of goods and fewer damaging externalities. On the capture theory, the regulation of entry

is associated with higher profitability of the incumbents. On the tollbooth view, stricter regulation is

most clearly associated with higher corruption.

                                                       3
        A second question we examine to distinguish the alternative theories of regulation is which

governments regulate entry? The helping hand model predicts that governments whose interests are

more closely aligned with those of the consumers, which we think of as the more representative and

more limited governments, should regulate better. If the regulation of entry serves consumers, then,

other things equal, more representative and limited governments should regulate entry more strictly. In

contrast, the grabbing hand model predicts that the governments least subject to popular oversight

should pursue the strictest regulations, to benefit either the incumbent firms or the regulators themselves.

The question of who regulates thus helps to discriminate among the theories.

        Our analysis of exhaustive data on entry regulation in 75 countries leads to the following

conclusions. The number of procedures required to start up a firm varies from the low of 2 in Canada

to the high of 20 in Bolivia, with the world average of around 10. The minimum official time for such a

startup varies from the low of 2 days to the high of 174 business days, assuming that there are no delays

by either the applicant or the regulators, with the worldwide average of 63 business days. The official

cost of following these procedures for a simple firm ranges from under 0.4 percent of per capita GDP

to over 2.6 times per capita GDP, with the world-wide average of 34 percent of annual per capita

income. For an entrepreneur, legal entry is extremely cumbersome, time-consuming, and expensive in

most countries in the world.

        In a cross-section of countries, we do not find that stricter regulation of entry is associated with

higher quality products, better pollution records or health outcomes. Nor is it strongly associated with

higher profitability of firms or survey measures of lack of competition. But stricter regulation of entry is

associated with sharply higher levels of corruption, and a greater relative size of the unofficial economy.

                                                     4
On the face of it, the evidence on the consequences of entry regulation does not support the helping

hand or the capture theories, and favors the tollbooth view of regulation.

        In response, a helping hand theorist could perhaps argue that corruption and a large unofficial

economy are inadvertent consequences of benevolent regulation, and hence cannot be used as evidence

against the helping hand view. Such inadvertent consequences might obtain as a side effect of screening

out bad entrants (Banerjee 1997, Acemoglu and Verdier 2000), or simply as a result of a well-intended

but misguided transplant of rich-country regulations into poor countries. Because of this logic, the

question of which countries regulate entry more heavily may be better suited conceptually to distinguish

the alternative theories.

        We find that the countries with more open access to political power, greater constraints on the

executive, and greater political rights have fewer required procedures for entry regulation -- even

controlling for per capita income -- than do the countries with less representative, less limited, and less

free governments. The per capita income control is crucial for this analysis because it could be argued

that richer countries have both better governments and a lower need for the regulation of entry, perhaps

because they have fewer market failures or better alternative ways of dealing with them. The fact that

better governments regulate entry less, along with the straightforward interpretation of the evidence on

corruption and the unofficial economy, point to the tollbooth theory: entry is regulated because doing so

benefits the regulators.

        The next section describes the sample. Section 3 presents our basic results on the extent of

entry regulation around the world. Section 4 asks who gets the rents from regulation. Section 5

presents the main results on which governments regulate. Section 6 concludes.

                                                     5
II. Data.

Construction of the Database

        This paper is based on a new database describing the regulation of entry by start-up companies

in 75 countries. We are interested in the steps that an entrepreneur needs to take to begin operating

legally. We collected data using all available written information on start-up procedures from

government publications, World Bank- and USAID-sponsored studies, and government web pages on

the Internet. When written sources were unavailable, we directly contacted the relevant government

agencies in each country. In addition, in seventy-three countries, we have doubled-checked the

accuracy of our data by commissioning an independent report on start-up procedures, time, and cost

from a local consulting company (most often, Price Waterhouse Coopers). For the remaining two

countries (Georgia and Ukraine) we have double-checked the accuracy of the data through direct

contacts with government agencies.

        Our selection of countries was guided by the goal of spanning a wide range of income levels

and political systems. The choice of countries was also dictated by the availability of reports on

business registration procedures by consulting companies.2 The sample includes nine African countries,

nine East Asian countries including China and Vietnam, three South Asian countries (India, Pakistan,

and Sri Lanka), all Central and Eastern European countries except for Albania and some of the former




2
  The major international consulting companies do not have representative offices in a number of
African countries. Countries in which we were unable to identify local consulting companies to do an
independent study were also excluded from the data set.

                                                    6
Yugoslav republics, seven former Soviet Union republics, ten Latin American countries, five Middle

Eastern countries (Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, and Tunisia), and all major developed countries.

        To describe the patterns of regulation across countries and to understand their determinants, we

record all the steps that are officially required for an entrepreneur to obtain all necessary permits and to

notify and file with all requisite authorities. In some countries, entrepreneurs may not bother to follow

official procedures or may bypass them by paying bribes or hiring the services of “facilitators”. An

entrepreneur in Georgia can start up a company after going through 12 procedures in 70 business days

and paying $270 in fees, or he may hire a legal advisory company that will complete the start-up

process for $450 in 3 business days (World Bank 1999, p. 16). In the analysis, we use the first set of

numbers. We do so because we are primarily interested in understanding the structure of official

regulation.

        Regulations of start-up companies vary across regions within a country, across industries, and

across firm sizes. For concreteness, we focus on a “standardized” firm that an entrepreneur may want

to set up. It has the following characteristics: it operates in the capital city, it is exempt from industry-

specific requirements (including environmental ones), it does not participate in foreign trade and does

not trade in goods that are subject to excise taxes (e.g., liquor, tobacco, gas), it is a domestically-

owned limited liability company,3 its capital is subscribed in cash (not in-kind contributions), it rents

(i.e., does not own) land and business premises, and it does not qualify for investment incentives.

Although different legal forms might be used in different countries to set up the simplest firm, to evaluate


3
 If the Company Law allows for more than one privately owned business form with limited liability, we
choose the more popular business form among small companies in the country.

                                                       7
how regulators address the same problem in different countries, we need to look at the same form.

        Our data almost surely underestimate the cost and complexity associated with entry. 4 Start-up

procedures in the provinces are often slower than in the capital. Industry-specific requirements also

add steps. Foreign ownership frequently involves additional verifications and procedures.

Contributions in kind often require assessment of value, a complex procedure that depends on the

quality of property registries. Finally, purchasing land can be quite difficult and even impossible in some

of the countries of the sample (for example, in the Kyrgyz Republic).




Definitions of variables

        We use three measures of entry regulation: the number of procedures that firms must go

through, the official time required to complete the process, and its official cost. On the helping-hand

theory, a more thorough screening process requires more procedures and demands more time. On the

grabbing-hand view, more procedures and longer delays facilitate bribe extraction (tollbooth view)

and/or make entry less attractive to potential competitors (capture view). Theoretical predictions

regarding our measure of cost are ambiguous. A benevolent social planner who wants to spend

significant resources on screening new entrants may choose to finance such activity with broad taxes

rather than with the direct fees that we measure, leading to low costs as we measure them. A corrupt

regulator may also want to set fees low in order to raise her own bribe income if, for example, fees are




4
 The World Competitiveness Report (1999) surveys business people on how important are
administrative regulations as an obstacle to new business. Our three measures are strongly positively
correlated with their subjective assessments.

                                                     8
verifiable and cannot be expropriated by the regulator.5 In contrast, higher fees are unambiguously

desirable as a tool to deter entry under the capture theory. Because of these ambiguities, we present

statistics on cost mainly to describe an important attribute of regulation and not to discriminate among

theories.

        We keep track of all the procedures that are required by law to start a business. A separate

step in the start-up process is a "procedure" only if it requires that the entrepreneur interacts with

outside entities: state and local government offices, lawyers, auditors, notaries, company seal

manufacturers, etc. For example, all limited liability companies need to hold an inaugural meeting of

shareholders to formally adopt the Company Articles and Bylaws. Since this step involves only the

entrepreneurs, we do not count it as a procedure. Similarly, most companies hire a lawyer to draft their

Articles of Association. However, we do not count that as a procedure unless the law requires that a

lawyer be involved in the process. In the same vein, we ignore procedures that the entrepreneur can

avoid altogether (e.g., reserving exclusive rights over a proposed company name until registration is

completed) or that can be performed after business commences.

        Each office that the entrepreneur visits counts as a separate procedure. To keep track of the

offices that an entrepreneur is required to visit, we use the "same building” criterion. That is, we

consider offices in different buildings distinct (although they may be part of the same bureaucratic

structure). For example, a Bulgarian entrepreneur receives her registration certificate from the Company




5
 Shleifer and Vishny (1993) distinguish corruption with theft from corruption without theft. In the latter
case, the regulator must remit the official fee to the Treasury, and therefore has no interest in that fee
being high.

                                                      9
Registry, and then has to pay the associated fee at an officially-designated bank. Even though both

steps are essentially related to "obtaining the registration certificate", they count as 2 separate

procedures. Visiting the same office counts as two procedures if there have to be other steps in

between. An entrepreneur in Kazakhstan needs to get a preliminary registration certificate at the

Ministry of Justice. She then goes to the Statistical Office to obtain a company code, which is used

during her second visit to the Ministry of Justice in the issuance of the actual registration certificate. We

count these as 3 separate procedures.

        To measure time, we collect information on the sequence in which procedures are to be

completed and rely on official figures as to how many business days it takes to complete each step. We

adopt a "perfect efficiency" approach when estimating the length of the registration process. We ignore

the time spent to gather information, and assume that all steps are known from the very beginning. We

also assume that steps are taken simultaneously whenever possible. Since entrepreneurs may have

trouble visiting several different institutions within the same day (especially if they come from out-of-

town), we set the minimum time required to visit an institution to be one day. Another justification for

this approach is that the relevant offices are sometimes open for business only briefly: both the Ministry

of Economy and the Ministry of Justice in Cairo are open for business only between 11am and 2pm.

        We estimate the cost of entry regulation based on all identifiable official expenses: fees, costs of

procedures and forms, photocopies, fiscal stamps, legal and notary charges, etc. All cost figures are official

and do not include bribes, which De Soto has shown to be significant for registration. Our cost estimates

also ignore the opportunity cost of the entrepreneur’s time and the foregone profits associated with

bureaucratic delay. Setup fees often vary with the level of start-up capital. We report the costs associated

                                                      10
with setting up a firm with capital of ten times per capita GDP. We have experimented with other capital

levels and found our results to be robust.

        Table I presents a comprehensive list of all procedures associated with setting up a firm in our

sample. The steps required by law before a company can legally start operations can broadly be

divided into registration and post-registration requirements. Registration covers all steps necessary for a

company to obtain a registration certificate. They range from 1-11 procedures, demand from 1 to 120

days, and cost from 0.25% to 210% of per capita GDP. Post-registration requirements refer to

municipal procedures, industry-level or national-level approvals of the company, filing with the tax and

labor authorities, environmental and zoning procedures, all required once a company has registered but

before it can start operations. These procedures range from 1 to 12 in number, consume up to 138

days, and cost up to 81% of per capita GDP in fees.

        The basic procedure in registration, present everywhere, is filing documentation in the

Companies’ Registry. This can take more than one step; sometimes there is a “preliminary license” and

a “final” license. Combined with that step, or as a separate procedure, is the check for uniqueness of

the proposed company name. Add-on procedures comprise the requirements to notarize the Company

Deeds, to furnish proof of deposit of start-up capital, and to publish a notification of the company’s

establishment in an official or business paper. While there are no differences in the above procedures

across countries, there is large variation in terms of the required time and cost. In the most efficient

countries, the Companies Registry performs these procedures automatically, without involving the

entrepreneur in any way. Additional procedures that require obtaining different certificates and filing

with agencies other than the Registry may add up to 87 days in delays, as is the case in Germany.

                                                     11
        The basic post-registration procedures, present in almost every country in the data set, are a

local business license and filing with the tax and labor authorities. The latter two procedures per se do

not take a lot of time in any country (up to a week at most), and are usually free of charge. Add-on

procedures appear in three areas. The first area covers mandatory municipal procedures, registrations

with statistical offices and with Chambers of Commerce and Industry (or respective Ministries). In

Mexico, these procedures take up to 7 steps and 63 days. In this area, procedures that appear to be

redundant show up frequently: “the permit to play music in public” is obligatory for every firm in

Colombia, regardless of whether it contemplates playing music. The second area covers tax-related

procedures, including the steps mentioned above. In Brazil, these procedures take up to 5 steps and

13 days. The final area is labor related procedures, which can take up to 7 steps and 17 days in the

case of Bolivia.

        Figures I and II describe the number of steps, time, and cost of following the procedures

needed to begin operating legally in New Zealand and France, respectively. New Zealand’s

streamlined startup process takes only three steps and 17 days. The entrepreneur must first obtain

approval for the company name from the website of the Registrar of Companies, and then apply online

for registration with both the Registrar of Companies and the tax authorities.

        In contrast, the process in France takes 66 days. To begin, the founder needs to check the

chosen company name for uniqueness at the Institut National de la Propriété Industrielle (INPI). He

then needs the mayor's permit to use his home as an office. If the office is to be rented, the founder

needs to secure a notarized lease agreement. The following additional documents must be obtained,

each from a different authority: proof of a clean criminal record, an original extract of the entrepreneur'

                                                     12
certificate of marital status from the City Hall, and a power of attorney. The start-up capital is then

deposited with a notary bank or the Deposit and Consignment Office (Caisse des Dépôt), and is

blocked there until proof of registration is provided. Notarization of the Articles of Association follows.

A notice stating the location of the headquarters office is published in a journal approved for legal

announcements and evidence of the publication is obtained. Next, the founder registers four copies of

the articles of association at the local tax collection office. He then files a request for registration with

the Centre de Formalités des Entreprises (CFE) which handles declarations of existence and other

registration related formalities. The CFE must process the documents or return them within 15 days in

case the request is incomplete. The CFE automatically enters the company information in the Registre

Nationale des Entreprises (RNE) and obtains from the RNE identification numbers: numero SIRENE

(Systéme Informatique pour le Répertoire des Entreprises), numero SIRET (Systéme Informatique

pour le Répertoire des Etablissements), and numero NAF (Nomenclature des Activitees Francaises).

The SIRET is used by, among others, the tax authorities. The RNE also publishes a notice of the

company formation in the official bulletin of civil and commercial announcements. Finally, the firm

obtains proof of registration form "K-bis," which is effectively its identify card. This form is then filed to

unblock the start-up capital. To start operations legally, the entrepreneur needs to undertake the

following five additional post-registration procedures: inform the post office of the new enterprise,

designate a bondsman or guarantee payment of taxes with a cash deposit, have the firm’s ledgers and

registers initialed, and file for social security. The magazine L'Entreprise comments: "To be sure that the

file for the Company Registry is complete, many promoters check it with a counselor's service, which

costs FF200 in Paris (about $30). But there's always something missing, and most entrepreneurs end

                                                      13
up using a lawyer to complete the procedure."




III. Basic Results.

        Table II describes all the variables used in this study. Table III presents the basic information

from our sample. Countries are ranked in the ascending order of the total number of entry procedures,

where the pre-registration and post-registration procedures are added up. We classify each procedure

as one of five types: safety and health, environmental, tax, labor, and a residual category which we label

“screening,” whose purpose under the helping hand view is presumably to weed out the undesirable

entrepreneurs. We then compute and report the total number of procedures and their breakdown into

our five categories for each country. We also report the minimum number of business days that are

officially required to comply with entry regulations and the costs arising from the official fees (as a

fraction of GDP per capita). Finally, we take averages by income level and report t-tests comparing

the regulation of entry across income groups.

        The data show enormous variation in entry regulation across countries. The total number of

procedures ranges from 2 in Canada to 20 in Bolivia and averages 10.17 for the whole sample. Very

few entry regulations cover tax and labor issues. The world-wide average number of each of labor and

tax procedures is roughly 1.5. Procedures involving environmental issues and safety and health matters

are even more rare (0.35 and 0.71 procedures on average, respectively). Instead, much of what

governments do to regulate entry falls into the category of screening procedures. The world-wide

average number of such procedures facing a new entrant is 6.




                                                     14
        The number of procedures is highly correlated with both the time and cost variables (see Table

VI). The correlation of the (log) number of procedures with (log) time is 0.75 and with (log) cost is

0.62. Translated into economic terms, this means that entrepreneurs pay a steep price in terms of fees

and delays in countries that make intense use of ex-ante screening. For example, completing 17

procedures demands 55 business days and 12.4% of GDP per capita in Colombia and 174 business

days and 116.4% of GDP per capita in Mozambique. In Italy, the completion of the 11 procedures

takes up 121 business days and 24.7% of GDP per capita. Bolivia is in a class of its own: completing

its 20 procedures requires 82 business days and fees of at least 2.6 times GDP per capita. These

figures are admittedly extreme within the sample, yet meeting the official entry requirements in the

average sample country requires roughly 63 days and fees of 34% of GDP per capita.

        Table III also reports the1997 level of per capita GDP in U.S. dollars. Panel B reports

averages of the total number of procedures and its components, time and cost by quartiles of per capita

GDP in 1997. Two patterns emerge. First, the cost-to-per-capita-GDP ratio decreases uniformly with

GDP per capita. The average cost-to-per-capita-GDP ratio for countries in the top quartile of per

capita GDP (“rich countries”) is 10% and rises to 65% in countries in the bottom quartile of per capita

GDP. This pattern reflects the fact that the income elasticity of fees (in levels) is about 0.5 and does not

have a deeper interpretation. Second, countries in the top quartile of per capita GDP require fewer

procedures and their entrepreneurs face shorter delays in starting a legal business than those in the

remaining countries.6 The total number of procedures in an average rich country is 7 which is


6
  One objection to this finding is that entrepreneurs in rich countries might face more post-entry
regulations than those in poor countries. We have collected data on one aspect of post-entry regulation

                                                    15
significantly lower than the sample average of 10 (t-stats are reported on Panel C). Rich countries also

have fewer tax, labor and even environmental start-up procedures than the rest of the sample.

Similarly, meeting government requirements requires approximately 43.2 business days in rich countries,

statistically significantly lower than the rest-of-sample mean of 69.3 days. In contrast, countries in the

other three quartiles of per capita income are not statistically different from each other in terms of the

number of procedures and the time required to fulfill them.

        To summarize, the regulation of entry varies enormously across countries. It often takes the

form of screening procedures. Rich countries (i.e., those in the top quartile of per capita GDP) regulate

entry relatively less than do all the other countries. In principle, these findings are consistent with both

the helping- and grabbing-hand views. Market failures might be more pervasive in countries with

incomes just below the first quartile of GDP per capita, generating a greater demand for benign

regulation in these countries. Alternatively, income levels may proxy for characteristics of political

systems that allow politicians and/or incumbents to capture the regulatory process for their own benefit.

In the next two sections, we try to relate these patterns in the data to the helping- and grabbing-hand

theories of regulation.




IV. Who gets the rents from regulation?




around the world, namely the regulation of labor markets (see Djankov et al., 2000). The data show
that the numbers of entry and of labor market regulations are positively correlated across countries,
contrary to the substitutes hypothesis.

                                                     16
          Theories of regulation differ in their predictions as to who gets its benefits. The helping-hand

theory predicts that stricter entry regulation is associated with higher measured consumer welfare. In

contrast, the grabbing-hand theory sees regulation as a tool to create rents for bureaucrats and/or

incumbent firms. Stricter regulation should then be associated with higher corruption (tollbooth view)

and/or profitability of incumbent firms (capture view).

          Measuring rents is inherently extremely difficult, especially across countries. In this section, we

present some measures that we have been able to find that might bear -- albeit quite imperfectly -- on

the relevant theories. To begin, consider some variables bearing on the helping hand theory. Note

that these variables reflect the activities of all firms in the country, and not just the entrants. The first is a

measure of a country’s compliance with international quality standards. It is a natural variable to focus

on if the goal of regulation is to screen out entrants who might sell output of inferior quality. Second, we

consider the level of water pollution, which should fall if entry regulation aims to control externalities and

does so successfully7. Third, we consider two measures of health outcomes that entry regulation

would guard against under the helping hand view: the number of deaths from accidental poisoning and

the number of deaths from intestinal infections (due to reporting practices in poor countries, the second

variable might better capture deaths from accidental poisoning in the poor countries, according to the

World Health Organization.) Finally, we include two measures of the size of the unofficial economy:

based on estimates of unofficial output and employment, respectively. Since firms operating unofficially

avoid nearly all regulations, a large size of the unofficial economy in countries with more regulations




7
    We have tried measures of air pollution and obtained similar results.

                                                       17
would contradict the prediction of the helping hand theory that regulation effectively protects

consumers.8

        Table IV presents the results on these six measures of consequences of regulation using the

number of procedures as dependent variables. For two reasons, we run each regression with and

without the log of per capita GDP. First, some of the independent variables are correlated with income

per capita and we want to make sure that we are not picking up the general effects of good governance

associated with higher income. Second, we use GDP per capita as a rough proxy of the prevalence of

market failures in a country. In a sense, including per capita income as a control is a crude way to keep

the need for socially desirable regulation constant, which allows us to focus on the consequences (and

later causes) of regulation separately from the need.

        The results in Table IV do not support the helping-hand theory. Compliance with international

quality standards declines as the number of procedures rises. Pollution levels do not fall with regulation

levels. The two measures of accidental poisoning are not lower in countries with more regulations (if

anything, the opposite seems to be true even controlling for per capita income.) More regulation is

associated with a larger unofficial economy, and statistically significantly so if we use the unofficial

employment variable. We have also run these regressions using cost and time as independent variables,

and obtained generally insignificant results. While the data are noisy, none of the results support the

predictions of the helping hand theory.




8
 There is a large literature detailing how regulation can drive firms into the unofficial economy, where
they can avoid some or all of these regulations. See, for example, Johnson, Kaufmann, and Shleifer
(1997) and Friedman, Johnson, Kaufmann and Zoido-Lobaton (2000).

                                                      18
        To assess the capture theory, we have collected two variables: a measure of the return on

assets for publicly-traded firms and a survey measure of “lack of product market competition.” The

capture hypothesis implies that the profitability of incumbents (proxied by return-on-assets) and the lack

of market competition should be positively associated with the intensity of regulation. The results in

Table V do not show that firms in countries with more entry regulation are more profitable.9 Also,

controlling for per capita income, competition in countries with more regulations is not perceived to be

(statistically significantly) less intense. These results, while relying on crude measures and not

contradicting the capture hypothesis, do not provide much support for it either.

        A direct implication of the tollbooth hypothesis is that corruption levels and the intensity of

entry regulation are positively correlated. In fact, since in many countries in our sample politicians run

businesses, the regulation of entry produces the double benefit of corruption revenues and the increased

profitability of the incumbent businesses already affiliated with the politicians. Figure III presents the

relationship between corruption and the number of procedures without controlling for per capita GDP.

Panel A of Table VI shows statistically that, consistent with the tollbooth view, more regulation is

associated with worse corruption scores. The coefficients are statistically significant (with and without

controlling for income) and large in economic terms. The results using the cost and the time of meeting

the entry regulations as independent variables are also statistically significant, pointing further to the

robustness of this evidence in favor of the tollbooth theory.


9
 These profitability numbers refer to public firms, and therefore are very imperfect. As an alternative,
we measured profitability using the return on World Bank financed projects from the World Bank
Operations Evaluation Department. Using these data, there is no evidence that more regulations are
associated with greater returns, either.

                                                      19
        A way to reconcile these findings on corruption with the helping hand theory is to argue that

regulation may have unintended consequences. One version of this theory holds that benign politicians

in emerging markets imitate the regulations of rich countries with best intentions in mind, but are stymied

by corruption and other enforcement failures. This theory is not entirely consistent with our earlier

finding that poorer countries in fact have more entry regulations than rich countries do. A further

implication of this theory is that regulations should have a bigger impact on corruption in poorer

countries. Panel B of Table VI addresses this hypothesis by examining separately the relationship

between entry regulations and corruption in countries with above and below world median income.

The results show that regulations actually have a stronger effect on corruption in the subsample of richer

countries.

        On the second version of the unintended consequences argument, it may be impossible for the

benevolent government to screen bad entrants without facilitating corruption (Banerjee 1997, Acemoglu

and Verdier 2000). In countries whose markets are fraught with failures, it might be better to have

corrupt regulators than none at all. Corruption may be the price to pay for addressing market failures.

We turn next to the evidence regarding the political attributes of countries that regulate to disentangle

the competing theories of regulation.




V. Who Regulates Entry?

        In this section we focus on the political attributes of countries that regulate entry. These

attributes are intimately related to the competing hypotheses about regulation. In the helping hand view,

regulation is a tool to remedy market failures. The implication is that countries whose political systems

                                                     20
are characterized by higher congruence between policy outcomes and social preferences should

regulate entry more strictly. In the empirical analysis that follows, we identify such countries with more

representative and limited governments. In contrast, despotic regimes generally pursue policies aimed

at maximizing the welfare of a few individuals and need not be concerned with market failure. The goal

of despotic rulers may well be to maximize bribes and profits of a few cronies rather than social welfare

(Olson 1991, DeLong and Shleifer 1993). On the grabbing hand theory, we expect more

representative and limited government to be associated with lighter regulation of entry.

        We have collected data on a variety of characteristics of political systems, partly because we

want to be flexible regarding the meaning of “good government”. Where possible, we use variables

from different sources to check the robustness of our results. Our political variables fall into four broad

groups. The first includes the de facto independence of the executive and an index of constraints on the

executive. The second group includes an index of the effectiveness of the legislature and a measure of

competition in the legislature’s nominating process. The third group includes a measure of autocracy

and one of political rights.

        An additional variable that we focus on, used in the earlier work by La Porta et al. (1998,

1999) is legal origin. We classify countries based on the origin of their commercial laws into five broad

groups: English, French, German, Scandinavian, and Socialist. Legal origin has been viewed as a proxy

for the government’s proclivity to intervene in the economy and the stance of the law toward property

rights in a country (La Porta et al. 1999). Rather than capture the power of the government to

intervene, legal origin may capture its inclination to do so.




                                                      21
        Correlations among the political variables are presented on Table VII. The political variables

tend to be strongly correlated within blocks. For example, the measure of constraints on the executive

power is highly correlated with de-facto independence of the executive (0.8523) and with the

effectiveness of the legislature (0.8711). Yet, we report results on all three variables as each comes

from a different source. Similarly, blocks of variables tend to be correlated with each other. In

particular, democracy tends to be associated with competitive and limited executive and legislative

branches. Legal origin, in contrast, tends to be insignificantly correlated with other political variables

(the exception is Socialist legal origin which has obvious correlations with democracy and limited

government). This particular result is consistent with our view that legal origin captures a different aspect

of the political structure than do the other political variables. Note also that income levels are positively

associated with various measures of democracy as well as with competitive and limited executive and

legislative branches, but not with the legal origin. The fact that countries with severe market failures have

more abusive governments by itself limits the normative usefulness of the Pigouvian model.

        In Table VIII, we present the results of regressing our proxies for regulation on a constant and

each of the political variables taken one at a time and the log of per capita income. In interpreting these

regressions, we take the broad political measures of limited and representative government as being

exogenous to the number, time, and cost of entry regulation. It is possible, of course, that both the

political and the regulatory variables are simultaneously determined by some deeper historical factors.

Even so, it is interesting to know what the correlation is: does the history that produces good

government also produce a lot or a few regulations of entry? The control for the level of development

is crucial (and in fact our results without this control are significantly stronger). Market failures are likely

                                                      22
to be both more pervasive and more severe in poor countries than in rich ones. Moreover, our

measures of good government are uniformly higher in richer countries. Without income controls, our

political variables may be just proxying for income levels. Imagine, for example, that the consumers in

poor countries are exposed to a larger risk from bad firms entering their markets and selling goods of

inferior quality. The Pigouvian planner would then need more tools to screen entrants in the poorer

countries.

        Holding per capita income constant, countries with more limited and representative

governments have statistically significantly fewer procedures for entry regulation using 5 out of 6

measures of better government (Panel A). Using time (Panel B) and cost (Panel C) as dependent

variables produces only somewhat weaker results. These results show that countries with more limited

governments, governments more open to competition, and greater political rights have lighter regulation

of entry even holding per capita income constant. Figure V plots the number of procedures against the

autocracy score and shows that regulation is increasing in autocracy. Regulation is heavy in autocratic

countries such as Vietnam and Mozambique and light in democratic countries such as Australia,

Canada, New Zealand, and the US.

        The log of per capita GDP tends to enter these regressions significantly. The interpretation of

this result is clouded both because there are problems of multicollinearity with the political variables and

because the direction of causation is unclear. Under the grabbing-hand hypothesis, burdensome

regulation is a manifestation of transfers from entrepreneurs and/or consumers that are likely to be

distortionary and, hence, associated with lower levels of income. Countries may be poor because

regulation is hostile to new business formation.

                                                     23
        Holding per capita income constant, countries of French, German and Socialist legal origin have

more regulations than English legal origin countries, while countries of Scandinavian legal origin about

the same. The results that civil law countries (with the exception of those in Scandinavia) regulate entry

more heavily lends further support for the interpretation of the legal origin variables proposed by La

Porta et al. (1999). Governments in civil law countries, especially the French civil law countries, tend to

have a greater proclivity to intervene in economic life, and the evidence on the regulation of entry is

further support of this interpretation. Note, however, that in itself this evidence does not discriminate

among the alternative theories in the same way as the evidence on democracy does: the French origin

countries might merely be more prepared to deal with market failures than the common law countries.




        These results are broadly consistent with the grabbing-hand theory that sees regulation as a

mechanism to create rents for bureaucrats and/or oligarchs. The grabbing-hand theory predicts that

such rent extraction should be moderated by better government to the extent that outcomes in such

regimes come closer to representing the preferences of the public. The grabbing hand theory also

predicts that governments with a greater proclivity to intervene and lower security of private property

will regulate entry more heavily. In contrast, these results are more difficult to reconcile social welfare

maximization unless one identifies it with political systems of countries such as Bolivia, Mozambique, or

Vietnam, where governments are unlimited and property rights insecure. Of course, these countries

might be doing even worse in the absence of heavy regulation. Such a possibility strikes us as remote,

especially since we keep the level of development constant in the analysis.




                                                     24
VI. Conclusion.

        An analysis of the regulation of entry in 75 countries shows that, even aside from the costs

associated with corruption and bureaucratic delay, legal entry is extremely expensive, especially in the

countries outside the top quartile of the income distribution. We find that heavier regulation of entry is

generally associated with greater corruption and a larger unofficial economy, but not with measures of

better quality of private or public goods. We also find that countries with less limited, less democratic,

and more interventionist governments regulate entry more heavily, even controlling for the level of

economic development.

        We interpret this evidence in light of the three broad approaches to regulation: the helping hand

model, in which governments regulate entry to cure market failures, the capture model, in which

governments regulate entry to protect the incumbent firms, and the tollbooth model, in which

governments regulate entry to seek political benefits and bribes. We do not find convincing evidence to

support the capture theory, although our data are probably least suited to test it. Our results are

difficult to reconcile with the helping hand model, and even with the elaborate versions of this model

which recognize that the generally benevolent regulation may have unintended consequences. On the

other hand, all the evidence is naturally consistent with the tollbooth version of the grabbing hand model.

Entry appears to be regulated more heavily by the less attractive governments, and such regulation

leads to unattractive outcomes. The principal beneficiaries, if any, are the politicians and the

bureaucrats themselves.




                                                     25
                                            References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Thierry Verdier, 2000, “The Choice Between Market Failures and Corruption,”

       American Economic Review 90, 194-211.

Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella, 1999, “Rents, Competition, and Corruption,” American Economic

       Review 89, 982-993.

Banerjee, Abhijit, 1997, “A Theory of Misgovernance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1289-

       1332.

Central Intelligence Agency, CIA World Factbook, published online, various years.

Chidzero, Anne-Marie, “Senegal” in Webster, Leila, and Peter Fidler, Editors, 1996, "The Informal

       Sector and Microfinance Institutions in West Africa," The World Bank, Washington DC.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Daniela Klingebiel, 2000, “Stock Markets in Transition

Economies,” World Bank Financial Sector Discussion Paper no. 5.

DeLong, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer, 1993, “Princes and Merchants: European City Growth

       Before the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Law and Economics 36, 671-702.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2000, “The

       Regulation of Labor,” manuscript in preparation.

De Soto, Hernando, 1990, The Other Path, New York: Harper and Row.

Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, Daniel Kaufmann, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, 2000, “Dodging the

       Grabbing Hand: the Determinants of Unofficial Activity in 69 Countries,” Journal of Public

       Economics 76, 459-494.




                                                 26
Johnson, Simon, Daniel Kaufmann, and Andrei Shleifer, 1997, “The Unofficial Economy in Transition,”

       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Washington, D.C.

Kasnako—lu, Zehra, and Münür Yayla, “Unrecorded Economy in Turkey: A Monetary Approach”,

       1999. "Unrecorded Economy in Turkey (A Monetary Approach)" in Informal Sector in

       Turkey (I), Tuncer Bulutay (ed.), SIS, Ankara, forthcoming.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, “Law

       and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1999, “The

       Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

Olson, Mancur, 1991, “Autocracy, Democracy, and Prosperity,” in Richard Zeckhauser, ed., Strategy

       of Choice, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Pigou, Arthur C., 1938, The Economics of Welfare, 4th ed., London:Macmillan and Co.

Pistor, Katharina, 2000, “Patterns of Legal Change: Shareholder and Creditor Rights in Transition

       Economies,” forthcoming in the European Business Organisation Law Review Vol. 1 Nr. 1.

Reynolds, Thomas H. and Arturo A. Flores, 1989, “Foreign law : current sources of codes and basic

       legislation in jurisdictions of the world”, Littleton, CO : F.B. Rothman.

Sananikone, Ousa, “Burkina Faso” in Webster, Leila, and Peter Fidler, Editors, 1996, "The Informal

       Sector and Microfinance Institutions in West Africa," The World Bank, Washington DC.

Schneider, Friedrich, 2000, “The Value Added of Underground Activities: Size and Measurement of

       Shadow Economies and Shadow Economy Labor Force All Over the World,” Mimeo, July.




                                                   27
Schneider, Friedrich, and Dominik H. Enste, 2000, “Shadow Economies: Size, Causes, and

       Consequences,” Journal of Economic Literature 38, 77-114.

Shleifer, Andrei , and Robert W. Vishny, 1993, “Corruption,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108,

599-617.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and their

       Cures, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

SRI International, 1999, “International Practices and Experiences in Business Startup Procedures,”

       Arlington, VA: SRI.

Stigler, George J., 1971, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and

       Management Science II, 3-21.

Turnham, David, Bernard Salome, and Antoine Schwartz, 1990, "The Informal Sector Revisitied,"

       OECD, Paris.

World Bank, 1998, “Constraints to Small Business Development in Georgia,” Private Sector

       Assessment Study, Washington, D.C.

World Bank, 1999, “Administrative Barriers to Investment in Africa: The Red Tape Analysis,” FIAS,

       Washinton, D.C.

World Economic Forum (1999), The Global Competitiveness Report 1999, Schwab, Klaus et al.,

       eds., New York: Oxford University Press.




                                                  28
                        Table I: List of Procedures for Starting-up a Company
This table provides an exhaustive list of all the procedures required to start-up a company in the seventy-
five countries of the sample.

1. Registration requirements
S      Company checks the name for uniqueness
S      Company notarizes company deeds
S      obtains certificate of compliance with company law
S      obtains approval of draft version of company deeds
S      plain vanilla notarization
S      Company registers at the Companies Registry
S      pays registration fee at a separate institution
S      registers at a second institution
S      submits documents for the record to an institution linked to the Registry
S      plain vanilla registration (always present as a step - this is arguably the only truly necessary step
       for start-up)
S      Company publishes notice of company foundation
S      Company opens a bank account and deposits start-up capital
S      Company validates documents permitting the opening of a bank account with the start-up
       capital or files documents ex-post with the bank so the capital is released
S      Company closes capital account and opens a checking account
S      plain vanilla opening of a bank account
S      Company performs official audit at start-up
S      Company complies with additional requirements
S      seal and related certificates
S      clean criminal record
S      right to use business premises and/or office
S      certification of marital status
S      certificate of competence
S      financial plan
S      power of attorney when the law requires a professional to perform a given procedure
S      statutory authorization of officers
S      initial accounts (financial statements)
S      notarization of the registration certificate
S      registration with customs, even if the company does not export or import
S      registration of company bylaws with the tax Authorities, or an id number from the Tax
       Authorities for stamp duty purposes
S      a declaration regarding investments in kind even if the company has no investments in kind

2. Post -registration requirements

2.1 Municipal-level requirements
S     Business license (operations permit)
S       Local levies
S       Inspections (safety, building, fire, sanitation)
S       Environmental declaration
S       Zoning approval
S       Notifications to local authorities
S       Approvals by a second authority at the local level (e.g. local people's committee / residents'
        committee)
S       Notifications to the post-office
S       Permit to play music to the public (even if the line of business does not envision any such
        activity)

2.2 National level or industry level requirements after registration
S      Membership in the Chamber of Commerce or Industry / Regional Trade Association
S      Filing with the Statistical bureau / National Business Information Agency
S      Filing with the Department/Ministry of Industry and Trade, Ministry of the Economy, or the
       respective ministries by line of business
S      Signing up with the inter-company clearing mechanism
S      Filing with the Ministry of Finance
S      Obtaining approval from the Committee for Scrutiny of New Companies
S      Miscellaneous government approvals

2.3 Tax-related requirements
S      Registration for corporate income tax
S      Separate registration for VAT
S      Separate registration for state taxes (or other taxes that are neither national nor municipal)
S      Sealing / validation / rubricating of accounting books
S      Printing and approval of receipts
S      Notice of start of activity to the Tax Authorities
S      Visit to the bank related to the Tax Authorities
S      Designating a bondsman (security) for tax purposes

2.4 Labor-related requirements
S      Social security registration
S      Separate registration for pensions, which is obligatory by law
S      Separate pension registration, which is obligatory by law
S      Separate health registration, which is obligatory by law
S      Separate accident registration, which is obligatory by law
S      Separate unemployment registration, which is obligatory by law
S      Separate housing fund registration, which is obligatory by law
S      Separate training fund registration, which is obligatory by law
S      Inspections regarding work conditions / labor safety / labor standards
S      Filing with the Ministry of labor / Employment center (labor exchange)
S      Visit to the bank related to the Labor Authorities
S   Arranging automatic withdrawal of the employees’ income tax from the company payroll funds




                                            31
                                            Table II: The Variables
This table describes the variables collected for the seventy five countries included in our study. The first
column gives the name of the variable. The second column describes the variable and provides the sources
from which it was collected.

 Variable                                                        Description
 Number of            The number of different steps that a start-up has to comply with in order to obtain a legal status,
 procedures           i.e. to start operating as a legal entity. Source: Authors’s own calculations.
                      The number of different safety and health procedures that a start-up has to comply with to start
 Safety & Health
                      operating as a legal entity.
                      The number of different environmental procedures that a start-up has to comply with to start
 Environment
                      operating as a legal entity.
                      The number of different tax procedures that a start-up has to comply with to start operating as
 Taxes
                      a legal entity.
                      The number of different labor procedures that a start-up has to comply with to start operating
 Labor
                      as a legal entity.
                      The number of different steps that a start-up has to comply with in order to obtain a registration
 Screening
                      certificate that are not associated with safety and health issues, the environment, taxes, or labor.
                      The time it takes to become operational, in business days. The figure is calculated by taking
 Time                 the time for registration, and adding the time for post-registration procedures. Time is measured
                      in business days. Per definition, a week has five business days and a month has twenty two.
                      The cost of becoming operational as a share in GNP/capita. The start-up is assumed to have
 Cost
                      a start-up capital of ten times the GNP per capita level in 1997 in the country.
                      Gross domestic product per capita in current U.S. dollars in 1997. Source: World Bank's World
 GDP1997 per capita
                      Development Indicators, 1999, Table 1.2. CD Rom 5/2000.
                      Number of ISO 9000 certifications per thousand inhabitants issued by the International
                      Organization for Standardization in 1998 to each country in the sample. “ISO standards
                      represent an international consensus on the state of the art in the technology concerned....ISO
                      9000 is primarily concerned with quality management...ISO develops voluntary technical
 Quality standards    standards that contribute to making the development, manufacturing and supply of products
                      and services more efficient, safer and cleaner....ISO standards also serve to safeguard
                      consumers ....When an organization has a management system certified to an ISO 9000..., this
                      means that the process influencing quality (ISO 9000) ....conforms to the relevant standard’s
                      requirements”. Source: International Organization for Standardization
                      Emissions of organic water pollutants (kilograms per day per worker) for 1996. Measured in
                      terms of biochemical oxygen demand, which refers to the amount of oxygen that bacteria in
 Water pollution      water will consume in breaking down waste. Emissions per worker are total emissions divided
                      by the number of industrial workers. Source: World Development Indicators 1999, Table 3.6,
                      World Bank.
                      Log of the number of deaths caused by accidental poisonings (including by drugs, medications,
                      bio-products, solid and liquid substances, gases and vapors) per million inhabitants. Average
 Deaths from
                      of the years 1981 through 1994 (the most recent available figure). Source: The number of
 accidental
                      accidental deaths from poisoning is taken from Causes of Death and Life, Birth Statistics,
 poisoning
                      World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 1998. Population figures are taken from World
                      Bank's World Development Indicators.
 Deaths from          Log of the number of deaths caused by intestinal infections (including digestive disorders) per
 intestinal           million inhabitants. Average of the years 1981 through 1994 (the most recent available figure).
Variable                                                       Description
infections           Source: The number of deaths from intestinal infections is taken from Causes of Death and Life,
                     Birth Statistics, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 1998. Population figures are
                     taken from World Bank's World Development Indicators.
                     Size of the shadow economy as a percentage of GDP (varying time periods). Source: Authors
Size of the          owns computations based on averaging over all estimates reported in Schneider and Enste
unofficial           (1999) for any given country as well as Sananikone (1996) for Burkina Faso, Chidzero
economy              (1996) for Senegal, Turnham and Schwartz (1990) for Indonesia and Pakistan, and
                     Kasnako—lu and Yayla (2000) for Turkey.
Employment in        Share of the labor force employed in the unofficial economy in the capital city of each country
the unofficial       as a percent of the official labor. Figures are based on surveys and, for some countries, on
economy              econometric estimates. Source: Schneider (2000).
                     Average of the five-year-mean-return-on-asset ratio for all publicly-traded non-financial firms
                     (i.e., excluding SICs 6000 through 6499) in a given country. Return on assets is defined as the
Return on assets     ratio of gross income to total assets. Source: WorldScope April 2000 (for all countries except
                     Bulgaria, Croatia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Rep.,Latvia and Slovenia) and, for countries not on
                     WorldScope, Claessens, Djankov, and Klingebiel (2000).
                     Survey measure of the extent to which respondents agree with the following statement:
Product market
                     “Competition in the local market is intense and market shares fluctuate constantly”. Scale from
competition
                     1 (strongly agree) through 7 (strongly disagree). Source: World Competitiveness Report, 1999.
                     Corruption perception index for 1999. Corruption is defined broadly as “the misuse of public
                     power for private benefits, e.g., bribing of public officials, kickbacks in public procurement, or
                     embezzlement of public funds.” The index averages the corruption scores given by the
                     following sources: (1) Freedom House Nations in Transit (FH); (2) Gallup International (GI); (3)
                     the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU); (4) the Institute for Management Development, Lausanne
Corruption index
                     (IMD); (5) the International Crime Victim Survey (ICVS); (6) the Political and Economic Risk
                     Consultancy, Hong Kong (PERC); (7) The Wall Street Journal, Central European Economic
                     Review (CEER); (8) the World Bank and University of Basel (WB/UB), (9) the World Economic
                     Forum (WEF). Descending score from 1 (most corrupt) to 10 (least corrupt). Source:
                     Transparency International.
                     Index of “operation (de facto) independence of chief executive.” Descending scale from 1 to
Executive de facto   7 (1=pure individual; 2=intermediate category; 3=slight to moderate limitations; 4=intermediate
independence         category; 5=substantial limitations; 6=intermediate category; 7=executive parity or
                     subordination). Average of the years 1945 through 1994. Source: Polity III.
                     Index of constraints on the executive power based on the number of effective veto points in a
Constraints on       country. Veto points include: (1) an effective legislature (represents two veto points in the case
executive power      of bicameral systems); (2) an independent judiciary; and (3) a strong federal system. Source:
                     Polcon Database available at <http://www.wharton.upenn.edu/faculty/henisz.html>.
                     Index of the effectiveness of the legislature. Ascending scale from 1 to 4 (1=no legislature;
Effectiveness of
                     2=largely ineffective; 3=partly effective; 4=effective;). Average of the years 1945 through 1994.
legislature
                     Source: The Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive.
Competition in       Index of the competitiveness of the nominating process for seats in the legislature. Ascending
the legislature’s    scale from 1 to 4 (1=no legislature; 2=non-competitive; 3=partly competitive; 4=competitive).
nominating           Average of the years 1945 through 1994. Source: The Cross-National Time-Series Data
process              Archive.
Autocracy            Indicates the “general closedness of political institutions.” Scale from 0 to 10 with 0 being high


                                                         33
Variable                                                     Description
                   in autocracy and 10 being low in autocracy. Average of the years 1945 through 1994. Source:
                   Polity III.
                   Index of political rights. Higher ratings indicate countries that come closer “to the ideals
                   suggested by the checklist questions of: (1) free and fair elections; (2) those elected rule; (3)
Political rights   there are competitive parties or other competitive political groupings; (4) the opposition has an
                   important role and power; and (5) the entities have self-determination or an extremely high
                   degree of autonomy. Source: Freedom of the World, 1996.
                   Identifies the legal origin of each Company Law or Commercial Code of each country. There
                   are five possible origins: (1) English Common Law; (2) French Commercial Code; (3) German
Legal origin
                   Commercial Code; (4) Scandinavian Commercial Code; and (5) Socialist/Communist laws.
                   Source: La Porta et al. 1998, Reynolds and Flores 1989, CIA World Factbook 1996.
                                                               Table III: The Data
The table reports the total number of procedures and their breakup in the following five categories: (1) safety and health; (2) environment; (3) taxes;
(4) labor; and (5) screening. The table also reports the time and direct cost (as a fraction of GDP per capita in 1997) associated with meeting
government requirements as well as the level of GDP per capita in dollars in 1997. Countries are sorted in ascending order on the basis of the total
number of procedures. Table II describes the variables in detail.
                            Number of    Safety &                                                                                 GDP1997 per
                                                     Environment     Taxes       Labor      Screening       Time        Cost
                            Procedures    Health                                                                                   Capita
        Canada                  2            0            0            1            0           1             2         0.0140          20,065
        Australia               3            0            0            1            0           2             3         0.0209          21,555
        New Zealand             3            0            0            1            0           2            17         0.0042          17,188
        United States           4            0            0            1            0           3             7         0.0096          29,231
        Sweden                  4            0            0            1            1           2            17         0.0254          25,736
        Ireland                 4            0            0            1            1           2            25         0.1145          20,718
        Finland                 4            0            0            1            2           1            32         0.0119          23,315
        Denmark                 5            1            0            1            1           2            21         0.0136          32,372
        Israel                  5            0            0            2            1           2            32         0.2017          16,806
        Norway                  6            0            0            2            2           2            24         0.0249          34,822
        Malaysia                6            0            1            1            1           3            41         0.1723           4,517
        Hong Kong               6            1            0            1            1           3            41         0.2467          26,701
        Zimbabwe                6            0            0            2            0           4            59         0.5849             731
        United Kingdom          7            1            0            2            0           4            11         0.0056          21,748
        Panama                  7            0            0            1            1           5            14         0.3105           3,229
        Latvia                  7            0            0            2            0           5            20         0.2774           2,242
        South Africa            7            1            0            2            1           3            30         0.3666           3,179
        Nigeria                 7            0            0            2            1           4            35         0.9927             338
        Germany                 7            0            0            0            1           6            90         0.0851          25,594
        China                   7            0            0            1            2           4           111         0.1068             735
        Sri Lanka               8            0            0            2            1           5            31         0.0863             814
        Lebanon                 8            0            0            0            1           7            32         0.3893           3,609
        Pakistan                8            0            0            1            2           5            32         0.5333             480
        Belgium                 8            1            0            1            1           5            42         0.1001          23,800
        Taiwan                  8            2            0            1            1           4            46         0.0072          13,073
        Netherlands             8            0            1            1            0           6            68         0.1902          23,281
        Kenya                   8            1            0            1            1           5            77         0.3031             358
        Kyrgyz Republic         9            0            0            1            1           7            23         0.1997             380
        Slovenia                9            0            0            0            1           8            35         0.0709           9,165
        Uruguay                 9            0            1            1            3           4           105         0.0551           6,115
                  Number of    Safety &                                                              GDP1997 per
                                          Environment   Taxes   Labor   Screening   Time    Cost
                  Procedures    Health                                                                Capita
Poland                10          1            0         2       1         6         26     0.2795          3,510
Singapore             10          1            1         1       1         6         36     0.1239        31,036
Thailand              10          0            0         2       2         6         39     0.1025         2,540
Hungary               10          0            0         2       1         7         53     0.8101         4,503
India                 10          1            0         2       2         5         61     0.1278           396
Bulgaria              11          0            1         2       0         8         20     0.1652         1,213
Ukraine               11          1            1         1       2         6         21     0.1970           980
Ghana                 11          1            1         2       3         4         35     0.1489           383
Korea (South)         11          2            0         0       2         7         46     0.1563         9,622
Japan                 11          2            0         2       1         6         50     0.1144        33,292
Senegal               11          0            0         2       3         6         50     0.9956           550
Turkey                11          0            0         2       1         8         55     0.0344         3,038
Romania               11          0            0         2       1         8         68     0.1137         1,545
Spain                 11          0            0         2       2         7         83     0.1269        13,499
Czech Republic        11          1            0         1       1         8         97     0.2510         5,050
Italy                 11          1            0         3       1         6        121     0.2474        19,912
Indonesia             11          0            1         2       1         7        142     0.2902         1,073
Kazakhstan            12          2            0         1       1         8         31     0.1248         1,403
Georgia               12          2            0         1       1         8         70     0.2797           966
Argentina             12          0            1         3       1         7         71     0.2323         9,110
Chile                 12          2            1         4       0         5         78     0.1161         5,272
Switzerland           12          0            1         1       1         9         88     0.1336        36,014
Portugal              12          0            0         2       1         9          99    0.3129        10,185
Slovak Republic       12          1            0         2       2         7        110.5   0.1314         3,615
Ecuador               12          2            0         1       2         7         141    0.1553         1,656
Austria               12          2            1         1       1         7         154    0.4545        25,549
Greece                13          0            0         2       2         9         53     0.4799        11,360
Lithuania             13          3            0         2       2         6         66     0.0550         2,587
Tunisia               13          1            0         1       4         7         66     0.4241         2,055
Burkina Faso          13          0            0         2       2         9         77     1.3336           227
Jordan                13          0            2         2       2         7         81     0.4342         1,581
Croatia               14          1            1         1       3         8         58     0.3405         4,021
Tanzania              14          1            2         2       1         8         77     0.8675           226
Peru                  14          1            1         1       4         7        171     0.2142         2,620
Philippines           15          2            1         2       2         8         59     0.1057         1,117
                      Number of    Safety &                                                                           GDP1997 per
                                              Environment     Taxes        Labor       Screening    Time     Cost
                      Procedures    Health                                                                             Capita
Brazil                    15          1            0            5            4             5         67      0.6735          5,012
Mexico                    15          2            2            2            3              6        112     0.5742          4,271
Venezuela                 15          3            1            2            3              6        124     0.1107          3,841
Egypt                     15          0            1            2            2             10        132     2.1608          1,253
Vietnam                   15          1            1            1            2             10        171     1.5017           324
France                    16          0            0            3            1             12         66     0.1970        23,754
Russia                    16          0            0            2            2             12         69     0.3776         3,034
Colombia                  17          3            1            1            2             10         55     0.1244         2,391
Mozambique                17          3            0            1            3             10        174     1.1640             90
Bolivia                   20          1            1            1            6             11         82     2.6252          1,027
Sample Average          10.17       0.71         0.35          1.55         1.51          6.07      63.05    0.34           9,448

                                                  Panel B: Means by Quartiles of GDP per Capita in 1997


1st Quartile             7.17        0.50        0.22          1.22         0.83          4.39      43.17     0.10      26,588
 nd
2 Quartile              10.63        0.79        0.42          1.84         1.63          5.95      70.42     0.26       9,080
 rd
3 Quartile              11.53        0.79        0.32          1.58         1.63          7.21      64.55     0.33       2,437
 th
4 Quartile              11.21        0.74        0.42          1.53         1.89          6.63      73.00     0.65         589

                                                            Panel C: Test of Means (t-Statistics)
 st      nd                    a
1 vs 2 Quartile         -2.95       -1.03        -1.15        -1.87c       -2.67b        -1.82c     -2.34b   -2.61b     10.57a
1st vs 3rd Quartile     -3.94a      -0.99        -0.55        -1.73c       -2.77a        -3.38a     -1.55    -2.00b     20.71a
1st vs 4th Quartile     -3.28a      -0.90        -1.15         -1.59       -3.17a        -2.58b     -2.12b   -3.48a     22.56a
2nd vs 3rd Quartile      -0.87       0.00        0.55          0.82         0.00         -1.86c     0.46     -0.58       5.66a
2nd vs 4th Quartile      -0.50       0.18        0.00          1.01         -0.67         -0.95     -0.20    -2.46b      7.31a
3rd vs 4th Quartile      0.29        0.17        -0.55         0.29         -0.69         0.83      -0.57    -1.76c      9.10a
                              Table IV: Evidence on the Helping-hand Theory
The table presents the results of OLS regressions using the following six dependent variables: (1) Quality
standards as proxied by the number of ISO9000 certifications; (2) Water pollution; (3) Deaths from accidental
poisoning; (4) Deaths from intestinal infection; (5) Size of the unofficial economy as a fraction of GDP; (3)
Water pollution; and (6) Employment in the unofficial economy. The independent variables are the number
of procedures and the log of per capita GDP in dollars in 1997. Table II describes all variables in detail.
Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients.

    Dependent Variable          Number of             Ln GDP/POP97              Constant                   R2
                                Procedures                                                                 N
                                  -0.2646a                                       0.7495a                 0.2232

    Quality standards             (0.0600)                                       (0.1454)                  75
    (ISO Certifications)          -0.1271b                 0.0942a               -0.3345                 0.4913
                                  (0.0614)                (0.0187)               (0.2370)                  75
                                   0.0108                                        0.1538a                 0.0152
                                  (0.0089)                                       (0.0196)                  68
    Water pollution
                                   -0.0054                -0.0119a               0.2894a                 0.1713
                                  (0.0090)                (0.0036)               (0.0447)                  68
                                   0.6046a                                       1.7256a                 0.0778

    Deaths from                   (0.2303)                                       (0.4781)                  55
    accidental poisoning           0.0364                 -0.4040 a
                                                                                 6.4584 a
                                                                                                         0.3118
                                  (0.2315)                (0.0941)               (1.1458)                  55
                                         a                                                a
                                   2.3522                                        -2.4771                 0.2924

    Deaths from intestinal        (0.3161)                                       (0.6548)                  60
    infection                      1.2846a
                                                          -0.7455 a
                                                                                 6.1875 a
                                                                                                         0.5205
                                  (0.3114)                (0.1412)               (1.6357)                  60
                                            a
                                  13.6277                                        -2.3438                 0.1595

    Size of the unofficial        (2.9920)                                       (6.4981)                  66
    economy 1                      5.1184                 -6.5696 a
                                                                                 73.9952   a
                                                                                                         0.4087
                                  (3.2505)                (1.6090)              (20.2810)                  66
                                            a                                             a
                                  19.8763                                        -4.3097                 0.1758

    Employment in the             (6.2802)                                      (14.1459)                  36
    unofficial economy            14.9688a                -6.0749a               52.9568b                0.4914
                                  (5.5192)                (1.3639)              (20.5722)                  36

1
 The regression on the size of the unofficial economy controls for the log of GDP per capita plus unofficial economy
income (i.e., GDP per capita*(1+unofficial economy)), and not just by GDP per capita as all other regressions on the table
do.

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%.
                              Table V: Evidence on the Capture Theory
The table presents the results of OLS regressions using the following two dependent variables: (1) Return on
assets; and (2) Product market competition. The independent variables are: (1) Number of procedures (Panel
A); (2) Time (Panel B); and (C) Cost (Panel C). Each regression is run with and without controlling for the
log of per capita GDP in dollars in 1997. Table II describes all variables in detail. Robust standard errors are
shown below the coefficients.

                          Panel A: Number of Procedures as the Independent Variable
 Dependent Variable          Number of           Ln GDP/POP97            Constant                 R2
                             Procedures                                                           N
                               -0.0052                                    0.1832a               0.0011
                               (0.0187)                                   (0.0438)                56
 Return on assets
                                                           a
                               0.0113               0.0166                 0.0024               0.0795
                               (0.0180)             (0.0062)              (0.0699)                56
                               -0.4308a                                   5.9449a               0.1887

 Product market                (0.1035)                                   (0.2280)                54
 competition                   -0.1391              0.2324a               3.2677a               0.4852
                               (0.1066)             (0.0515)              (0.6314)                54

                                   Panel B: Time as the Independent Variable
 Dependent Variable               Time           Log GDP/POP97           Constant                R2
                                                                                                 N
                                 -0.0052                                  0.1917a              0.0039
                                (0.0124)                                  (0.0504)               56
 Return on assets
                                                             b
                                 0.0002              0.0151               0.0389               0.0747
                                (0.0112)             (0.0060)             (0.0689)               56
                                -0.1758a                                  5.6806a              0.1045

 Product market                 (0.0589)                                  (0.2388)               54
 competition                     -0.0337             0.2482a              2.9537               0.4732
                                (0.0521)             (0.0484)             (0.5637)               54

                                   Panel C: Cost as the Independent Variable
 Dependent Variable               Cost           Log GDP/POP97           Constant                R2
                                                                                                 N
                                 -0.0089                                  0.1533a              0.0254
                                (0.0086)                                  (0.0181)               56
 Return on assets
                                 -0.0028             0.0139c              0.0444               0.0768
                                (0.0098)             (0.0073)             (0.0540)               56
                                -0.1653a                                  4.6643a              0.2208

 Product market                 (0.0283)                                  (0.0949)               54
 competition                     -0.0564             0.2265a              2.8993a              0.4890
                                (0.0368)             (0.0516)             (0.4241)               54
                                Table VI: Evidence on the Toll-Booth Theory
The table presents the results of OLS regressions using corruption as the dependent variable. The
independent variables are: (1) the number of procedures; (2) Time ; (3) Cost; and the log of per capita GDP
in dollars in 1997. Panel A presents results for the 71 observations with available corruption data. Panel B
reports results for both the sample of countries with GDP per capita in 1997 above and below the sample
median. Table II describes all variables in detail. Robust standard errors are shown below the coefficients.

                                           Panel A: Results for the whole sample
                                     (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)

 Number of procedures             -3.2809a        -1.7249a
                                  (0.3555)        (0.2726)

 Time                                                             -1.2503a    -0.5524a
                                                                  (0.2450)    (0.1556)

 Cost                                                                                      -1.0757a     -0.3581a
                                                                                           (0.1369)     (0.1324)

 Ln GDP/POP97                                      1.0796a                     1.2072a                   1.1246a
                                                  (0.1259)                    (0.1242)                  (0.1316)

 Constant                         12.2803a         -0.1695         9.8176a    -2.9330b      2.9519a     -5.0634a
                                  (0.8462)        (1.3575)        (1.0262)    (1.2058)     (0.3095)     (1.0253)

 R2                                0.3923          0.7749         0.1913       0.7204       0.3668       0.7145

 N                                   71              71             71             71         71          71



                  Panel B: Results for Countries above and below the world median GDP per capita
                                  Countries Above Median GDP/POP97             Countries Below Median GDP/POP97

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)

 Number of procedures             -1.6508a                                     -0.1732
                                  (0.3280)                                    (0.5423)

 Time                                             -0.6623a                                  0.1078
                                                  (0.1748)                                 (0.2132)

 Cost                                                             -0.4580a                               0.0628
                                                                  (0.1662)                              (0.1245)

 Ln GDP/POP97                      1.7664a         1.9926a         1.9139a     0.4645b      0.4721b      0.4938b
                                  (0.2878)        (0.3005)        (0.3341)    (0.1926)     (0.1766)     (0.2066)

 Constant                         -6.8486b        -10.1111       -12.7763a     0.3211       -0.5904      -0.2218
                                  (3.0867)        (3.1598)        (3.0221)    (1.6286)     (1.4239)     (1.3725)

 R2                                0.7264          0.6656         0.6711       0.2251       0.2278       0.2260

 N                                   37              37             37             34         34          34

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%.
                                                                                            Table VII: Correlation Table for Political Attributes
The table reports correlations among the variables used in Table VIII. All variables are defined in Table II. Significance levels are Bonferroni-adjusted.




                                                                                                                                                                                      Scandinavian LO
                                                  Executive Power




                                                                                                                    Political Rights
                                                   Constraints on
                                 Independence
                                 Exec de-facto




                                                                     Effectiveness


                                                                                      Competition




                                                                                                                                                       Socialist LO


                                                                                                                                                                        German LO
                                                                                      Nominating




                                                                                                                                         French LO




                                                                                                                                                                                                          English LO
                                                                      Legislature




                                                                                                      Autocracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ln GDP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Number


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Time


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cost
Exec De-facto Indep.             1.0000
Constraints Exec. Power          0.8523a          1.0000
Effectiveness Legislature        0.9134a          0.8711a            1.0000
Competition Nominating           0.8211a          0.7219a            0.8440a          1.0000
Autocracy                        0.8918a          0.8567a            0.8475a          0.7578a        1.0000
Political Rights                 0.5352a          0.6140a            0.5993a          0.4246c        0.4800a       1.0000
French Legal Origin             -0.1899          -0.0230            -0.1963          -0.2204         0.0128       -0.0746               1.0000
Socialist Legal Origin          -0.3946          -0.4586a           -0.3736          -0.3619        -0.5594a      -0.0754              -0.4179b       1.0000
German Legal Origin              0.1832           0.2544             0.2579           0.1797         0.1510        0.2304              -0.2276       -0.1596           1.0000
Scandinavian Legal Orig.         0.3353           0.3367             0.3399           0.2510         0.2979        0.2294              -0.1832       -0.1285          -0.0700        1.0000
English Legal Origin             0.3027           0.1339             0.1520           0.2627         0.2760       -0.0942              -0.4654a      -0.3265          -0.1778       -0.1431              1.0000
Ln GDP per cap in 1997           0.6453a          0.7619a            0.7506a          0.6323a        0.6296a       0.6749a             -0.0800       -0.2497           0.3316        0.3114             -0.0378         1.0000
Number Procedures               -0.5743a         -0.4948a           -0.5699a         -0.4496b       -0.4718a      -0.2779               0.4680a       0.1881           0.0430       -0.3619             -0.5325a       -0.4285b 1.0000
Time Procedures                 -0.3580          -0.3150            -0.4061          -0.3479        -0.3099       -0.3116               0.4259c       0.0223           0.1365       -0.2108             -0.4635a       -0.3053 0.7531a 1.0000
Cost Procedures                 -0.5103a         -0.5419a           -0.6318a         -0.5233a       -0.4669a      -0.4303c              0.3280        0.1082          -0.1223       -0.3885c            -0.1887        -0.5695a 0.6229a 0.5490a 1.0000

Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%.
                                                 Table VIII: Evidence on Regulation and Political Attributes

The table presents the results of running regressions for three alternative measures of entry regulation: (1) Number of procedures in Panel A; (2) Time in Panel B; and
(3) Cost in Panel C. For each dependent variable, we run seven regressions using various political indicators described on Table II and GDP per capita. Robust standard
errors are shown below the coefficients.

                                                  Panel A: Number of Procedures as the Dependent Variable


                                                        (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)
              Executive De-facto                     -0.1278a
              Independence                           (0.0265)
                                                                   -0.5909b
              Constraints on Executive Power
                                                                   (0.2337)
                                                                                  -0.3120a
              Effectiveness of Legislature
                                                                                  (0.0658)
                                                                                                -0.2864a
              Competition Nominating
                                                                                                (0.1006)
                                                                                                              -0.0563a
              Autocracy
                                                                                                              (0.0172)
                                                                                                                             0.0045
              Political Rights
                                                                                                                            (0.0264)
                                                                                                                                             0.6660a
              French Legal Origin
                                                                                                                                            (0.0998)
                                                                                                                                             0.4869a
              Socialist Legal Origin
                                                                                                                                            (0.1024)
                                                                                                                                             0.6715a
              German Legal Origin
                                                                                                                                            (0.1561)
                                                                                                                                            -0.0510
              Scandinavian Legal Origin
                                                                                                                                            (0.1621)
                                                     -0.0245       -0.0296         0.0020       -0.0703b      -0.0596b      -0.1296a        -0.1129a
              Ln GDP per capita in 1997
                                                     (0.0292)      (0.0358)       (0.0341)      (0.0339)      (0.0297)      (0.0339)        (0.0291)
                                                      3.0035a       2.6684a        2.7804a       3.2373a       3.0971a       3.2776a         2.7534a
              Constant
                                                     (0.2259)      (0.2639)       (0.2518)      (0.2650)      (0.2307)      (0.2406)        (0.2115)
              R2                                      0.3339        0.2490         0.3247        0.2350        0.2473        0.1825          0.6098
              N                                         74            74             64            64            74            74              75
                                      Panel B: Time as the Dependent Variable


                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)
                                  -0.1263b
Executive De-facto Independence
                                  (0.0513)
                                             -0.5488
Constraints on Executive Power
                                             (0.4772)
                                                         -0.3274b
Effectiveness of Legislature
                                                         (0.1375)
                                                                     -0.3848b
Competition Nominating
                                                                     (0.1735)
                                                                                -0.0594c
Autocracy
                                                                                (0.0331)
                                                                                           -0.0848c
Political Rights
                                                                                           (0.0509)
                                                                                                       1.1150a
French Legal Origin
                                                                                                      (0.2123)
                                                                                                      0.5808b
Socialist Legal Origin
                                                                                                      (0.2359)
                                                                                                       1.4043a
German Legal Origin
                                                                                                      (0.3438)
                                                                                                       0.3263
Scandinavian Legal Origin
                                                                                                      (0.3050)
                                  -0.0703    -0.0775     -0.0593     -0.1183c   -0.1007c   -0.0925    -0.1924a
Ln GDP per capita in 1997
                                  (0.0524)   (0.0688)    (0.0592)    (0.0609)   (0.0548)   (0.0743)   (0.0606)
                                   5.0125a    4.6831a     4.9921a     5.4594a    5.0945a    5.0691a    4.7791a
Constant
                                  (0.4592)   (0.5060)    (0.4511)    (0.5119)   (0.4594)   (0.5092)   (0.4137)
R2                                 0.1376     0.1067      0.1691      0.1516     0.1162     0.1094     0.4304
N                                    74         74          64          64         74         74         75
                                                            Panel C: Cost as the Dependent Variable


                                                           (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                                                        -0.1710c
              Executive De-facto Independence
                                                        (0.0961)
                                                                        -1.0027c
              Constraints on Executive Power
                                                                        (0.6106)
                                                                                   -0.6685a
              Effectiveness of Legislature
                                                                                   (0.1950)
                                                                                              -0.6756b
              Competition Nominating
                                                                                              (0.2804)
                                                                                                         -0.0822
              Autocracy
                                                                                                         (0.0634)
                                                                                                                    -0.0589
              Political Rights
                                                                                                                    (0.0800)
                                                                                                                                0.9698a
              French Legal Origin
                                                                                                                               (0.3306)
                                                                                                                                0.4179
              Socialist Legal Origin
                                                                                                                               (0.3324)
                                                                                                                                0.6839
              German Legal Origin
                                                                                                                               (0.7061)
                                                                                                                               -0.8399c
              Scandinavian Legal Origin
                                                                                                                               (0.4513)
                                                        -0.3835a        -0.3566a   -0.2459a   -0.3884a   -0.4228a   -0.4330a   -0.4495a
              Ln GDP per capita in 1997
                                                        (0.1009)        (0.1142)   (0.0808)   (0.0866)   (0.1066)   (0.0999)   (0.0886)
                                                         2.0911a         1.4327a    1.5079a    2.4780a    2.1974a    2.0978a   1.4291b
              Constant
                                                        (0.6417)        (0.8015)   (0.5810)   (0.6591)   (0.6666)   (0.6538)   (0.6400)
              R2                                         0.3693          0.3613     0.4335     0.3915     0.3548     0.3264     0.4565
              N                                            74              74         64         64         74         74         75


Note: a Significant at 1%; b Significant at 5%; c Significant at 10%.
                       18                                                                                                 0.0045
                                 Cost
                              (right axis)
                       16                                                                                                 0.0040



                       14                                                                                                 0.0035


                                                                           Time
                       12                                                (left axis)                                      0.0030




                                                                                                                                   Cost / GDP per capita
     (business days)




                       10                                                                                                 0.0025
          Time




                       8                                                                                                  0.0020



                       6                                                                                                  0.0015



                       4                                                                                                  0.0010



                       2                                                                                                  0.0005



                       0                                                                                                  0.0000
                                1              2               3
                            Check name   Register with   Register with
                            uniqueness   Companies'      tax authority
                                           Registry




                                                                                       Steps of Start-up Process


Figure I. Start-up procedure in New Zealand. Procedures are lined up sequentially on the horizontal axis. The time required to complete
each procedure is described by the height of the bar and measured against the left scale. Cumulative costs are plotted using a line and
measured against the right scale.
                      70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.25



                      60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.20

                      50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cost/GDP per capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.15
    (business days)




                      40
          Time




                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                           Time
                                                                                                                                                                                         (left axis)
                      20
                                                         Cost
                                                      (right axis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                      10



                      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00
                               1               2                 3                4             5             6                 7             8               9               10            11             12              13            14            15                16
                           Check name   Notarize lease /    Certificate      Certificate     Power of     Open bank          Notarize      Publish        Register        Request       Form K-bis   Unblock capital   Notify post   Designate    Initial firm's   File for social
                           uniqueness    home-office       clean criminal   marital status   attorney     account &       company deeds headquarters'      articles      registration                                    office      bondsman /   ledgers and        security
                                           approval           record                                    deposit capital                   address in    association at                                                               guarantee     registers
                                                                                                                                           journal        tax office                                                                   taxes




                                                                                                                      Steps of the Start-up Process


Figure II. Start-up procedure in France. Procedures are lined up sequentially on the horizontal axis. The time required to complete
each procedure is described by the height of the bar and measured against the left scale. Cumulative costs are plotted using a line and
measured against the right scale.
                                              uoydnuo3 .IOJ ~)r?p %.yss!ur-uou Y)!M aldures mo u! sayno:, 1~ aye JOJ sampaDoldJo
laqumu (201) ay )su!e% xapu! uogdwo:, ay,jo sanlm ay$ s~oys Iold .Ia))km ayl -sampaaoJd JO .mqumN pna no!Jdnuo3 -111 a.m%!~
                               saJ”Pa=>OJd 4 0 JaqwnN 601
                                                           SAW
                        ud[      uns
                                                                                                                  ,
        e-4         vd dsa
                    143                                     S!
                                               /
                                              nap
                                              46
                                                                                 St-m
                       aw                           JOU                                                       I
                                d6s    t=l”
                                                                                                   ue3’
                                                                    aMS          l=u                      ,
                                                                     “!J
                                                          WP                                              1           OL
                     SaJnpa=>OJd 40 JaqUlnN Ul
                                                 6
                                      YUP
               dse
loq      ,
 _-’ /-” 100
       ZOU.4
                                 0
                                 -It
     e6u         e4         “W   Q
           uay        UN4        a
                                 8
IW
