$  %     

        
  
  
 !" #&'()
*#+,,--- ",##.,-&'()

 

  $  / 0   0  0
1232 ..4*.. 5
0"6  2718'
# 7222

             
               
!"   # $   %  &" '#" & %  # (
  #    ) (  *    '"   + +           
     ,    % "  $ "
-../0  ,  1 "   ( 1 "   1 "  
     1 "      '"        
 2  1 "     3'  '"  
         32" +      
   0         3
45666 #3%3% ' 3  "3    
+ 7 +       "      4
    "  3

#.*#   .*  5"
      
$  !" #   &'()
# 7222
9   7





 *. ##6 - " * 4 . : ;4" ;  # 5.. <4 #
-* #  *"* .  * . 5..= *. #  #4 . ;  * .5"6
5.6   4. . ; 4 "  #  #. *. ;;4.  .
 .#  *   #  4 . : ;4"  5.  4 #  .
."  ;  * 1('8  1('( / .5 $  5. ; 0 . /4.6 -
>; * ;".   # .5" 4. .  *    * .*  -*
44  /.6 # * .* . -  .. .* ; * .*  -* 
4 6  *. .* 4.. * "*  * -* .   * 4  . 
4 6 * # ;  . ; # * .* .6 5 -* .6  5 5.;6 -*
* ! ; ... * -* 45 .... *6 -*?4   .  .5" .  *"*
;  # * .* . 5 ; 4  " ;  "  *  "#*4 5. !
 "*6 *. ;". ."". * .. ; * .*  .5" 4. .  "  ; * .5".
4. . ; -*  *"*?4  * .* .  #4 *5 # .;;4    *  
; # 4. .  *    -* 44 
 4 4.  * # .5"  5. 4. .  # ..
* . ;  ; .4*+ <1= ." *  

; #.  """ -*

44 @ <7= ." #4 . ;  # ;   4   .. #4"@  <8= A"
4 .>4. ;  : # 4  - # .5"  5.
  
 4*  ; $...
0  5.
B27 . @ 8277 $ -
- C !6 C 1227&
<717= '3)?32(7
-"BD4 

  
 4*  ; $...
0  5.
B2( . @ 8277 $ -
- C !6 C 1227&
<717= '3)?8)(8
"*1D4 

I.

INTRODUCTION
Much of the interest in “entrepreneurs” by economists reflects a curiosity about the role of

entrepreneurs in fostering innovation and economic growth (see, e.g., Schumpeter, 1934). The notion
of an “entrepreneur” ranges from inventors who create new products or even new industries to local
business people starting restaurants and retail stores. A common link across these entrepreneurs is that
their business investment plans are likely to influence their saving decisions. In contrast, for households
without entrepreneurial ambitions, the life-cycle model of saving augmented with some precautionary
saving (see, e.g., Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1994, 1995; Aiyagari, 1994; and Huggett, 1996)
explains much of the heterogeneity in saving among U.S. households. These models of saving are less
successful in describing the saving patterns of wealthier households. Because the wealth distribution is
skewed toward wealthier households, the motives for an important portion of aggregate saving remain a
puzzle. The link between entrepreneurial business decisions and entrepreneurs’ saving decisions may
help explain this puzzle since many wealthy households own active business assets.
In this paper, we examine the importance of saving by entrepreneurial households and the
possible interdependence between entrepreneurs’ investment and saving decisions. Such an
interdependence would affect the consumption choices and the portfolio allocation of both current and
potential entrepreneurs. Therefore both the amount of capital in closely-held businesses and the
number of households with businesses understate the importance of this interdependence for the level
and the heterogeneity of household saving. For example, entrepreneurs may increase their nonbusiness
liquid assets as possible insurance against business risk; potential entrepreneurs may increase their total
saving or allocate more saving to liquid assets in anticipation of future business investment needs.
1

In theory, entrepreneurs’ investment and saving decisions would not necessarily be linked if
financial markets allowed closely-held businesses to separate completely their investment decisions
from the saving decisions of the owners. However, asymmetric information about the value of the
entrepreneur’s project, differences between the entrepreneur’s perception of the project and the
perception of an outsider investor, and moral hazard problems in financing contracts could all cause
entrepreneurs to commit substantial equity to their ventures. Recent research (see, e.g., Evans and
Jovanovic, 1989; Hubbard and Kashyap, 1992; and King and Levine, 1993) has linked such capitalmarket imperfections to the investment decisions of entrepreneurs. The potentially high returns available
to entrepreneurs – coupled with costly external financing – could also lead to relatively high saving rates
for entrepreneurs.1
Using data from the 1983 and 1989 Federal Reserve Board Surveys of Consumer Finances,
we quantify three findings about entrepreneurial saving decisions and their role in household wealth
accumulation. First, entrepreneurial households own a substantial share of household wealth and
income, and this share increases throughout the distributions of wealth and income. This concentration
of household wealth among active business owners suggests that entrepreneurial selection and
investment decisions may have important implications for models of aggregate household consumption

1

The notion that entrepreneurial shares in income and in saving significantly outweigh
entrepreneurs’ proportion in the population is not new (see, e.g., Klein, Straus, and Vendome, 1956;
Friend and Kravis, 1957; and Klein, 1960); in addition, high savings-income ratios have been noted for
business owners by Friend and Kravis (1957) and Hubbard (1986). Klein (1960, page 305) also notes the
interdependence of entrepreneurial saving and investment decisions: “Of primary importance is the need
and desire of entrepreneurs to reinvest their unspent business earnings in further business expansion.”
Friedman (1957) highlights a role for economic rents in entrepreneurial investment decisions, arguing that
business owners may obtain a higher rate of return from their business than from the capital market.

2

and saving. Second, the saving patterns of entrepreneurs appear to be quite different than those of
non-entrepreneurial households. Wealth-income ratios are higher for entrepreneurial households and
saving-income ratios are higher for entrants and continuing entrepreneurs, even after controlling for age
and other demographic variables. Third, the portfolios of entrepreneurial households, even wealthy
ones, are undiversified, with the bulk of assets held within active businesses; furthermore, the portfolios
of continuing entrepreneurs grow less diversified over time suggesting that the lack of diversification is
not just related to down-payment constraints for starting a business. Taken together, these findings
suggest that studies of household saving decisions in general and of the savings decisions of high-income
households in particular have paid insufficient attention to the role of entrepreneurial decisions.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II defines an “entrepreneur” for our analysis,
describes the composition of entrepreneurs in the population, and documents the concentration of
wealth among entrepreneurs. In section III, we provide a simple model and describe evidence of
effects of costly external financing on entrepreneurial decisions. We also present evidence on the
portfolio composition of entrepreneurs and portfolio changes during entrepreneurial transitions. Section
IV examines the mobility of entrepreneurs in the distribution of wealth and documents the role of
entrepreneurs in explaining the heterogeneity in household saving rates. Section V concludes and
discusses potential areas of future research.

II.

ENTREPRENEURSHIP AMONG WEALTHY HOUSEHOLDS
A.

Defining Entrepreneurship

We begin by describing and evaluating alternative definitions of “entrepreneurship” for our
3

empirical work. We also describe the Survey of Consumer Finances data and present some basic facts
about the households meeting our definition of entrepreneurship.
Our focus on “entrepreneurship” raises an important question for empirical work: What does it
mean to be an “entrepreneur”? Someone who is self-employed? Someone who has some selfemployment income? Someone who makes active business investments? Someone who creates jobs?
Many descriptions of entrepreneurship by economists (see, e.g., Schumpeter, 1934, 1942) or by
businesspeople are broad, leaving the impression that, perhaps like pornography, one will know it when
one sees it. Unfortunately, such a standard is not promising for meaningful empirical work. Moreover,
one’s choice of a definition of entrepreneurship is linked to the choice of data for tests of links between
business ownership and household saving decisions.
Because we are interested in the possible interdependence of saving and investment decisions
of business owners, we think of an “entrepreneur” as someone who combines upfront business
investments with entrepreneurial skill to obtain the chance of earning economic profits.2,

3

Specifically,

a household meets our definition of an entrepreneur if it reports owning one or more active businesses
with a total market value of at least $5000.5 Because we require information on household
2

Our emphasis on investment by the entrepreneur is consistent with a Schumpeterian emphasis
on innovation. As long as some upfront investment is required, our concept of entrepreneurship is also
consistent with the uncertainty-bearing roles stressed early by Cantillon and later by Knight. We are
abstracting from the entrepreneur’s role as a coordinator – merely hiring and combining factors of
production, as suggested initially by Say.
3

While the model we present in section III emphasizes an unobserved “talent” for
entrepreneurship, our saving discussion will require only that an upfront internal investment is important
(i.e., a good realization could reflect talent or luck).
5

Our choice of a precise figure is, of course, inherently arbitrary. Our data description and
empirical results are not qualitatively different if we define entrepreneurship based on owning active

4

characteristics, business ownership and investment, and wealth and its composition, we use the crosssection of households in the 1989 Federal Reserve Board Survey of Consumer Finances and the panel
of households spanning the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances and the 1989 Survey of Consumer
Finances.6 Because the SCF attempts to describe the wealth characteristics of the population, it
oversamples higher-income households. The 1989 SCF contains data on 3,143 households. The
1983 to 1989 panel component of the SCF includes a subsample of 1,479 households in the 1983 and
1989 cross-sectional surveys.7 The data include population weights which allow the calculation of
estimates of population statistics. To deal with non-responses to some questions, the SCF data have
imputations for missing values and provide replications for each household (5 per household in the
cross-section and 3 per household in the panel).
In the 1989 SCF, we classify 8.7 percent of households as entrepreneurs. Other definitions are
possible, of course. For example, 9.5 percent of households report active business assets greater than

business assets (even if they have zero market value net of debt) rather than using a $5000 cutoff. An
appendix with these results is available upon request from the authors.
6

For more information on the SCF, see Kennickell and Shack-Marquez (1992). We did not use
the 1992 or 1995 Surveys of Consumer Finances because those surveys did not collect data on the book
value of assets invested in active businesses. They also do not have a longitudinal component, which is
important for our measures of saving. We use the SCF instead of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), because the SCF oversampled higher-income households. Lastly, while using Schedule C filings
for federal income tax purposes as an indicator of business ownership (as in Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and
Rosen, 1994a, 1994b) has rich longitudinal information, we do not use these data since tax returns contain
little information on wealth and Schedule C excludes ownership of incorporated businesses.
7

Many of the households in the panel were also interviewed in 1986. Unfortunately, the 1986
interviews asked less specific questions regarding asset types and values. In particular, the 1986 survey
did not separate active and passive business investments, which is critical for our definition of
entrepreneurs. Because the sample is smaller, the data are less reliable, and we cannot consistently
define entrepreneurs, we do not use the 1986 data.

5

$1,000 and 11.5 percent of households report owning active business assets, even though these assets
might have zero value. In addition, we did not use reported “self-employment” status in the SCF
because that information did not reveal whether such households had made any active business
investments. Of the 8.7 percent of households in the 1989 SCF that we classify as entrepreneurs,
roughly two-thirds report the head of household as being self-employed. Of the 11.1 percent of
households with a self-employed head of household, 52 percent meet our definition of being an
entrepreneur.8
The entrepreneurs in our sample own a diverse set of businesses.9 Agriculture is the largest
industry, comprising 26 percent of our sample. The other major groups are: retail firms with 16
percent, construction with 13 percent, professional practices with 11 percent, personal and business
services with 10 percent, and manufacturing businesses with five percent. Sole proprietorships are the
most popular organizational form, with 49 percent of businesses.10 Corporations are 25 percent of the
sample (11 percent are S-corporations, which are taxed as pass-through entities, and 14 percent are
C-corporations subject to double taxation); partnerships account for 24 percent.
The fraction of households in the 1989 SCF cross-section that we classify as entrepreneurial

8

The correlation between owning active business assets (even with a market value of zero) and
self-employment status is slightly stronger than the correlation using the $5,000 cutoff. Again, roughly
two-thirds of active business owners report being self employed; however, of the 11.1 percent of
households with a self-employed head of household, 68 percent report owning active business assets.
9

We classify entrepreneurs by the industry listed for their primary business in the SCF.

10

Organizational form refers to the household’s primary business. The second and third
businesses of households with multiple businesses are less likely to be sole proprietorships and more likely
to be partnerships.

6

rises and then falls with age. Entrepreneurs are 6.3 percent of households with heads under age 35.
This percentage rises to 13.4 percent of households with heads between the ages of 35 and 54 and
then falls to 6.0 percent of households with heads over age 54. The panel component of the SCF
suggests that there is substantial turnover in which families are entrepreneurs. Of households that were
entrepreneurs in the 1983 SCF, 52 percent exited from entrepreneurship by 1989. Similarly, 54
percent of the 1989 entrepreneurs entered entrepreneurship during the six-year period.

B.

Are Entrepreneurs Wealthier?

In 1989, only 8.7 percent of U.S. households fit our definition of entrepreneurs. However, this
relatively small group of households plays a major role in aggregate household wealth accumulation.
Table 1 reports the concentration of assets and net worth among entrepreneurs.11 Overall, the 8.7
percent of households defined as entrepreneurs own 37.7 percent of assets and 39.0 percent of net
worth.12
Table 1 also presents the frequency of entrepreneurs and their importance for wealth

11

Household wealth is a broad measure of net worth. “Assets” include financial assets, the net
market value of active and passive business holdings, the value of residential and investment real estate,
vehicles, and other miscellaneous financial and nonfinancial assets. Assets include the value in quasiliquid retirement accounts (e.g., 401(k) plans), but not the value of defined-benefit plans or Social Security
wealth. “Net worth” subtracts mortgage and other personal debt from the value of assets.
12

For the lowest income group and for the overall calculation, our definition’s requiring business
assets of at least $5000 creates some concentration of assets among entrepreneurs because some
households have less than $5000 in total assets and do not satisfy our definition of being an
“entrepreneur.”

7

accumulation within income groups.13 Entrepreneurship is associated with higher income; for example,
almost one-third of households in the top five percent of the income distribution are entrepreneurs.
However, the correlation between income and entrepreneurship does not eliminate the concentration of
wealth among entrepreneurs. Wealth is concentrated, albeit to a lesser degree, within income groups.14
For example, the 13.4 percent of entrepreneurial households in the ninth income decile own 26.5
percent of that decile’s net worth.
Table 2 presents the average and median net worth of entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs
both overall and within income groups. Both overall and within income groups, entrepreneurs have
substantially more wealth per capita than nonentrepreneurs. Tables 1 and 2 indicate that a considerable
fraction of household wealth is owned by entrepreneurial households. Thus differences in how
households decide on investing in active business assets and other assets may provide important
modifications for life-cycle models that focus on saving through financial assets. Because wealthier
households are more likely to be entrepreneurs, these modifications may be especially important for
understanding the saving decisions of the wealthy.
Another prediction of simple life-cycle models of saving is that the ratio of wealth to permanent
13

“Income” includes wages, salaries, business income, distributions from pension plans, interest
and dividend income, gains on the sale of stock or other assets, rents and royalties, unemployment
insurance, workers’ compensation, gifts (including child support and alimony), and transfer payments.
While this broad measure of household income includes transitory components, the exclusion of the type
of income with arguably the largest transitory component – capital gains – does not affect the inferences
from our regression results.
14

Using current income to rank households raises the issue of how to account for transitory
income for entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs in the bottom income quintile may have temporarily low income
(e.g., a startup company), but have high permanent income. An entrepreneur with temporarily low
income may have much more wealth than a nonentrepreneur with low, stable income. In using the panel
component of the SCF, we use average income from 1982 and 1988 to mitigate these concerns.

8

income should be constant within an age cohort. Moreover, absent capital- or insurance-market
imperfections, the ratio of wealth to permanent income should increase with age as households
approach retirement. In this section, we examine more closely how wealth-income ratios vary with
household characteristics, especially entrepreneurship. One caveat is in order: While the life-cycle
model uses permanent income, we are limited to using annual income (or, in later sections, average
income for two years). Because the variance of transitory income may differ across households, our
wealth-income ratios are a noisy proxy for wealth-to-permanent-income ratios.
Using information on wealth and income from the cross-section of households in the 1989 SCF,
Table 3 shows average and median household wealth-income ratios by age, education, income, and
entrepreneurial status. We use three groups for age: “young” (under age 35), “middle-aged” (between
35 and 54), and “old” (55 or older). We use three education groups: less than high school, high school
graduate (including people with less than four years of college education), and college graduate
(including people with post-college education). We decompose income into quintiles, with five groups
in the highest income quintile.15
Overall, entrepreneurs have a median wealth-income ratio of 6.0, which is four times larger than

15

The comparisons of wealth to income ratios restrict the sample to the 3,110 households that
have positive income. Using the population weights, these age groups are roughly one-third of the
population; however, the SCF has an over-representation of older households so that the young, middle,
and older groups are based on 613, 1,209, and 1,288 households respectively. The education groups are
based on 662, 1,323, and 1,225 households (from low to high education). The propensity of households to
be entrepreneurs increases with education from 3.70 percent of the low education group to 8.82 percent
of the middle education group to 13.66 percent of the higher education group. By oversampling wealthier
households, the SCF allows us to split the sample into finer ranges at high income levels without relying on
small groups of households. The eight income groups are based on 457, 481, 467, 501, 315, 195, 301, and
393 households, respectively.

9

the median wealth-income ratio of nonentrepreneurs. Similar differences hold for all age and education
groups. Furthermore, entrepreneurs have higher wealth-income ratios for all income groups.16 For the
overall population, wealth-income ratios generally rise with income, consistent with the findings of
Diamond and Hausman (1984), Hubbard (1986), and Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2000). However,
while the wealth-income ratios of nonentrepreneurs rise with income, they are consistently high for
entrepreneurs of all income levels. Combining the high wealth-income ratios of entrepreneurs with the
positive correlation between entrepreneurship and income suggests that some portion of the pattern that
wealth-income ratios rise with income may be related to entrepreneurial selection and investment
decisions.

III. INTERDEPENDENCE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL SAVING AND INVESTMENT
To fix ideas regarding the role of costly external financing of entrepreneurial projects for
entrepreneurial saving and investment, we begin by presenting a stylized model of entrepreneurial
investment and illustrate its implications for entrepreneurial saving decisions. The model builds on work
by Lucas (1978), Jovanovic (1982), Evans and Jovanovic (1989), and Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and
Rosen (1994a). Rather than construct a complicated model, we a present a parsimonious model that
highlights the link between entrepreneurial investment and saving decisions. After presenting the model,
we review previous evidence on links between assets and entrepreneurial decisions and present
16

The relationships among wealth-income ratios, income, and entrepreneurship also hold within
the three age groups. Entrepreneurs have higher median wealth-income ratios than nonentrepreneurs of
similar age and income. For entrepreneurs, the median wealth-income ratios within an age group are
relatively constant across income groups; for nonentrepreneurs, however, the median wealth-income
ratios rise gradually with income within an age group.

10

information on differences in the portfolio allocation of entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs.

A.

Why Might Costly External Financing Affect Entrepreneurial Saving?

Many models of asymmetric information and incentive problems in financing and investment
decisions focus on the decisions of entrepreneurs. Most empirical studies of “costly external
financing,” however, have focused on the investment decisions of large publicly traded corporations,
for which longitudinal data on income-statement and balance-sheet items are available (see, e.g., the
review of studies in Hubbard, 1998). Those studies emphasize that, to the extent that information and
incentive problems in capital markets raise the cost of external financing relative to internal financing,
shifts in internal funds can affect investment, holding constant true underlying investment opportunities.
In addition, the anticipation of binding financing constraints can lead firms to accumulate liquid assets to
finance future investment (see, e.g., Calomiris, Himmelberg, and Wachtel, 1995; and Fazzari, Hubbard,
and Petersen, 2000).
Entrepreneurial ventures are somewhat closer to the underlying models than the more frequently
studied large firms. Just as related margins for larger businesses can be influenced by the availability of
internal funds, the “saving” and “investment” decisions of entrepreneurs are likely to be related. These
linkages can affect both entrepreneurial investment and entrepreneurial selection.
For simplicity, suppose that entrepreneurs have two sources of income: earnings from
entrepreneurial activity and returns on capital invested outside the business. Denoting entrepreneurial
earnings by y, we let:
y = 2 k " ,,
11

(1)

where 2 indexes (unobserved) ability for entrepreneurship; k is the amount of fixed capital invested in
the business; " is a constant in the unit interval; and , is an independently and identically distributed
productivity shock (with a mean of unity and a variance ofσ ∈2 ). Higher levels of entrepreneurial ability
imply greater average and marginal earnings for any given level of capital (as in Lucas, 1978; and
Jovanovic, 1982). Net income for an entrepreneur equals the sum of entrepreneurial earnings and
investment income, where investment income equals the return on assets, a, less entrepreneurial
investment, k. In this static example, investment income equals R(a-k), where R is the gross rate of
return. Total net income for an entrepreneur, then, equals y + R(a-k). If talent were perfectly
observable, the desired capital stock for entrepreneur i is given by k i = (2i"/Ri ) 1/(1 - ").
In the presence of a simple borrowing constraint, the capital stock may be less than this firstbest level. If one assumes that an entrepreneur may borrow a multiple 8 of assets (8 $0), then 0 # k #
(1 + 8) a. For any given unobserved ability 2, low-net-worth individuals are more likely to have their
business capital stock constrained by the requirement that k # (1 + 8) a.17, 18
To emphasize the interdependence of entrepreneurial saving and investment decisions, we
model costly external financing not by a nonnegativity constraint on net worth, but by an upward-

17

In general, an entrepreneur is unconstrained if 2 # (1 + 8) 1 - " (R/"). For constrained
entrepreneurs, Mk /Ma > 0 as long as k < (2"/R) 1/(1 - ").
18

Bhidé’s (1999) interviews with 100 entrepreneurs profiled by Inc. magazine strongly confirm
both the importance of capital-market imperfections as a constraint on growth and the modesty of upfront
investments. As Bhidé notes (page 15):
More than 80 percent of the Inc. founders I studied bootstrapped their ventures with modest
funds derived from personal savings, credit cards, second mortgages, and so on; the median startup capital was about $10,000. Only 5 percent raised their initial equity from professional venture
capitalists.

12

sloping supply schedule for uncollateralized external financing.19 (We take up the effect of costly
external financing constraints on entrepreneurial selection below.) When k > a, we represent the cost
 k − a

of funds as given by R + Ø  k  , where Ø $ 0 is the premium in the cost of external financing;
ØNk > 0 (higher collateral relative to capital reduces the costs of external financing).20 If the
entrepreneur’s assets are at least as large as his or her capital investment, Ø = 0, and the cost of funds
is given simply by R . Under this representation of costly external financing, the entrepreneur chooses
the capital stock to:

max 2 k "- R (k - a) - Ø k.

(2)

The equilibrium capital stock for an unconstrained firm remains k* = ( " 2 / R )(1/(1 - ")). When a <
k, the capital stock solves:

 a
,
 k

" 2 k " - 1 = R + Ø + Øk' 
so that



 a  
k =  α θ /  ( R + Ø + Ø'k )   
 k  



1/ ( 1−α )

< k*.

(3)

As long as a < k, Ø and Øk' are positive, and the constrained capital stock is less than the
19

An alternative approach would be a model of credit rationing in which internal funds may
generate high returns (see, e.g., Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981; and Hoff, 1994).
20

In our simple formulation, the premium in the cost of external financing applies only when
entrepreneurial investment exceeds assets. However, if entrepreneurs require saving for other reasons
(e.g., housing or precautionary saving) or value diversification, these extra costs could apply when k < a.
For simplicity, our model abstracts from these issues.

13

desired capital stock. In addition, while Mk/Ma = 0 when a $ k*, Mk/Ma > 0 when a < k* (because
increases in collateralizable a reduce Ø ).
For an individual entrepreneur, we can connect the link between net worth and investment to
the entrepreneur’s saving decision. Letting A represent expected entrepreneurial income (i.e., A = 2
k " - R (k - a) - Ø k), we can analyze the effect of a change in the entrepreneur’s assets (a) on
entrepreneurial income. When there is no uncollateralized financing (i.e., when a $ k*), Mk/Ma = 0,
and MA/Ma = R . An increase in entrepreneurial saving produces a return R . When the
entrepreneur faces costly external financing, however, Mk/Ma > 0, and highly talented (high-2)
entrepreneurs experience a higher return on saving in business assets than they could earn on financial
assets, giving those entrepreneurs a greater incentive to save than nonentrepreneurs. This enhanced
substitution effect arises not just because of high expected entrepreneurial returns, but because of the
joint effect of those high returns on entrepreneurial saving and investment decisions.

B.

Do Assets Influence Entrepreneurial Decisions?

Costly external financing also implies that net worth constraints affect selection into
entrepreneurship. In the spirit of Lucas (1978), Jovanovic (1982), and Evans and Jovanovic (1989),
we consider the individual’s decision about whether to work for someone else (for wage income) or for
himself or herself (as an entrepreneur). The individual would enter entrepreneurship if expected
entrepreneurial earnings (defined above) exceed expected wage income, w, where wit = w (x it, ei)
+0it , where x and e denote experience and education, respectively, and 0 is an independently and
identically distributed disturbance term with a mean of zero and a variance of σ η2 . Under perfect

14

capital markets, assets of potential entrants are not relevant to the selection problem.
Costly external financing distorts the entry decision for low-net-worth potential entrepreneurs.
Holding ability constant, entrepreneurial earnings depend on capital invested, k. When external
financing is costly relative to internal financing, Mk/Ma > 0 and M prob (entry)/Ma > 0. Hence one
selection problem to analyze is whether, given that a household is not entrepreneurial in one period,
initial assets influence the probability of becoming an entrepreneur by the next period, after controlling
for household characteristics and work experience.
A number of authors have documented a link between entrepreneurial assets and
entrepreneurial entry. Evans and Jovanovic (1989) estimate a model similar to that described above,
using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men for 1976 and 1978. For a sample of
wage-earning men between the ages of 24 and 34 in 1976, they estimate the effect of assets on who
becomes self-employed. They find that financing constraints bind for most of their sample. Financing
constraints reduce the number of men who become self-employed and lead to existing businesses being
undercapitalized.
In a pair of papers, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen (1994a, 1994b) use a matched sample
of income and estate tax returns between 1981 and 1985 to examine how receiving an inheritance
affects the probability of entering entrepreneurship (defined as filing a Schedule C for self-employed
income), the probability of surviving as an entrepreneur, and the scale of business. For potential
entrants, they find that receiving an inheritance increases the probability of entering entrepreneurship and
the inheritance increases the level of depreciable assets in the business. For existing entrepreneurs,
receiving an inheritance of $150,000 increases the probability of remaining a sole proprietor by 1.3
15

percentage points and increases the gross receipts of the business by 20 percent.
As we show in the Appendix (Table A1), the SCF data document a pattern similar to that
found by other researchers. Higher initial assets raise the probability of entry into entrepreneurship,
except for very high levels of initial assets.
For continuing entrepreneurs, costly external financing implies that personal assets should affect
the level of business investment. In the spirit of “excess sensitivity” tests in the consumption literature
(see, e.g., Zeldes, 1989) and the investment literature (see, e.g., Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen,
1988). Such investment tests require panel data in that initial nonbusiness assets should not affect the
flow of entrepreneurial investment. Because the SCF lacks data on investment flows, we cannot carry
out the direct analogue to these previous studies.
As a substitute for tests of the effects of nonbusiness assets on entrepreneurial investment, we
examine the link between nonbusiness assets and entrepreneurial earnings. We describe the
underpinnings of this relationship and our results in more detail in the appendix. Under the null
hypothesis of no costly external financing, predetermined nonbusiness assets should not affect the
growth in business earnings of continuing entrepreneurs. By studying the growth in business earnings,
we have differenced out any effects of talent on the level of earnings.21 Our results for such a test using
the SCF data (see the Appendix, Table A2) offer some support for the interdependence of
entrepreneurial saving and investment decisions, consistent with previous studies (see Evans and
Jovanovic, 1989, and Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen, 1994a and 1994b). To the extent that
21

While focusing on business growth removes the possible correlation between talent and the
level of assets on the level of business earnings, it is still possible that talent affects the growth rate in
earnings and that talent is correlated with nonbusiness assets.

16

entrepreneurs expect higher returns on funds invested in active businesses than on financial assets, they
have an incentive to invest their assets in their business and, if their achievable capital investment is less
than the desired capital stock, increase their saving to finance business investment.

C.

Do Debt Markets Eliminate Costly External Financing for Entrepreneurs?

The foregoing discussion emphasizes the internal equity contributions of entrepreneurs. It is, of
course, possible that business owners face no premium in the cost of external debt financing. This
possibility is unlikely for very young businesses for which information and incentive problems likely lead
to internal financing before turning to banks and then public borrowers (see Diamond, 1991; and the
empirical evidence in Petersen and Rajan, 1994). Using only the SCF, this question is somewhat
difficult to address. The dataset does not segregate business debt. In terms of mortgage and personal
debt, we show later (Table 4) that business owners are not significantly more leveraged overall than
non-business owners.
Even if one observed the level of business debt, it is unclear what it would mean in isolation. A
given debt-assets ratio is influenced by both loan demand and loan supply considerations. For
example, a low ratio of debt to assets could imply little need for external financing (weak loan demand)
or very costly external financing (a constraint from the loan supply side).22 While the SCF does not
provide data on sources of debt financing and their relative costs, other research has shed light on this

22

Avery, Bostic, and Samolyk (1998) estimate that personal commitments are important for risky
small business lending; see also the analysis of the use of collateral in Berger and Udell (1995) and
Hubbard, Kuttner, and Palia (1999).

17

question. Using the National Survey of Small Business Finances23 conducted in 1988 and 1989 under
the auspices of the Small Business Administration and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Petersen and Rajan (1994) explore the costs of debt financing for small businesses. They find
that, all else being equal, smaller and younger firms pay higher explicit loan interest rates.24 Moreover,
they find that smaller and younger firms are more likely to forego trade credit discounts (or even to pay
late). This source of external debt financing is very expensive. As Petersen and Rajan note, for
example, if trade credit discounts were offered at two percent if paid within ten days and no discount if
paid in 30 days, the foregoing of the discount equivalent to a loan interest rate on an annual basis of
44.6 percent.
Hence, while we cannot directly observe costs of external debt financing in our data, available
evidence suggests that it is unlikely that the cost of external debt financing is roughly equivalent to the
cost of business owners’ internal equity financing. As a consequence, for entrepreneurs with promising
investment projects, the rate of return on a marginal dollar of internal equity financing (entrepreneurial
saving) might be quite high.

23

Petersen and Rajan (1994) report that the median of business assets for the firms in the
National Survey of Small Business Finance is $130,000 compared to $100,000 for the firms owned by the
entrepreneurs in our sample from the SCF.
24

Hubbard, Kuttner, and Palia (1999) – using a matched dataset of loan, borrower, and bank
characteristics – also find that smaller firms face higher explicit loan interest rates and are more likely to
have collateral requirements than larger firms, other things being equal. Research on “switching costs” in
borrower-bank relationships is also consistent with capital-market imperfections in bank financing (see,
e.g., Petersen and Rajan, 1994; Berger and Udell, 1995; James, 1987; and Slovin, Sushka, and Polonchek,
1993).

18

D.

Are High-Wealth Households Exposed to Costly External Financing?

Because entrepreneurs are more likely to be wealthy, one’s intuition suggests that they may not
need to worry about costly external financing. However, models of costly external financing depend
critically on the household’s assets relative to its investment opportunities. A household with $1 million
of wealth may easily undertake some projects (e.g., a project that requires $20,000 of capital) but face
binding financing constraints for larger projects (e.g., a project requiring $5 million of capital).
Unfortunately, investment opportunities are unobservable to outsiders. Nonetheless, the SCF allows
comparisons of the distribution of household net worth and the distribution of the size of equity stakes in
entrepreneurial ventures. The distribution of net worth serves as a benchmark for household resources;
the distribution of the size of existing equity positions proxies for the distribution of possible
entrepreneurial investments.25 Conditional on qualifying as an entrepreneur, the median entrepreneurial
equity stake has a market value of $107,000 (the median book value is $60,000) in the 1989 SCF.
This venture value easily exceeds the median wealth of $46,960 in the overall sample of households.
Indeed, the household at the 75th percentile of the overall wealth distribution would need to invest 73
percent of its wealth ($146,370) in order to own this asset. Obviously, most households would require
substantial external financing to start businesses.
The more surprising comparison is the financing needs required by existing entrepreneurs who

25

The distribution of existing entrepreneurial projects should only be taken as a rough proxy for
the distribution of ideas or possible projects. First, entrepreneurs with large projects may select
organizational forms (e.g., publicly traded corporations) that would classify them as nonentrepreneurs for
our purposes. Second, as suggested by the model, if borrowing constraints are binding, then entrepreneurs
may underinvest in their business. In addition, our definition of entrepreneurship abstracts from projects
that have equity stakes of less than $5,000.

19

want to move up in the distribution of projects. To own the median equity stake with a value of
$107,000, the entrepreneur with the median wealth of $318,940 in 1989 would need a portfolio share
of 34 percent. However, for this same entrepreneur to own the project at the 75th percentile of the
distribution of active business assets ($350,000) would require the entrepreneur to invest all of his or
her wealth plus borrow ten percent of his or her wealth. 26 This pattern continues at higher wealth levels.
For the entrepreneur at the 80th percentile of the wealth distribution ($922,800 of net worth) to own
the venture at the 95th percentile of the distribution of active business assets requires an investment of
one and one-half times the household’s wealth ($1.38 million).27 Thus costly external financing may
play a role for households that want to enter entrepreneurship and for entrepreneurs at all wealth levels
that want to expand.

E.

Are the Portfolios of Entrepreneurs Poorly Diversified?

The model in section IIIA assumes saving only through the business and a single financial asset.
Constrained entrepreneurs invest all of their wealth in their business; unconstrained entrepreneurs invest
in their business until the marginal rate of return equals the return on the financial asset. In a more
realistic model, capital-market imperfections would affect portfolio composition as well as the level of
investment. Constrained entrepreneurs would hold a large fraction of their wealth in their active
business assets. Under perfect capital markets, entrepreneurs could diversify the idiosyncratic risk
26

The 75th percentile of the distribution of book values of equity stakes is $200,000, which would
still require almost two-thirds of this household’s net worth.
27

The 95th percentile of the distribution of book values of active business assets is $1.60 million
which requires an even larger investment than owning the stake at the 95th percentile of market values.

20

associated with their business, so net business value need not be large relative to total assets.
Table 4 shows that entrepreneurs hold undiversified portfolios. For entrepreneurs and
nonentrepreneurs, Table 4A reports the percentage of each group that owns various assets (liquid
assets, bonds, equity, retirement accounts, housing, real estate, active and passive businesses, and other
assets), the median asset holding conditional on owning the asset, and the overall portfolio share of each
asset. The portfolio shares are the weighted (by total assets) average of each asset relative to total
assets.28 Active businesses account for 41.5 percent of entrepreneurs’ assets. The share of assets held
as a business equity stake varies widely across entrepreneurs but most entrepreneurs hold a substantial
portion of their assets in their business. The median portfolio share (relative to assets) is 35.0 percent.
The 25th percentile is 14.8 percent, and the 75th percentile is 61.2 percent. Relative to
nonentrepreneurs, entrepreneurs hold less of their wealth in liquid assets, bonds, equity, and, especially
housing; they hold more of their portfolios in passive business assets and real estate suggesting that
assets might be complements to active business assets. These differences remain (though they are
smaller) if one uses entrepreneurs’ portfolio shares in nonbusiness assets in the comparison.
While active business assets play a large role in the portfolios of entrepreneurs, the portfolios of
nonentrepreneurs (and, to a lesser degree, entrepreneurs) are undiversified along another dimension –
housing. For nonentrepreneurs, principal residences comprise over 40 percent of the assets in their
portfolio. This finding is consistent with Engelhardt and Mayer’s (1998) finding that the median
percentage of wealth in housing at the time of first home purchase is 90.6 percent; they ascribe this lack
28

For active business assets, the data report the net active business value – the market value of
the business after paying any debts. Thus the asset is the household’s equity stake in the business. In
contrast, for housing, the asset value and outstanding mortgage liability are reported separately.

21

of diversification to downpayment constraints. Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) report that even among
households near retirement age, house value is 16.0 percent of total wealth (including Social Security
and defined benefit pension wealth).
These capital-market frictions could be relatively less important for the wealthiest
entrepreneurs. For wealthy households, a $5000 business investment is a small fraction of their wealth.
To examine how portfolio diversification varies with wealth, Table 4B repeats the statistics in Table 4A
for households in the top five percent of the wealth distribution (households with 1989 net worth
exceeding $687,000).29 The results are strikingly similar to those for the overall population. The
entrepreneurs in the high-wealth sample hold 42.7 percent of their wealth in their active business. The
distribution of this portfolio share confirms that even wealthy entrepreneurs are undiversified. The 25th
percentile, median, and 75th percentile of the distribution are 19.1 percent, 44.8 percent, and 60.8
percent, respectively. Since the majority of wealthy entrepreneurs are not well-diversified, our sample
of entrepreneurs has relatively few rich households that simply have a small, sideline business.
With this simple control for wealth, several other features of the portfolio allocation of
entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs are noteworthy. First, while housing accounts for a large fraction
of the overall difference in the portfolios of entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs, the share of housing
for wealthier entrepreneurs (15.2 percent of nonbusiness assets) is closer to the share of housing for
wealthier nonentrepreneurs (19.5 percent of assets). Second, the differences between the two groups
in bond and equity holdings are larger for the wealthier sample. As a percentage of their nonbusiness
29

Because the SCF oversamples wealthy households, this comparison still uses a relatively large
number of households – 327 nonentrepreneurs and 419 entrepreneurs (which is over one-quarter of the
households in the sample).

22

assets, wealthy entrepreneurs have a portfolio share in bonds and equity that is roughly half the share of
these assets for wealthy nonentrepreneurs, suggesting that wealthy entrepreneurs do not increase their
holdings of liquid assets as insurance against poor business performance. Third, wealthier
entrepreneurs borrow more heavily than wealthier nonentrepreneurs. For example, the entrepreneurs
have larger mortgages, larger mortgage-to-value ratios, and are more likely to incur non-mortgage debt.
The patterns in Table 4 are consistent with costly external financing leading entrepreneurs to
hold undiversified portfolios. Again, in frictionless capital markets, entrepreneurial selection need not
have a very significant impact on portfolio allocation. Business owners could own a small share of their
business, selling claims to others and diversifying with the proceeds. It is also possible that such a lack
of diversification reflects entrepreneurs’ preference for control.
Because entrepreneurs hold undiversified portfolios, one would expect that becoming an
entrepreneur entails either converting existing assets into business assets or considerable saving around
the time of entry. That is, when entering entrepreneurship, a household either changes the composition
of its portfolio (for a portfolio of a given scale), increases the size of their portfolio (with the increase in
assets primarily going into the active business), or combines these two changes. Likewise, exit from
entrepreneurship for an undiversified entrepreneur involves either a change in the scale of the portfolio
or a change in portfolio composition. Large decreases in portfolio size could be associated with
businesses that fail while shifts in portfolio composition would characterize entrepreneurs who retire.
We use the 1983-1989 panel of households in the SCF to examine the portfolio changes
associated with different entrepreneurial transitions. We define four entrepreneurial transition groups:
entrants (households with more than $5,000 of active business assets in 1988 but not in 1982);
23

continuing entrepreneurs (households with more than $5,000 of active business assets in both years);
exiting households (households with more than $5,000 of active business assets in 1982 but not in
1988); and nonentrepreneurial households.
Before examining the portfolio changes associated with entrepreneurial transitions, it is useful to
have some idea of the change in portfolio scale associated with these transitions. For entrants, median
asset holdings (in 1989 dollars) increase by $77,960 from $130,540 to $208,500. This increase in
assets closely mirrors the median 1989 active business assets of entrants of $88,000. Continuing
entrepreneurs have a much smaller increase in median assets, increasing by $26,093 from $359,007 to
$385,100. The median active business assets of continuing entrepreneurs actually falls from $125,518
to $100,000.30 Households that exit entrepreneurship experience a sharp decline in assets, with the
median falling from $379,315 to $171,000; this decline exceeds the median 1983 active business asset
value for these households of $138,070. Thus, especially for households entering and exiting
entrepreneurship, the change in portfolio scale appears linked to the change in business assets. We
return to these issues when we analyze saving patterns and entrepreneurial transitions in section IV.
If costly external financing associated with entry were responsible for the entrants’ higher level
of assets before entry, then one would expect considerable asset substitution upon entry. Alternatively,
the lack of diversification in entrepreneurs’ portfolios could arise because successful entrepreneurs find
it difficult to diversify their positions (because of illiquidity); under this scenario, entrepreneurs would
start businesses with net assets that are a small portion of their portfolio but their portfolio would grow
30

The changes in mean assets and business value suggest that some continuing entrepreneurs are
quite successful. Mean assets increase by $426,879 from $943,587 to $1,370,466 and mean active
business assets increase by $262,370 from $394,745 to $657,115.

24

more undiversified over time.31 Furthermore, the prospect of starting a business might lead potential
entrepreneurs to hold different types of assets than households that are not contemplating
entrepreneurship. Conversely, among entrepreneurial households, portfolios may differ between
entrepreneurs who continue (successful, ongoing enterprises) and those who exit (either failed ventures
or retirements).
The first columns of Table 5 present data on the portfolios of entrants in 1983 (pre-entry) and
1989 (post-entry). The most striking feature of these portfolios is that the active business assets are, on
average, 45.3 percent of the entrants’ 1989 portfolios. Thus entrepreneurs with relatively young
businesses hold undiversified portfolios. For entrants, the median active business holdings in 1989 are
$88,000 compared to $100,000 for continuing entrepreneurs. Relative to households that did not
become entrepreneurs, the entrants were more likely to hold real estate and passive business assets and
a had a larger share of their total assets in these assets in 1983. Lastly, entrants held more personal
debt relative to their assets that other households.32
The second set of columns in Table 5 compares the 1983 and 1989 portfolios of continuing
entrepreneurs. The propensity to hold most assets rises over the six-year period suggesting some effort

31

If the entrepreneur is able to borrow heavily upon starting the business, then the initial net asset
value will be small and the business will appear as a small portion of the entrepreneur’s portfolio since the
SCF data report net asset value of the business. However, this highly levered position in an active
business could contribute considerable risk to the entrepreneur’s portfolio. Unfortunately, the SCF data
do not report business debt separately from net asset value.
32

Because entrants, on average, have higher initial assets than households that do not enter and
have fewer assets than 1983 entrepreneurs, these comparisons may just reflect wealth differences.
However, these portfolio differences between entrants and other households also hold within the sample
of households in the top wealth quintile of 1983.

25

to diversify. However, the average portfolio share in active businesses rises from 41.8 percent to 47.9
percent indicating that, on average, entrepreneurs grow less diversified over time. Personal debt
relative to assets increases over the six-year period for continuing entrepreneurs. These patterns also
hold for continuing entrepreneurs in the top wealth quintile in 1983.
The third set of columns in Table 5 compares the 1983 and 1989 portfolios of households that
exit entrepreneurship. In 1983, compared to the continuing entrepreneurs, these households’ assets
were slightly more heavily concentrated in their active businesses. As one might expect given the
adding up constraint, their portfolio shares in all asset classes (other than active businesses) increased.
The largest increases were in passive businesses, housing, real estate, and retirement assets. Similar
patterns exist for households in the top wealth quintile in 1983.
To summarize, the lack of diversification of entrepreneurs appears to occur early in the life of
the business (entrants) and to persist as the business ages. Thus limited opportunities for external
financing may play a role for entrepreneurial selection and continuing business growth.

IV.

ENTREPRENEURSHIP, WEALTH, AND SAVING: A CLOSER EXAMINATION
The central question raised by our emphasis on the interdependence of households’ decisions

about entrepreneurship and saving is whether, all else being equal, a decision to enter or expand
business ownership requires an upfront equity commitment by the entrepreneur. If so, saving may be
higher for business owners (and prospective business owners) than for similarly situated workers
solving a conventional life-cycle consumption-smoothing problem.
In principle, this difference is straightforward to investigate. Consider, for example, an
26

individual not considering business ownership who faces an upward-sloping age-earnings profile and
perfect capital markets. All other things being equal, that individual’s consumption smoothing in a lifecycle problem would lead to low saving prior to the period of earnings growth. An individual
considering business ownership must make an internal equity investment in the business in order to have
access to expected future earnings growth, leading to greater current saving. Such intuition is difficult to
take to data, however, because of the lack of long panel data on asset holdings and labor earnings.
The SCF, for example, has an available panel of only two periods.
Using the SCF panel, we investigate two links between entrepreneurship and saving. First, we
consider the relationship between entrepreneurial participation and mobility in the wealth distribution.
Second, we study whether business entrants and continuing entrepreneurs have higher saving rates than
nonbusiness households.

A.

Are Entrepreneurs More Upwardly Mobile?

Thus far, we have emphasized cross-sectional differences in wealth-income ratios between
entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs. However, these cross-sectional differences only tell part of the
story of the relationship between entrepreneurship and wealth accumulation. Entry and exit play an
important role in defining who is an entrepreneur. As noted earlier, 54 percent of the 1989
entrepreneurs enter entrepreneurship in the previous six years and 5 percent of the 1983 entrepreneurs
exit by 1989. Furthermore, cross-sectional comparisons cannot distinguish the possibility that wealth
levels affect entrepreneurial selection from the possibility that entrepreneurship (or a desire to become
an entrepreneur) increases saving. Panel data help disentangle the different roles of entrepreneurship in
27

wealth accumulation.
As mentioned above, entrants have a larger increase in their wealth than other entrepreneurial
transition groups. To further examine the relationship between entrepreneurial transitions and mobility in
the wealth distribution, we calculate transition probabilities across wealth-income ratio quintiles. Before
turning to these transition probabilities, it is useful to have a rough idea of the wealth-income ratios of
the different entrepreneurial transition groups in the two years. The median wealth-income ratio for
continuing entrepreneurs increased from 6.11 in 1982 to 7.91 in 1988. Entrants experienced a
relatively large percentage increase in their median wealth-income ratio which increased from 2.50 in
1982 to 3.95 in 1988. Households that exited entrepreneurship experienced a downward shift in the
distribution of their wealth-income ratios with the median falling from 6.45 in 1982 to 3.98 in 1988.33
Households that stayed out of entrepreneurship experienced modest increases in their wealth-income
ratios with the median rising from 1.30 in 1982 to 1.72 in 1988. These shifts in the median wealthincome ratios foreshadow the upward mobility of continuing entrepreneurs and entrants in the wealth
distribution.
Table 6 documents the mobility of the four groups of households in terms of wealth-income
ratios between 1982 and 1988. In particular, the table presents transition probabilities within the
distribution of wealth-income ratios for continuing entrepreneurs (Table 6A), entrepreneurial entrants
(Table 6B), exiting entrepreneurs (Table 6C), and nonentrepreneurs (Table 6D). Households
continuing as entrepreneurs or entering as entrepreneurs are more likely to move up in the overall
33

Retirement and business failure can have quite different effects on the wealth-income ratio.
Retirement probably decreases income but does not necessarily change wealth. Entrepreneurial failure
has an ambiguous effect on income but probably lowers wealth.

28

wealth-income distribution. Moreover, the link between entrepreneurship and wealth-income ratios is
not simply driven by unusual changes in current income associated with entry into or maintenance of
entrepreneurship. In addition to their mobility in terms of wealth-income ratios, households continuing
as entrepreneurs or entering as entrepreneurs are more likely to move up in both the overall wealth
distribution and the overall income distribution (not reported in a table).
Our explanation emphasizes the interaction of capital-market imperfections and
entrepreneurship in explaining differential wealth accumulation by business owners. An alternative
explanation for an increase in the wealth-income ratio for entering and continuing entrepreneurs is that
income falls upon entrepreneurial entry. Gordon (1998) argues, for example, that entrepreneurs have
lower reported income for tax purposes and when shifting to an incorporated business accrue capital
gains by leaving funds in the firm. There are two problems with this explanation in our setting. First, as
noted above, though not shown in Table 6, entrepreneurship is associated with greater upward mobility
in the distributions of wealth and income (as well as wealth relative to income). Second, unlike studies
classifying entrepreneurs by Schedule C filing status, shifts in organizational form pose no problem;
entrepreneurs are asked in the Survey of Consumer Finances about their business income, irrespective
of whether they withdrew income for tax purposes (as would be the case in an incorporated business).

B.

Do Entrepreneurs Save More?

The upward mobility in the distribution of wealth (and wealth-income ratios) of continuing
entrepreneurs and entrants, along with the downward mobility of households that exit entrepreneurship,
suggests that entrepreneurship is related to household saving. In this section, we examine the saving
29

patterns of households with different entrepreneurial experiences. In defining saving, we take a broad
definition of household net worth to capture the association of entrepreneurial activity with both
business and nonbusiness saving. Specifically, we define the saving rate as the change in net worth (as
defined earlier) divided by the average income in the two years divided by six (the number of years
between the two surveys). We use average income over the two years to get a better measure of
permanent household income.34 As Table 7 shows, entrants and continuing entrepreneurs have
substantially higher saving rates than nonentrepreneurs.35 These higher saving rates persist for most age,
income, and wealth groups.
The persistence in the differences in saving rates of entrepreneurial transition groups across
subgroups in the population suggests that the differences are related to entrepreneurship rather than
differences in the observable characteristics of the different entrepreneurial transition groups.
Nonetheless, regression analysis helps summarize these differences across households with different
entrepreneurial experiences. We regress the annualized saving rate on dichotomous variables for
entrepreneurial transitions and various household characteristics. The entrepreneurial transition
34

As an alternative method of estimating “permanent” income, we could estimate income as a
function of household demographics and use predicted income as a measure of permanent income. This
method suffers two problems for the evaluating the effects of entrepreneurship on saving. First,
entrepreneurship almost certainly entails unobservable differences in talent that would not be captured by
an estimating regression for “permanent” income. By using predicted income for the household, we
would be ignoring the unobservable talent that is captured by current income. Second, many of the
variables that would be likely candidates to predict permanent income (e.g., age, experience, and
education) may have independent effects on saving decisions.
35

One possible explanation for a difference in saving rates between entrepreneurs and
nonentrepreneurs is that some nonentrepreneurs may be covered by defined-benefit pension plans, while
entrepreneurs must save for their retirement in their personal assets. The differences in saving rates
documented in Table 7 are quite large, however, relative to reasonable estimates of contribution rates for
pensions. We return to this issue in our empirical work below.

30

variables represent entry (ENTRY = 1 if the household is entrepreneurial in 1988, but not in 1982, and
zero otherwise), continuing (CONTINUE = 1 if the household is entrepreneurial both in 1982 and
1988), and exiting (EXIT = 1 if the household is entrepreneurial in 1982, but not in 1988); the omitted
category in the regressions is nonentrepreneurial households. The demographic variables are: marital
status in 1982 (MARRIED = 1 for married couples in 1982, and zero otherwise); marital transitions
between 1982 and 1988 (GOT DIVORCED = 1 for households that got divorced during the six-year
period, and zero otherwise; BECAME WIDOWED = 1 for households in which one spouse died
during the six-year period, and zero otherwise; and GOT MARRIED = 1 for households that got
married during the six-year period, and zero otherwise); the number of people in the household in 1982
(FAMILY SIZE); dummy variables for the age of the head of household (AGE2 = 1 if the head is
between 35 and 54 years old in 1982; AGE3 = 1 if the head is over 54 years old in 1982; employment
status (UNEMPLOYED = 1 if the household head is unemployed in 1982, and zero otherwise); and
education of the head (EDUC = number of years of education of the head of household in 1982). To
control for differences in saving rates due to the presence of defined benefit pension plans (the value of
which are not available to include in our wealth measure), we include a dummy variable for the
presence of a defined benefit pension in 1982 (DEFBIN). Because inheritances can raise household
wealth, we include a dummy variable for whether the household received an inheritance between the
two survey years (INHERIT). Table 8 provides summary statistics for these variables by
entrepreneurial transition groups.
We also include income variables to address the extent to which links between
entrepreneurship and wealth accumulation reflect a nonlinear relationship between income and wealth
31

(as in Diamond and Hausman, 1984; or Hubbard, 1986) or between income and saving (as in Dynan,
Skinner, and Zeldes, 2000).36 To capture this influence we add variables, based on 1982 income,
corresponding to whether the household is in the: second income quintile (between the 21st and 40th
percentile, INC 21-40), third income quintile (between the 41st and 60th percentile, INC 41-60), fourth
income quintile (between the 61st and 80th percentile, INC 61-80), ninth income decile (between the
81st and 90th percentile, INC 81-90), 91st through 95th percentile (INC 91-95), the 96th through 99th
percentile (INC 96-99), or top one percent (INC 99+).
Table 9 presents OLS and median regression results for the relationship between saving rates
and entrepreneurial transitions controlling for household characteristics. Table 9 shows that entrants
into entrepreneurship have substantially higher saving rates than nonentrepreneurs, controlling for other
determinants of saving. Continuing entrepreneurs also have higher saving rates than nonentrepreneurs
(but not as high as entrants) but this difference is statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence
level only in the median regressions. Saving rates are lower for households exiting entrepreneurship
than for nonentrepreneurs.37 Moreover, because continuing entrepreneurs and entrants are upwardly
mobile in the wealth distribution (as well as the wealth-income distribution reported in Table 6), this
finding does not appear to reflect simply changes in income upon entry into entrepreneurship.
Among the control variables, marital status and transitions affect saving rates with married
households having higher saving rates and divorce leading (not surprisingly) to dissaving; however, the

36

Excluding the income variables yields similar regression results.

37

Though not reported here, the pattern of coefficients for entrepreneurial transitions is robust to
the exclusion of “professional practices” from the entrepreneurial sample.

32

magnitudes of the effects of these marital transitions is smaller than the magnitude of the effects of the
entrepreneurial transitions. As expected, receiving an inheritance between the survey years leads to a
substantially higher saving rate during the period. With the exception of the highest income groups in
the median regressions, the income variables do not exhibit a strong association with saving rates.
In section IIIE, we observed that nonentrepreneurs hold a considerable fraction of their assets
in their homes. As a benchmark for the effects of entrepreneurial transitions on saving, we include a set
of housing transition variables on saving rates in the second and fourth columns of Table 9. These
dummy variables are for households that: (1) are homeowners in 1982 and 1988; (2) are homeowners
in 1982 and 1998 but moved between surveys; (3) changed from renting (or not owning) in 1982 to
owning in 1988; and (4) changed from owning in 1982 to renting in 1988. The omitted category is
households that own in neither period.
The inclusion of these housing transition variables has very little effect on the magnitude of the
coefficients on the entrepreneurial transition variables. Homeowners (except for those who move) have
higher saving rates than renters. Consistent with the importance of downpayment constraints,
homebuyers have high saving rates around the time of purchase. The effects of continuing as a
homeowner or entering homeownership have smaller effects on saving rates than the equivalent
entrepreneurial transitions. However, exiting from homeownership is associated with dissaving at a
similar rate to exiting entrepreneurship.
How important is business saving for the wealth accumulation of entrepreneurs? For both
entering and continuing entrepreneurs, the majority of the change in wealth over our sample period is
accounted for by changes in business wealth; that is, business saving accounts for much of the saving of
33

entrepreneurs. For entrants as a whole, their increase in business value is 84.7 percent of their total
increase in wealth. Among entrants whose real wealth increases by at least 25 percent over the sixyear period, the change in business value accounts for 70.8 percent of the increase in real wealth and
the median ratio of the change in business value to the change in wealth is 68.7 percent. Among
continuing entrepreneurs, the aggregate change in business value over the period was 66.8 percent of
the change in aggregate wealth. Because either business value or wealth could fall in value, again we
condition on households that experience a greater than 25 percent increase in wealth (49.3 percent of
the continuing entrepreneurs). For this sample, the change in business value accounts for 61.6 percent
of the change in wealth and the median ratio of the change in business value to the change in wealth is
43.0 percent. Again, these statistics highlight that entrepreneurs do not grow more diversified as their
business grows older. Taken together, these patterns suggest a link between capital-market
imperfections for entrepreneurial selection and investment opportunities and the saving decisions of
entrepreneurs.
How much of the increase in business wealth required new upfront saving by the entrepreneur?
One possibility, of course, is that entrants acquire significant wealth from ideas or luck with little upfront
investment. A related possibility is that continuing entrepreneurs become wealthier with little additional
investment and, perhaps, do not diversify because of the illiquidity of business assets. While we lack
data on investment per se, we investigate these possibilities by examining ex post (i.e., 1988) data on
average “Q” for entrepreneurs – that is, the market value of the assets relative to replacement cost. To
the extent that a business’s value is near unity for an entrant, the change in business value (which, as we
saw above, is on average substantial) reflects an upfront investment. Likewise, for a continuing
34

entrepreneur, Q values not too much greater than unity suggest the presence of investment.
We construct average Q proxies for active business holdings by households in the 1989 SCF.
The survey asks detailed questions on up to three active businesses for each household; remaining
active business assets are lumped together. In order to have data on both the market value and book
value of assets, we are limited to using only the separately listed businesses for each household. To
calculate average Q, we divide the sum of the households’ market value of different active businesses
by its share of these firm’s book value.
The median Q value for entrants is 1.01, suggesting the significance of upfront investment; the
interquartile range is 0.99 to 2.5, suggesting further the significance of upfront investment. The median
Q value for continuing entrepreneurs is somewhat higher (1.47) than that for entrants, as one might
expect, but it is still suggestive of the importance of investment in generating business wealth. Finally,
even among entrepreneurial households with annual saving rates over the 1982-1988 period in excess
of 25 percent, Q values indicate the importance of investment (i.e., the median Q for entrants is 1.03
and the median Q for continuing entrepreneurs is 1.71). Hence one may reasonably conclude that
changes in business value reflect a substantial commitment of funds as well as returns to ideas or luck.

V.

CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Studies of household saving decisions in general and of the saving decisions of wealthy or high-

income households in particular have paid relatively little attention to entrepreneurial saving decisions
and their role in wealth accumulation. Nevertheless, active business owners figure prominently among
high-wealth households. Using data from the 1983 and 1989 Federal Reserve Board Surveys of
35

Consumer Finances, we quantify three findings about entrepreneurial saving decisions and their role in
household wealth accumulation. First, entrepreneurial households own a substantial share of household
wealth and income, and this share increases throughout the wealth distribution and the income
distribution. Second, the portfolios of entrepreneurial households, even wealthy ones, are very
undiversified, with the bulk of assets held within active businesses. Third, wealth-income ratios and
saving rates are higher for entrepreneurial households even controlling for age and other demographic
variables.
We suggest that costly external financing for entrepreneurial investments (coupled with
potentially high returns on those investments) has important implications for the saving behavior of
wealthy households. While our analysis cannot rule out a role for unobserved heterogeneity in talent for
entrepreneurship in explaining links between entrepreneurship and wealth accumulation, an alternative
explanation that nonbusiness assets are simply a proxy for unobserved entrepreneurial talent must,
however, confront the fact that would-be entrepreneurs have higher saving rates prior to and during
entrepreneurship than do nonentrepreneurs and the challenge of explaining why unconstrained
entrepreneurs would have higher saving rates. Another possible source of unobserved heterogeneity is
a preference for “internal control,” which might induce links among assets, entrepreneurial selection, and
entrepreneurial investment. Unobserved heterogeneity in willingness to take risk is also possible, of
course. To the extent that it is a “downpayment constraint” that links the saving and investment
decisions of entrepreneurs, it is still the case that entrepreneurs would save more (in this case to
participate in a risky business venture).
Our conclusion that entrepreneurial saving and investment decisions are interdependent raises
36

four areas for future research: (1) measuring the role of entrepreneurs in aggregate wealth accumulation;
(2) dissaving decisions of business owners; (3) studying implications for portfolio allocation and asset
pricing; and (4) analyzing consequences for tax policy toward entrepreneurial saving and investment.
First, recent adaptations of the life-cycle model emphasize the importance of uninsured
idiosyncratic risk (of earnings, lifespan, or medical expenses) and lending-market imperfections (or
borrowing constraints); see, e.g., Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994, 1995). While such models can
explain many aggregate and distributional features of U.S. wealth accumulation, they are not well suited
to explain saving related to business ownership. That is, though models incorporate decisions about
labor supply and investment in financial assets, they do not incorporate decisions about entrepreneurial
entry, saving, and investment. The inclusion of such margins is likely to be useful for explaining wealth
accumulation, given the observed concentration of household wealth38 and the empirical significance for
total wealth of business owners’ household wealth accumulation decisions.39
Quadrini (2000) has embarked on one research program in this area. He nests a formalization
of entrepreneurial choice within an intertemporal general equilibrium model of an economy of infinitelylived households. The production sector has both large firms and small firms, the latter being “financially

38

The top one percent of households in 1989 owned about 36 percent of household wealth
(based on SCF) or about 29 percent (based on the PSID).
39

The wealthy may save more for a number of reasons. Alternatives to the life-cycle model that
may help explain the saving patterns of wealthy households include: (1) differences in the importance of
pensions and Social Security across income groups (see Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1994, 1995); (2)
bequest motives; (3) precautionary savings (see Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1994, 1995); (4)
differences in rates of time preference (see Lawrance, 1991, and Dynan, 1994); (5) differences in
attitudes towards risk; (6) nonhomothetic preferences (see Attanasio and Browning, 1995, and Atkeson
and Ogaki, 1996); and (7) differences in whether households derive direct utility from holding wealth (see
Carroll, 1997).

37

constrained.” Potential entrepreneurs face higher costs of external financing than for internal financing
(their own saving). Calibrating the model using data from the PSID, Quadrini does relatively well in
matching the variation on wealth-income ratios by income class for entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs
and the distribution of wealth and income for the model economy and the PSID data. Moreover, he
finds that eliminating the entrepreneurial selection and investment margins significantly reduces the
model’s ability to explain the observed concentration of wealth and income. Our empirical findings
suggest that further research along these lines may be fruitful.
Second, a link between entrepreneurship and saving may imply a link between entrepreneurial
transitions and old-age dissaving. We have focused our attention on the pre-retirement saving decisions
of entrepreneurs. Higher saving rates for higher-income households are principally a feature of
entrepreneurs. We have not explicitly considered the dissaving decisions of the very affluent (see, e.g.,
the discussion in Carroll, 1997). Our emphasis on business ownership may, however, shed light on the
“slow” dissaving of the elderly (relative to the conventional life-cycle predictions) observed by some
researchers (see, e.g., King and Dicks-Mireaux, 1982; Diamond and Hausman, 1984; Hubbard, 1986;
and Bernheim, 1987).
Three potential channels could account for slow dissaving by business owners even in the
absence of a bequest motive. The first is the possibility of continuing economic profits for older
business owners. In this case, the relevant “interest rate” in the life-cycle consumption decision is not
the expected return on financial assets, but the higher expected returns on business assets; in effect, the
price of old-age consumption is higher for business owners than for workers. Second, just as
information and incentive problems make it costly to obtain external financing, selling off portions of an
38

active business is likely to prove difficult. Third, the capital gains tax acts in part as a transactions tax
on exit from business ownership.
Third, most empirical studies of household portfolio allocation and asset pricing abstract
from business ownership as a “portfolio allocation” decision, as it is in the presence of illiquid business
assets and internally financed business ownership. While the influence of nonmarketable labor income,
pensions, or Social Security on household portfolio allocation has been considered (see, e.g. Mayers,
1973; and Hubbard, 1985), relatively little attention has been paid to links among business ownership,
portfolio allocation, and asset pricing. In one study consistent with our findings, Heaton and Lucas
(2000) find that households with high and variable private business income hold less of their assets in
equities than do other wealthy households and that the variability of wage income has relatively little
explanatory power for portfolio allocation. To the extent that undiversifiable business risk is more
important than undiversifiable labor income risk for the wealthy, some entrepreneurial risk factor may
contribute to explaining such asset-pricing anomalies as the equity premium puzzle or the small firm
premium. Heaton and Lucas (2000) extend the augmented CAPM asset-pricing model of Jagannathan
and Wang (1996), in which they separate components of human capital into the value of future wage
income and the value of future proprietary business income; they conclude that proprietary income is
more important than wage income in determining asset returns.
Fourth, tax policy has potentially large effects on entrepreneurial saving and investment. From
a positive perspective, to the extent that the “rich” are business owners whose high rates of wealth
accumulation are stimulated by the combination of high returns on saving and investment, high “success
tax rates” can discourage entrepreneurial entry, saving, and investment (see, e.g., King and
39

Levine,1993; Carroll, Holtz-Eakin, Rider, and Rosen, 1997; and Gentry and Hubbard, 2000). Even if
one believed that the entrepreneurial rich have different rates of time preference, high marginal tax rates
would redistribute resources based on tastes rather than on ability. In addition, binding financing
constraints can imply a link between the average tax rates on entrepreneurs’ profits and entrepreneurial
investment.

40

REFERENCES
Aiyagari, S. Rao. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109 (August 1994): 659-684.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Masao Ogaki. “Wealth-Varying Intertemporal Elasticities of Substitution:
Evidence from Panel and Aggregate Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics 38 (1996):
507-534.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Martin Browning. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle and Over the Business
Cycle.” American Economic Review 85 (1995): 1118-1137.
Avery, Robert B., Raphael W. Bostic, and Katherine A. Samolyk. “The Role of Personal Wealth in
Small Business Finance.” Journal of Banking and Finance 22 (1998): 1019-1061.
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory Udell. “Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm
Finance.” Journal of Business 68 (July 1995): 351-381.
Bernheim, B. Douglas. “Dissaving After Retirement: Testing the Pure Life Cycle Hypothesis.” In Zvi
Bodie, John B. Shoven, and David A. Wise, eds., Issues in Pension Economics. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Bhidé, Amar. The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999.
Calomiris, Charles W., Charles P. Himmelberg, and Paul Wachtel. “Commercial Paper and Corporate
Finance: A Microeconomic Perspective.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 41 (1995).
Carroll, Christopher D. “Why Do the Rich Save So Much?” In Joel B. Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas
Shrug?: Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2000.
Carroll, Robert, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Mark Rider, and Harvey S. Rosen. “Entrepreneurs, Income
Taxes, and Investment.” Mimeograph, Princeton University, September 1997.
Diamond, Douglas W. “Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice Between Bank Loans and DirectlyPlaced Debt.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (1991): 688-721.
Diamond, Peter A., and Jerry A. Hausman. “Individual Retirement and Savings Behavior.” Journal of
Public Economics 23 (February/March 1984): 81-114.
41

Dynan, Karen E. “Relative Wage Changes and Estimates of the Rate of Time Preference.”
Mimeograph, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 1994.
Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. “Do the Rich Save More?” Mimeograph,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2000.
Engelhardt, Gary V., and Christopher J. Mayer. “Intergenerational Transfers, Borrowing Constraints,
and Saving Behavior: Evidence from the Housing Market.” Journal of Urban Economics 44
(1998): 135-157.
Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic. “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice Under
Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy 97 (August 1989): 808-827.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. “Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1988:1): 141-195.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities:
A Comment on Kaplan and Zingales.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (May 2000):
695-706.
Friedman, Milton. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1957.
Friend, Irwin, and Irving Kravis. “Entrepreneurial Income, Savings, and Investment.” American
Economic Review 47 (1957): 269-301.
Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. “Distributional Implications of Introducing a Broad-Based
Consumption Tax.” In James M. Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 11.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997.
Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. “Tax Policy and Entrepreneurial Activity.” American
Economic Review 90 (May 2000): 283-287.
Gordon, Roger H. “Can High Personal Tax Rates Encourage Entrepreneurial Activity?” International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers 45 (1998): 49-80.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. “Effects of Pensions on Savings: Analysis with Data
from the Health and Retirement Study.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 50 (1000): 271-324.
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas. “Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance of
42

Entrepreneurial Risk.” Journal of Finance 55 (June 2000): 1163-1198.
Hoff, Karla. “The Second Theorem of the Second Best.” Journal of Public Economics 54 (1994):
223-242.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. “Entrepreneurial Decisions and Liquidity
Constraints.” RAND Journal of Economics 23 (Summer 1994a): 334-347.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. “Sticking It Out: Entrepreneurial
Survival and Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (February 1994b):
53-75.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. “Capital-Market Imperfections and Investment.” Journal of Economic
Literature 36 (March 1998): 157-186.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. “Pension Wealth and Individual Saving: Some New Evidence.” Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking 18 (May 1986): 167-178.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. “Personal Taxation, Pension Wealth, and Portfolio Composition.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 67 (February 1985): 53-60.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Anil Kashyap. “Internal Net Worth and the Investment Process: An
Application to U.S. Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy 100 (June 1992): 506-534.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Kenneth N. Kuttner, and Darius N. Palia. “Are There Bank Effects in Borrowers’
Costs of Funds?: Evidence from a Matched Sample of Borrowers and Banks.” Mimeograph,
Columbia University, 1999.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. “The Importance of Precautionary
Motives for Explaining Individual and Aggregate Saving.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 40 (June 1994): 59-126.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy 105 (April 1995): 360-399.
Huggett, Mark. “Wealth Distribution in Life-Cycle Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics 38
(December 1996): 469-494.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang. “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of Expected
Returns.” Journal of Finance 51 (March 1996): 3-53.

43

Jovanovic, Boyan. “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica 50 (May 1982): 649670.
Kennickell, Arthur B., and Janice Shack-Marquez. “Changes in Family Finances From 1983 to 1989:
Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin (January 1992):
1-18.
King, Mervyn A., and Louis Dicks-Mireaux. “Asset Holdings and the Life Cycle.” Economic
Journal 92 (June 1982): 247-267.
King, Robert G., and R. Levine. “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and Evidence.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 32 (1993): 513-542.
Klein, Lawrence R. “Entrepreneurial Saving.” In Irwin Friend and Robert Jones, eds., Consumption
and Saving, volume 2. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960.
Klein, Lawrence R., K.H. Straus, and P. Vandome. “Saving and Finances of the Upper Income
Groups.” Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics 18 (1956): 293-319.
Knight, Frank H. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1921.
Lawrance, Emily. “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel Data.” Journal of
Political Economy 99 (February 1991): 54-77.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms.” Bell Journal of Economics 9
(Autumn 1978): 508-523.
Mayers, David. “Nonmarketable Assets and the Determination of Capital Asset Prices in the Absence
of a Riskless Asset.” Journal of Business 46 (April 1973): 258-267.
Petersen, Mitchell, and Raghuram Rajan. “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence From Small
Business Data.” Journal of Finance 49 (March 1994): 3-37.
Quadrini, Vincenzo. “Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility.” Review of Economic Dynamics
3 (January 2000): 1-40.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. The Theory of Economic Development. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1934.
Slovin, Myron B., M.F. Sushka, and J.A. Polonchek. “The Value of Bank Durability: Borrowers and
Stakeholders.” Journal of Finance 48 (March 1993): 247-266.
44

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information.”
American Economic Review 71 (June 1981): 393-410.
Zeldes, Stephen P. “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of
Political Economy 97 (April 1989): 305-346.

45

Table 1: Concentration of Population, Assets and Net Worth, By Income
Entrepreneurs’ Percentage of:
Population

Assets

Net Worth

8.7

37.7

39.0

Bottom

0.9

6.0

6.3

Second

4.9

17.8

18.3

Third

7.3

22.4

23.9

Fourth

11.2

28.1

30.9

80 - 90

13.4

25.2

26.5

90 - 95

16.9

30.0

29.4

95 - 99

26.7

43.9

44.7

99 - 100

56.3

68.6

68.0

Overall
Income Quintile:

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data representing 3,143 households from the 1989 Survey of
Consumer Finances. The calculations use population weights.

46

Table 2: Average and Median Net Worth of Entrepreneurial Status, By Income (Dollars)
Entrepreneurs

Nonentrepreneurs

Average

Median

Average

Median

854,800

307,000

126,228

38,250

Bottom Quint

186,341

53,060

25,834

2170

2nd Quint

236,805

141,500

54,851

19,850

3rd Quint

321,465

151,430

80,325

36,700

4th Quint

384,543

198,800

108,698

57,352

80 - 90th percentile

437,828

306,449

188,716

131,500

90 - 95th percentile

738,285

767,000

361,625

207,160

95 - 99th percentile

1,600,083

970,500

723,126

429,500

99 - 100th percentile

5,164,994

2,713,000

3,130,220

1,685,300

Overall
Income Group:

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data representing 3,143 households from the 1989 Survey of
Consumer Finances. The calculations use population weights.

47

Table 3: Wealth-Income Ratios, By Age, By Income, and Entrepreneurial Status
Average W/Y

Median W/Y

All

Entrepreneurs

Nonentrepreneur

All

Entrepreneurs

Nonentrepreneur

4.6

8.1

3.6

1.8

6.0

1.5

Young

1.8

6.5

1.2

0.4

4.3

0.3

Middle

3.8

6.6

2.9

1.8

5.8

1.4

Old

7.6

11.0

6.5

4.4

11.2

4.1

Low

3.9

11.8

3.2

1.6

7.5

1.5

Middle

4.1

8.8

3.1

1.5

5.7

1.2

High

5.4

7.5

4.4

2.5

6.0

2.2

1st Quintile

4.5

41.1*

4.2

0.4

14.7*

0.4

2nd Quintile

4.3

15.4

3.7

1.5

10.1

1.3

3rd Quintile

3.8

11.8

3.1

1.6

5.9

1.4

4th Quintile

3.4

9.4

2.6

1.6

4.9

1.4

9th Decile

3.7

7.3

3.1

2.4

5.0

2.1

90 - 95th percentile

4.8

8.3

4.1

2.9

7.6

2.5

95 - 99th percentile

6.3

10.2

4.8

3.7

5.9

3.3

99 - 100th percentile

6.1

6.7

5.3

4.5

4.7

4.4

Overall:
By Age:

By Education:

By Income:

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data on the 3,110 households with positive income from the
1989 Survey of Consumer Finances. * denotes cells with fewer than 10 households. The average
ratios are the ratio of average wealth to average income for each group.

48

Table 4A: Portfolio Allocation of Entrepreneurs and Nonentrepreneurs, 1989
Entrepreneurs
Asset:

% with
asset

Conditional
median

Liquid

98.2

8000

5.2

Bonds

40.7

1000

Equity

32.9

Retirement

Nonentrepreneurs
% with
asset

Conditional
median

Portfolio
share

8.8

84.3

2880

10.5

2.2

3.7

27.4

1000

5.2

14000

3.3

5.7

17.7

8000

6.3

52.0

18000

3.1

5.3

34.0

10000

6.7

Other Fin.

63.8

10000

3.1

5.2

44.0

3000

6.1

Home

85.0

85000

12.6

21.5

61.9

70000

41.1

Real Estate

42.7

100000

17.7

30.2

18.1

40000

15.1

Act Bus

100.0

107000

41.5

N/A

1.4

2000

0.01

Pass Bus

36.4

40000

7.4

12.6

2.1

15000

1.7

Other Nonfinancial

96.0

16000

4.1

6.9

83.4

7000

7.3

Mortgage

59.7

43000

3.8

6.4

37.5

32000

10.8

Other Debt

79.3

15000

8.1

13.8

65.4

5000

6.3

All Debt

87.0

56000

11.9

20.3

71.2

14000

17.1

48.0

30.1

N/A

41.0

26.2

Mortgage to
Value

Portfolio Portfolio
share
share*

Source: Authors’ calculations using 3,143 households from the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances.
Note: The second portfolio share column for entrepreneurs excludes the value of active business assets
in total assets in order to measure the allocation of non-business assets. Mortgage-to-value refers to
the ratio of outstanding mortgage debt to house value. The conditional median reflects the median
among households with mortgages. The number in the portfolio share column is the ratio of total
mortgage debt for the group to total house value for the group.

49

Table 4B: Portfolio Allocation of Entrepreneurs and Nonentrepreneurs, 1989
Top 5 Percent of the Wealth Distribution
Entrepreneurs
Asset:

% with
asset

Conditional
median

Liquid

100

45300

5.2

Bonds

55.2

15000

Equity

63.8

Retirement

Nonentrepreneurs
% with
asset

Conditional
median

Portfolio
share

9.1

100

62000

10.3

2.5

4.3

68.2

87000

10.4

47000

3.9

6.9

81.3

85000

12.5

71.5

50000

3.2

5.6

70.9

75000

5.6

Other Fin.

78.9

22000

3.1

5.3

72.1

38000

8.0

Home

88.1

225000

8.8

15.2

96.4

275000

19.5

Real Estate

70.4

220000

19.2

33.9

68.8

310000

24.5

Act Bus

100.0

650000

42.7

N/A

1.5

1000

0.00

Pass Bus

55.9

130000

8.3

14.5

21.1

83000

3.8

Other Nonfinancial

93.5

24000

3.2

5.6

98.5

21000

5.3

Mortgage

54.1

59000

2.0

3.4

40.9

38000

2.0

Other Debt

82.0

43000

7.1

12.4

58.5

41610

4.7

All Debt

87.4

93000

9.0

15.8

64.9

74332

6.7

37.0

22.3

N/A

Mortgage to
Value

Portfolio Portfolio
share
share*

14.4

10.2

Source: Authors’ calculations using data for 846 households from the 1989 Survey of Consumer
Finances.
Note: The second portfolio share column for entrepreneurs excludes the value of active business assets
in total assets in order to measure the allocation of non-business assets. Mortgage-to-value refers to
the ratio of outstanding mortgage debt to house value. The conditional median reflects the median
among households with mortgages. The number in the portfolio share column is the ratio of total
mortgage debt for the group to total house value for the group.
50

Table 5: Changes in Portfolio Allocation by Entrepreneurial Transition, 1983 and 1989
Entrants
1983

Continuing Entrepreneurs
1989

1983

1989

Asset:

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

Liquid

99.0

8.3

99.0

4.2

100.0

3.5

95.6

3.4

Bonds

37.0

1.4

33.0

1.7

27.2

2.4

32.3

3.8

Equity

28.9

7.1

29.4

2.8

34.3

9.5

38.7

4.1

Retirement

34.2

4.0

47.9

3.8

55.8

1.8

59.7

3.0

Other Fin.

52.5

7.6

66.3

2.4

56.3

4.7

63.1

2.8

Home

76.5

37.0

82.2

22.9

93.2

15.9

96.2

11.7

Real Estate

41.2

21.6

48.5

9.8

34.8

11.9

40.2

12.5

Act Bus

0.016

0.02

100.0

45.3

100.0

41.8

100.0

47.9

Pass Bus

11.2

7.6

22.7

2.5

15.1

6.3

22.7

8.5

Other Nonfinancial

99.9

5.3

97.0

4.7

97.1

2.1

93.7

2.3

Mortgage

58.3

12.2

61.1

9.1

71.0

3.7

71.3

3.2

Other Debt

83.2

8.8

79.7

3.4

85.6

3.0

78.3

4.1

All Debt

89.1

21.0

83.9

12.5

89.4

6.7

89.9

7.3

Mortgage to
Value

32.9

40.0

51

23.3

27.6

Table 5:(continued) Changes in Portfolio Allocation
by Entrepreneurial Transition, 1983 and 1989
Households that Exit Entrepreneurship
1983

Nonentrepreneurial Households

1989

1983

1989

Asset:

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

% with
asset

Portfolio
share

Liquid

97.5

4.4

98.9

8.5

86.2

11.0

87.1

11.6

Bonds

25.0

3.0

21.7

5.3

25.6

4.3

25.0

4.7

Equity

27.4

4.5

32.3

5.8

14.6

10.3

16.2

7.5

Retirement

36.3

2.7

51.2

7.1

19.1

2.9

34.0

7.6

Other Fin.

45.9

2.7

58.6

6.2

37.7

4.5

45.5

4.7

Home

80.8

16.8

86.9

25.9

59.5

42.0

66.1

44.5

Real Estate

50.9

13.3

25.4

19.7

16.3

11.5

20.6

11.2

Act Bus

100.0

47.7

2.8

0.008

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.0

Pass Bus

5.4

2.1

5.0

13.7

2.4

7.3

0.9

0.8

Other Nonfinancial

98.6

2.7

98.6

7.8

84.5

6.3

85.8

7.3

Mortgage

58.4

4.4

57.3

5.4

35.5

9.8

39.6

11.6

Other Debt

84.5

4.7

69.5

5.1

67.4

5.4

65.1

4.9

All Debt

91.2

9.1

84.1

10.5

72.9

15.1

71.5

16.4

Mortgage to
Value

26.3

21.0

23.3

26.0

Source: Authors’ calculations from the 1983 and 1989 Surveys of Consumer Finances. In the sample,
85 households entered entrepreneurship, 186 households continued as entrepreneurs, 151 households
exited from entrepreneurship, and 1,057 households were not entrepreneurs in either year.

52

Table 6A: Wealth-Income Ratio Transition Probability Matrix, Households that Remain
Entrepreneurs
Wealth-Income Ratio Quintile in 1988
Wealth-Income
Ratio Quintile in
1982:

Bottom

2nd

3rd

4th

Top

Bottom

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.83

0.0

2nd

0.0

1.73

0.06

0.0

4.82

3rd

0.0

1.36

3.68

1.92

5.48

4th

0.0

1.23

5.69

5.94

7.05

Top

0.0

0.35

2.13

14.99

41.75

Table 6B: Wealth-Income Ratio Transition Probability Matrix, Households that Enter
Entrepreneurship
Wealth-Income Ratio Quintile in 1988
Wealth-Income
Ratio Quintile in
1982:

Bottom

2nd

3rd

4th

Top

Bottom

0.0

0.44

2.26

1.62

0.0

2nd

0.79

13.75

1.09

2.97

9.77

3rd

0.0

0.0

3.53

4.03

6.04

4th

0.0

2.58

3.91

12.84

11.41

Top

0.0

0.0

7.05

7.19

8.74

53

Table 6C: Wealth-Income Ratio Transition Probability Matrix, Households that Exit
Entrepreneurship
Wealth-Income Ratio Quintile in 1988
Wealth-Income
Ratio Quintile in
1982:

Bottom

2nd

3rd

4th

Top

Bottom

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2nd

0.0

0.58

0.48

0.0

0.01

3rd

0.32

4.03

4.13

2.07

1.98

4th

1.05

7.70

10.66

5.91

7.06

Top

1.09

2.40

11.84

14.21

24.48

Table 6D: Wealth-Income Ratio Transition Probability Matrix, Nonentrepreneurial
Households
Wealth-Income Ratio Quintile in 1988
Wealth-Income
Ratio Quintile in
1982:

Bottom

2nd

3rd

4th

Top

Bottom

13.82

6.90

1.17

1.01

0.24

2nd

6.42

7.09

5.88

1.44

0.45

3rd

2.34

4.97

6.67

5.38

1.85

4th

0.68

1.23

4.86

7.28

4.61

Top

0.19

0.99

1.54

3.99

8.99

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from the 1983-1989 Panel of the Survey of Consumer
Finances. In the sample, 85 households entered entrepreneurship, 186 households continued as
entrepreneurs, 151 households exited from entrepreneurship, and 1,057 households were not
entrepreneurs in either year.
Note: Entries in each panel of the table sum to 100 percent.
54

Table 7: Median Saving-Income Ratio for 1983 to 1989, By Entrepreneurial Behavior
Stay In

Enter

Exit

Stay Out

Overall

Overall S/Y

0.165

0.361

-0.483

0.042

0.045

Overall S

9,998

13,547

-27,875

1,041

1,246

Overall Y

61,666

42,001

46,455

24,727

27,619

Median S/Y, By age in 1986
Young

0.219*

0.387

0.0679*

0.0617

0.072

Middle

0.153

0.358

-0.558

0.0600

0.062

Old

0.244

0.487

-0.431

0.0060

0.0035

Median S/Y, By income in 1982
1st quintile

-0.622*

1.34*

-1.79*

0.0041

0.0034

2nd quintile

-0.167*

0.128*

-1.88*

0.0203

0.020

3rd quintile

0.352*

0.209

-0.429

0.0664

0.069

4th quintile

0.156

0.387

-0.692

0.103

0.102

9th decile

0.191

0.450

0.0692*

0.0938

0.126

10th decile

0.257

0.454

-0.475

0.113

0.113

Median S/Y, By wealth in 1982
1st quintile

0.357*

0.423*

n/a*

0.0336

0.0341

2nd quintile

n/a*

0.344

n/a*

0.0609

0.0718

3rd quintile

0.257*

0.445*

-0.0294*

0.0347

0.0445

4th quintile

0.144

0.439

0.0679

0.0953

0.118

9th decile

0.165

-0.182

-0.510

-0.00033

-0.0086

10th decile

0.212

0.407

-0.815

-0.196

-0.330

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from 1,479 households from the 1983-1989 Panel of the Survey of
Consumer Finances. * denotes cells with fewer than 10 households.
Note: Income is measured as the average income (in 1988 dollars) using household income from 1982 and 1988.
Saving is measured as the change in the real value of wealth over the six-year period divided by six.

55

Table 8: Summary Statistics of Household Characteristics, By Entrepreneurial Behavior
MARRIED
GOT DIVORCED
BECAME
WIDOWED
GOT MARRIED
FAMILY SIZE
AGE2
AGE3
UNEMPLOYED
EDUC
DEFBEN
INHERIT
Homeowner in
1982 & 1988
Homeowner both
years but moved
Renter in 1982,
Owner in 1988
Owner in 1982,
Renter in 1988

Stay In
0.82
(0.39)
0.035
(0.18)
0.0046
(0.068)
0.035
(0.18)
2.76
(1.12)
0.54
(0.50)
0.15
(0.35)
0.00
(0.00)
13.67
(2.74)
0.26
(0.44)
0.14
(0.35)
0.92
(0.27)
0.16
(0.36)
0.037
(0.19)
0.024
(0.15)

Enter
0.72
(0.45)
0.075
(0.26)
0.0096
(0.098)
0.19
(0.40)
2.62
(1.01)
0.29
(0.45)
0.15
(0.36)
0.050
(0.22)
13.67
(2.56)
0.29
(0.46)
0.031
(0.17)
0.66
(0.47)
0.17
(0.38)
0.15
(0.36)
0.094
(0.29)

Exit
0.83
(0.38)
0.17
(0.37)
0.031
(0.17)
0.12
(0.33)
2.70
(1.05)
0.43
(0.50)
0.36
(0.48)
0.00
(0.00)
13.57
(2.29)
0.21
(0.41)
0.10
(0.30)
0.68
(0.47)
0.14
(0.35)
0.18
(0.39)
0.11
(0.31)

Stay Out
0.58
(0.49)
0.084
(0.28)
0.056
(0.23)
0.094
(0.29)
2.36
(1.25)
0.32
(0.47)
0.32
(0.47)
0.074
(0.26)
12.11
(3.26)
0.39
(0.49)
0.084
(0.28)
0.53
(0.50)
0.081
(0.27)
0.14
(0.34)
0.70
(0.26)

Overall
0.61
(0.49)
0.085
(0.28)
0.050
(0.22)
0.098
(0.30)
2.41
(1.23)
0.33
(0.47)
0.31
(0.46)
0.066
(0.25)
12.33
(3.22)
0.37
(0.48)
0.085
(0.28)
0.56
(0.50)
0.092
(0.29)
0.13
(0.34)
0.071
(0.26)

Source: The entries are the means for each sample with standard deviations in parentheses. Authors’
calculations based on data from 1,479 households from the 1983-1989 Panel of the Survey of
Consumer Finances.

56

Table 9: Entrepreneurial Decisions and Saving-Income Ratios
Variable

OLS Regressions

Median Regressions

Constant

-0.0231
(0.165)

-0.0211
(0.154)

-0.0589
(0.0541)

-0.0803
(0.0430)

ENTRY

0.710
(0.274)

0.723
(0.271)

0.351
(0.0371)

0.352
(0.0288)

EXIT

-0.934
(0.206)

-0.933
(0.209)

-0.276
(0.0302)

-0.285
(0.0234)

CONTINUE

0.133
(0.190)

0.0973
(0.191)

0.191
(0.0290)

0.169
(0.0226)

MARRIED

0.149
(0.0986)

0.107
(0.0979)

0.0618
(0.0267)

0.0471
(0.0211)

GOT DIVORCED

-0.192
(0.0944)

-0.0945
(0.0979)

-0.131
(0.0403)

-0.105
(0.0316)

BECAME
WIDOWED

0.0191
(0.287)

0.0728
(0.293)

-0.0852
(0.0399)

-0.0507
(0.0312)

GOT MARRIED

0.113
(0.109)

0.0702
(0.114)

0.0745
(0.0396)

0.00592
(0.0313)

FAMILY SIZE

-0.0346
(0.0286)

-0.0295
(0.0281)

0.00109
(0.00875)

0.00351
(0.00683)

AGE2

0.100
(0.0775)

0.118
(0.0622)

0.0113
(0.0256)

0.0253
(0.0202)

AGE3

0.000228
(0.102)

-0.0211
(0.0988)

0.00828
(0.0281)

0.0210
(0.0225)

UNEMPLOYED

0.0566
(0.0791)

0.0693
(0.0751)

-0.0232
(0.0511)

-0.00497
(0.0404)

EDUC

0.00706
(0.0126)

0.00652
(0.0124)

0.00565
(0.00336)

0.00521
(0.00261)

DEFBEN

0.0955
(0.0715)

0.0765
(0.0738)

0.0527
(0.0190)

0.0522
(0.0147)

INHERIT

0.202
(0.0970)

0.190
(0.0948)

0.142
(0.0274)

0.157
(0.0211)

INC21_40

-0.210
(0.123)

-0.216
(0.126)

-0.0317
(0.0346)

-0.0354
(0.0270)

INC41_60

-0.314
(0.157)

-0.0690
(0.164)

-0.00583
(0.0356)

-0.0191
(0.0282)

57

Table 9: Entrepreneurial Decisions and Saving-Income Ratios
Variable

OLS Regressions

Median Regressions

INC61_80

-0.137
(0.158)

-0.164
(0.174)

-0.00185
(0.0382)

-0.0323
(0.0303)

INC81_90

0.00500
(0.159)

0.00743
(0.173)

0.0429
(0.0439)

0.0236
(0.0349)

INC91_95

-0.000392
(0.198)

-0.0382
(0.211)

0.0125
(0.0506)

-0.0213
(0.0398)

INC96_99

-0.0440
(0.242)

-0.0476
(0.256)

0.182
(0.0456)

0.158
(0.0364)

INC99+

0.306
(0.242)

0.319
(0.246)

0.312
(0.0451)

0.270
(0.0360)

Homeowner in
1982 & 1988

0.0993
(0.0901)

0.0566
(0.0215)

Homeowner both
years but moved

-0.0806
(0.0894)

-0.0591
(0.0217)

Renter in 1982,
Owner in 1988

0.0992
(0.103)

0.195
(0.0324)

Owner in 1982,
Renter in 1988

-0.358
(0.156)

-0.254
(0.0364)

Adj. R2

0.059

0.067

0.056

0.065

Source: Estimates using panel data from the 1983-1989 Survey of Consumer Finances.
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions use 4,434 observations, representing
approximately 1,478 households. Standard errors are multiplied by the square root of three to adjust
for the replications. Income in the saving-income ratio is measured as the average income (in 1988
dollars) using household income from 1982 and 1988. Saving is measured as the change in the real
value of wealth over the six-year period divided by six. OLS regressions use population weights;
median regressions are unweighted.

58

Appendix: Assets and Entrepreneurial Decisions
I.

Entrepreneurial Selection
We estimate in Table A1 a probit model for entry into entrepreneurship (as we defined earlier).

We include as explanatory variables 1982 wages (WAGES), education (EDUC = number of years of
schooling), labor market experience (EXPERIENCE), and age and demographic controls. In these last
categories, we include dummy variables for the age of the head of household (AGE2 = 1 if the head is
between 35 and 54; AGE3 = 1 if the head is over 54), marital status (MARRIED = 1 if the household head
is married in 1982, and zero otherwise; and proxies for changes in marital status -- GOT MARRIED, GOT
DIVORCED, and BECAME WIDOWED), number of people in the household (FAMILY SIZE), and
homeownership (OWNHOME = 1 if the household owns its home in 1982, and zero otherwise). We add
household assets and household assets squared to investigate whether a household’s net worth influences
the propensity toward entrepreneurship, holding constant other determinants. Labor market and
demographic variables have intuitive effects on entry and exit (e.g., wages are negatively correlated with
the likelihood of entry).
As the estimates reported in the first column of Table A1 show, higher initial assets raise the
probability of entry into entrepreneurship,40 except for very high levels of initial assets. Such a pattern is
consistent both with a “costly external financing” explanation and an “entrepreneurial ability” explanation
(in which unobserved heterogeneity in entrepreneurial ability is positively correlated with initial assets), a
point to which we return later. Arguably some assets, such as vehicles and retirement accounts, are less
relevant for entrepreneurial decisions than other assets. We obtain similar results to those in Tables A1
and A2 if we exclude vehicles and retirement accounts from the measure of assets (not reported in the
tables but available upon request from the authors).
II.

Entrepreneurial Investment
Previous studies of capital-market imperfections have focused on indirect tests of constraints on

investment. For example, letting i and t index entrepreneurs and time, respectively, we can return to
equation (3) for the choice of the capital stock; taking logs, the log of the entrepreneur’s capital stock as a
function of entrepreneurial ability (2), technology ("), and the “cost of capital” (R) is:

40

Moreover, there is no evidence that wealthy entrepreneurs are less talented. Indeed, Gentry
and Hubbard (1997), using data from the 1989 SCF, show that “Q” ratios for entrepreneurs rise with both
household income and net worth.

59

∧
l nkit = (1 / (1 − α ))lnθi + (1 / (1 − α ))l nα − (1 / (1 − α ) )ln Rit + ωit
where

,

(A1)

∧
 a
R = R + Ø + Ø'   , and T is a white-noise optimization error.
k
After controlling for 2 ,", and R , there should be no predictive power for the capital stock of

beginning-of-period nonbusiness assets, a n . That is, if we add nonbusiness assets as a regressor in
equation (A1), its estimated coefficient should be zero under the null hypothesis of perfect capital
markets. Unfortunately, cross-sectional tests using the level of assets across entrepreneurs are likely to
confound the effects of unobserved talent and assets. A positive correlation between unobserved talent
and assets would upwardly bias the estimated coefficient on nonbusiness assets in the regression for the
capital stock. These biases would be less severe with panel data on investment flows; however, such
data are not available in the SCF.
It is possible, however, to examine the link between net worth and investment by studying the
relationship between net worth and entrepreneurial earnings. Under the null hypothesis of perfect
markets, one can substitute the optimal capital stock for k from equation (A1) into the definition of
entrepreneurial earnings in equation (1), so that yit = 2i 1/(1-") (" /

R it) "/(1-") ,it , or

Rnyit = (1/(1 - ")) Rn2i + (" /(1-"))Rn" + (" /(1-"))Rn

R it + Rn,it .

(A2)

Here, one can test whether predetermined assets affect entrepreneurial earnings. Firstdifferencing equation (A2) removes the entrepreneurial-ability term. If one adds an initial nonbusiness
assets variable to that model, its estimated coefficient should be zero under the null hypothesis of perfect
capital markets. The model of costly external financing presented earlier suggests an alternative role for
assets and internally generated funds. Higher initial assets decrease the external financing premium,
reducing the cost of capital and increasing business investment, k, and business income, y.
Using data on continuing entrepreneurs, we report estimates for two specifications of equation
(A2) in Appendix Table A2. In both, we include household variables (marital status, number of children,
age, and education), and business industry dummy variables. We first estimate equation (A2) in log
differences; because some observations have zero or negative business income in one or both years, we
also estimate (A2) in level differences. In the change in levels specification, the estimated coefficient on
initial nonbusiness assets is marginally statistically significantly different from zero, inconsistent with the
null hypothesis of frictionless financing for entrepreneurs.

60

Variable
Constant
MARRIED
GOT MARRIED
GOT DIVORCED
FAMILY SIZE
AGE2
AGE3
OWNHOME
EXPERIENCE
EDUC
“WAGES”
ASSETS
ASSETS 2
Pseudo R2

Table A1: Assets and Entrepreneurial Entry
Probit Coefficients
Marginal Effects
-2.65
(0.480)
0.512
0.0389
(0.369)
(0.0241)
0.776
0.105
(0.380)
(0.0687)
-0.273
-0.0177
(0.330)
(0.0171)
-0.0948
-0.00748
(0.0826)
(0.00618)
-0.482
-0.0335
(0.203)
(0.0117)
-0.693
-0.0435
(0.254)
(0.0158)
0.531
0.0392
(0.220)
(0.0172)
0.0117
0.000925
(0.00669)
(0.000524)
0.0509
0.00401
(0.0301)
(0.00249)
-0.000000905
-7.14e-8 (1.96e-7)
(0.00000244)
0.00000118
9.29e-8
(0.000000491)
(3.98e-8)
-2.68e-13
-2.11e-14
(1.38e-13)
(1.10e-14)
0.13

Source: Probit estimates using panel data from the 1983-1989 Survey of Consumer Finances.
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The regression uses 3,434 observations, representing
approximately 1,145 households. The standard errors are multiplied by the square root of three to adjust
for replicated data. “WAGES”equals the sum of 1982 wage and business income. None of the
households that “Became widowed” entered entrepreneurship. Marginal effects are calculated at the
means of the variables. For discrete variables, the marginal effect is the effect of changing the value of
the variable from zero to one.

61

Table A2: Assets and Business Income Growth
Variable

Change in Log of Business Income

Change in Level of Business
Income ($000)

Constant

-5.01
(5.42)

3.88
(122.3)

MARRIED

-0.952
(0.585)

3.56
(33.4)

GOT MARRIED

-0.639
(0.654)

182.9
(153.8)

GOT DIVORCED

-4.93
(0.736)

-155.8
(118.9)

BECAME WIDOWED

1.17
(1.25)

85.4
(156.3)

FAMILY SIZE

-0.180
(0.243)

-13.8
(15.7)

AGE2

-0.431
(0.608)

-51.4
(38.6)

AGE3

-0.146
(0.857)

-70.5
(68.7)

EDUC

0.145
(0.111)

DEFBEN

-0.779
(0.431)

Log of other assets in
1982

0.390
(0.346)

-0.276
(4.95)
-5.44
(40.0)

Other assets in 1982
($000)

0.0694
(0.0470)

Other assets in 1982,
squared ($000)

-5.99e-10
(1.17e-09)

Adj. R2

0.47

0.14

Source: OLS estimates using panel data from the 1983-1989 Survey of Consumer Finances.
Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Regressions include dummy variables for the business industry.
The sample includes only households that were entrepreneurs in both years. The log regression uses 240
observations, representing approximately 80 households. The level regression uses 556 observations, or
approximately 185 households. The standard errors are multiplied by the square root of three to adjust for
replications in the data.

62

