                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HOW DO DOCTORS BEHAVE WHEN SOME (BUT NOT ALL)
                    OF THEIR PATIENTS ARE IN MANAGED CARE?


                                              Sheny Glied
                                              Joshua Zivin


                                         Working Paper 7907
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7907



                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2000




The authors would like to thank seminar participants at the New York Federal Reserve Bank, Cornell
University, Columbia University, and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine for many helpful comments. The
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

   2000 by Sheny Glied and Joshua Zivin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including notice, is given
to the source.
How Do Doctors Behave When Some (But Not All)
of Their Patients are in Managed Care?
Sheny Glied and Joshua Zivin
NBER Working Paper No. 7907
September 2000
JELNo. Ii
                                             ABSTRACT

        Most physicians today treat a variety of patients within their practices and operate in markets
where a variety of insurance arrangements co-exist. In this paper, we propose several theoretical
explanations for physician treatment patterns when the patient population is heterogeneous at the
practice and market level. Data from the 1993-1996 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey
(NAMCS) are used to test how practice-level and market-level HMO penetration affect treatment
intensity. Practice composition has strong effects on treatment. HMO-dominated practices have
shorter, but otherwise more treatment intensive visits than do other practices. Market characteristics
are less important determinants of treatment. As HMO practice share rises, the differences between
the treatment of non-HMO and HMO patients are attenuated. These results provide strong evidence
for a model of physician behavior with fixed costs of effort in the form of visit duration. For tests
ordered, medications prescribed, and return visits specified, the empirical evidence supports a model
with marginal cost pricing for excess capacity. HMO and non-HMO treatment patterns are most
distinct at the level of the practice, not the patient. HMO-dominated practices appear to use a practice
style that is quite different from that used in other practices. These findings suggest that practices are
likely to become more segregated over time.


Sherry Glied                                            Joshua Zivin
Division of Health Policy and Management                Division of Health Policy and Management
Joseph Mailman School of Public Health                  Joseph Mailman School of Public Health
Columbia University                                     Columbia University
600 West 168th St., 6th Floor                           600 West 168th St., 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032                                      New York, NY 10032
and NBER                                                jz126@columbia.edu
sagl@columbia.edu
Physician Practice in a Mixed Payment Environment



The past decade has seen managed care praised as a means to reduce the over-provision

of health care pervasive in fee-for-service operations, and harshly criticized as a

mechanism that leads to the under-provision of care. Yet, surprisingly, empirical studies

of managed care typically find modest effects of managed care on the behavior of

physicians in office practice (Miller and Luft, 1994).1 One possible explanation for the

discrepancy between predictions and results is that while the incentives for treating an

individual patient in isolation are clear, most patients are seen in a much more

complicated context.

        Physician practices are rarely comprised of entirely managed care patients.

Indeed, most physicians today see a range of patients whose insurers pay providers using

a variety of payment levels and methods. Remler et al. (1997) surveyed 2000 physicians

and found that the mean physician practice received capitation payments for about 13%

of all patients, and 41% of all practices included at least some capitated patients. This

situation is further complicated by heterogeneous treatment patterns across regions of the

country, suggesting that perhaps the behavior of individual physicians are strongly

influenced by the practices of physicians around them. These heterogeneous conditions

may help explain the relatively modest impact managed care appears to have had on

physician office practice.

        In this paper, we propose several distinct theoretical models of patient treatment

in a heterogeneous environment. At the practice level, we propose three models of


 There is, however, strong evidence that managed care organizations reduce the frequency of hospital
admissions and the length of hospital stay.


                                                    1
physician behavior: one in which there are fixed costs associated with different types of

effort production; one in which physicians induce demand for services; and one in which

managed care organizations pay marginal costs for excess physician capacity. In an

environment with two types of practices, traditional fee-for-service and managed care,

these three models yield distinct results about the behavior of physicians toward patients

who pay with each of these types of coverage. The first and last imply a convergence in

treatment intensity as managed care penetration in a practice increases, although the

former suggests convergence to an intermediate level of intensity while the latter suggests

convergence to the traditional fee-for-service intensity level. The second model suggests

a divergence in effort intensity. At the regional, or market, level, we propose two

models. In the first market-level model, we posit that physicians that treat managed care

patients may need to attract them away from traditional fee-for-service practices. In this

model, as the regional presence of managed care expands, effort intensity for traditional

fee-for-service and managed care patients diverges. In the second model, managed care

organizations enroll the healthiest patients. The role of managed care expansion on effort

intensity is unclear and will depend on the manner in which patients are distributed across

practices. Because physician effort can take many forms, a different model may best

describe each type of effort.

       These five theoretical hypotheses are tested using data from the National

Ambulatory Medical Care Survey, an annual nationally representative survey of

randomly sampled physicians in office-based practice. We find that at an individual

patient level, treatment intensity is indeed lower under managed care, although managed

care patients are more likely to have a return visit specified by their physician. Practice




                                             2
composition is shown to have a large and statistically significant effect on practice

intensity. As the percentage of managed care patients in a practice increases, treatment

intensities converge. In the case of tests ordered, medications prescribed, and return

visits specified, effort to managed care patients increases and effort to fee-for-service

patients remains constant, providing strong evidence for a model with marginal cost

pricing for excess capacity. This result is slightly different for visit duration, where the

form of convergence in treatment intensity provides strong evidence for a model with

fixed costs of effort. The effects of market characteristics on physician behavior are

insignificant. Further, our analysis suggests that other researchers that find significant

market effects may, in fact, be observing omitted practice composition effects instead.

       The paper is structured as follows. The next section presents the five theoretical

models for physician behavior in a mixed payment environment. The first three models

examine within practice heterogeneity; the last two examine across practice (regional)

heterogeneity. Section three describes the data used in this paper. Section four provides

empirical results and the final section concludes.



II. Models of Physician Behavior in a Mixed Payment Environment

       Economic theory suggests that, holding all else equal, patients who pay using

capitation rates or who visit salaried physicians will receive less intense services than

those who pay using fee-for-service rates. The simple economics of capitation, salary,

and fee-for-service payment, however, provide no guidance about how these alternative

payment mechanisms might be affected by the behavior of other patients or other

practices. The industry literature on physician and hospital practice has begun to explore




                                              3
the problems of management in a mixed payment system, but this literature is very

limited (Krohn and Broffman, 1998; Manheim and Feinglass, 1994). In the economics

literature, most analyses of economies of scope contemplate the sale of two related

products using similar pricing strategies, not two (nearly) identical products using

different pricing strategies.

       In the remainder of this section, we propose several theoretical models of

physician management in a mixed payment system. These models focus on the

sensitivity of treatment patterns by payment type to both practice and market

compositions. For ease of exposition, we develop a very general model specification that

encompasses all features of our proposed theoretical models. It is important to note that

our principal choice variable, physician effort, is, in practice, multidimensional. Thus,

different theoretical models may best describe different forms of effort (e.g. tests,

medications, visit duration). The analysis of the general model specification is followed

by a discussion of each of our five proposed models for physician behavior in a mixed

payment system.

        Consider a physician whose practice consists of two types of patients: fee-for-

service patients, denoted byf; and managed care patients, who throughout the remainder

of the theory section we will refer to as HMO patients, denoted by It Given FllvIO goals

to limit excessive treatment intensity, the implicit price the physician receives for each

service rendered to an FIMO patient, Ph' is less than the price received for each identical

service rendered to a fee-for-service patient, Pf We recognize that capitated and

salaried physicians do not receive an explicit fee per service. Nonetheless, their income

does depend (albeit indirectly) on providing services to their patients, i.e. certain levels of



                                              4
quality must be maintained to retain patients. For modeling purposes, we treat this return

as a price. Let a represent the fraction of patients in managed care within a given

practice, a represent the fraction of patients in managed care within a given market, qf

and q represent the production functions for quantity of services per patient, and     and

C,   represent cost functions for physician services. The physician will choose a level of

effort for each type of patient, e and eh, such that the combined profits from fee-for-

service and DM0 patients are maximized.

         Formally, the physician's objective is represented by the following maximization

problem:

(1) maxef e ap(a)qh(eh,aJ)+ (l—a)pfqf(ef,a)—ach:eh,a)—(l—a)cf(ef,cZ:)

The production of services is assumed to increase with effort, but at a decreasing rate,

i.e., q' (e)>O and q"(e)<O, where primes denote differentiation. The costs of effort are

assumed to increase with effort at an increasing rate, c' (e)>O and c' '(e)>O. The impacts

of a and a on the price of services, the production of services, and the cost of effort

will be addressed in the discussion of individual models.

         The first-order conditions for the profit maximization specified in equation (1)

are:

                      ac
(2) (1—a)pf----—(1—a)-—t-=O
            aef       def


(3) Pk
          e,      ae,

These equations simply state that the value marginal product of effort for each type of

patient should equal the marginal cost of that effort. In other words, the marginal benefit


                                              5
the physician receives from his/her effort in the form of increased profits should equal the

marginal cost of that effort. Given our assumptions about the production and cost

functions specified above, the sign of the Hessian matrix of second-order conditions

ensures a maximum.

           As noted earlier, we are interested in the effects of changing physician practice

composition (or regional practice composition) on physician effort levels. These

comparative statics are obtained by totally differentiating (2) and (3) above and applying

Cramer's rule. This yields the following conditions:

                 (
                     p
                         a dc\                           a2c
                                                                —p
      de,                3ef        aef )               ae,aa

                                  (l—a)pf
                                             d2q
                                                   2
                                                 def
                                                       —(1—a)
                                                                a2c

                                                                ae,
                                                                    '
      d
      da
              1-ph -+2+a[ d'Ch
                          ae,       ae, )

                                   0Ph 2-a a2q
                                                  [aehaa aa
                                                       a2c,
                                                         2
                                                                        -



                                           aeh         aeh

      de
(6) — =0
      dce


                         Ph
      deh    —                aehaaf
(7)
      dcci
                 Ph
                         d2q dCh
                              2        2
                         aek        ae,

The signs of the first two equations determine changes in physician effort for the two

stylized patient groups, in response to changes in the DM0 population size at the practice

level. The second two equations measure the response to changes in the HMO

population size at the market level. It is important to distinguish between the two terms



                                                                6
in the numerators of expression (4) and (5) above. The first term is the extensive margin

of the change, and reflects the change in effort that can be attributed to treating more

(less) patients due to an increase (decrease) in the size of the relevant population. The

second term is the intensive margin, and represents the change in effort level per person,

by effort type. Together, these two terms indicate the response of total effort type to

changes in practice composition.2

            For our purposes, it is more interesting to examine the changes in effort intensity

by payment type, i.e. the amount of effort per person. These intensity responses are

reflected by changes in only the intensive margin discussed above. A formal analysis

that restricts its attention to intensive changes is equivalent to an examination of the

                                       (e '
following comparative statics:
                                       LI-a) and
                                        aa
                                                        __
                                                        aa
                                                              .   This yields the following


equations:


        (
        I
             e   'I
                        a2        dqf
                                 Pf
            1—a I      aefaa     aeaa
(4')
        I

        "             _____________
            da                   aC
                           aqf — ____
                        Pf
                           ae

        (eh           a2c, aaq,          Ph
                                               a2q
                aehaa aa aeh aeftaaJ
             — ___________________
       _____ —
            da
                            Ph     2      2
                                 ae,    aeh




2 Expression (6) and (7) do not have an extensive margin because we assume that the individual physician's
practice comprises only a small part of the market. Alternatively, we can simply redefine a as HMO
concentration in all other practices in the market region.


                                                    7
Inspection of these equations reveals their equivalence to (4) and (5) without the

extensive component. For the remainder of this paper, we shall limit our attention to

intensive margin changes, recognizing that the total effort change by payment type is

captured by both the intensive and extensive components. For ease of exposition, we will

                             e
           a
refer to
               1—a
               aa
                      and   a)        .
                                  as simply
                                              a
                                              da
                                                          ae
                                                      and __A, respectively. Equation (6) and
                                                          da
(7) remain unchanged.




II.A. Excess Capacity Model

           As indicated earlier, physician's may respond to changes in practice

characteristics by changing the quality (or intensity) of services provided to an individual

patient through changes in effort. Models of quality choice among monopolistically

competitive firms show that firms will choose practice intensity such that the marginal

revenue achieved through increased intensity is equal to the marginal cost of producing

output at that intensity (Sheshinski, 1976). In the context of physician practice, HIvIO

pricing behavior will mean that the marginal revenue associated with an increase in

service intensity for an FIMO patient will be smaller than that for an indemnity patient.

If, as specified earlier, the marginal cost of production is increasing in effort, physician

firms serving lIMO patients will choose a lower level of effort than will firms serving

indemnity patients. In such a model, the effect of practice characteristics on the treatment

of individual patients will depend on the structure of the service intensity production

function and the economic rewards for effort.




                                                  8
        In this model, we assume that HMOs seek to pay marginal costs for excess

physician capacity (Gold 1995a). If pan of the incentive for physicians to participate in

managed care plans is to ensure a large client base, excess capacity will likely be larger

when HMO concentration is low. Thus, lIMO bargaining power will be highest when

FIMO concentration is low. If bargaining of this type exists, then the fees paid for HIvIO

patients will rise the larger HMO payment is as a share of a physician's practice, i.e.


Ph (a) and       > 0. As HMO penetration increases, excess capacity in the practice

decreases, and HMOs can no longer extract such low prices from physicians.

        The size of the HIvIO population is assumed to have no effect on the production

                                                                d2c
function of services or their cost functions, i.e.          =           =      h=
                                                     aeaa       aefaa       aehaa

Inspection of equations (4') and (5') reveal that an increase in the HtvIO population size

has no effect on effort levels to indemnity patients and leads to greater effort levels to

                             de         de
managed care patients, i.e. —h = 0; _h> 0. This latter result is intuitive, as we would
                              dcc        dcc

expect quantity of services rendered, via effort levels, to increase as fees increase. Given

the economic assertion that, ceteris paribus, effort level to managed care patients is lower

than that for fee-for-service patients, patterns of care for indemnity and FIMO patients

will converge as the share of HTvIO patients in a practice increases.



Proposition I: In a model where HMOs pay marginal costs for excess physician capacity,

treatment intensity of fee-for-service and lIMO patients will converge as HMO




                                               9
penetration increases within a practice. The effort intensities will converge to the fee-for-

service intensity level.




JLB. Demand Inducement Model

        A second model in which physician practice characteristics can affect the

treatment of individual patients is one that incorporates demand inducement. If

physicians can induce demand for services and income effects are important, then

changes in the fees paid by one payer in a multi-payer firm can generate demand

inducement for the other payer (McGuire and Pauly, 1991). In the context of alternative

financing arrangements, physicians may profit from inducing behavior from indemnity.

patients but may not profit from inducing demand from patients paid through HMOs. If

HMOs also pay lower rates than indemnity plans, then an increase in the lIMO share of a

practice will lead to a reduction in physician income. If abstention from demand

inducement (or ethical behavior) is a normal good, this increase in HMO share will lead

to an increase in demand inducement from fee-for-service patients.

        Thus, the production function of services to fee-for-service patients is modeled as

                                                       aq            a2q
an increasing function of HMO concentration, qf (e ,a); —s-> 0; and                >o.
                                                        aa          aefaa
The size of the lIMO population is assumed to have no effect on the cost of service


production or on the price received for services rendered, i.e. a-Cf = a2c, = aP, = 0.
                                            -              -


                                                               aefaa aehaa aa
Inspection of equations (4') and (5') reveal that an increase in the lIMO population size




                                             10
leads to greater levels of inducement and thus effort to indemnity patients and has no

                                                                de
                                                              de
effect on effort levels to managed care patients, i.e. —-> 0; —h- = o
                                                                 dcc         dcc
                                                                                       .   Thus, this


framework suggests a divergence in effort intensity by payment type as }IMO

concentration increases.



Proposition 2: In a model of demand inducement, treatment intensity of fee-for-service

and BlYlO patients will diverge as }IMO penetration increases within a practice. Effort

intensity increases for fee-for-service patients, while HMO intensity remains unchanged.




II. C. Fixed Cost Model

         In this model, we assume that there are both fixed and variable of effort

production. The fixed cost investment can be thought of as durable equipment or office

capacity (intellectual or physical) that cannot vary for the two types of patients. Thus, a

physician must assess the needs of their practice, based partly on practice composition,

and make an unalterable investment accordingly. More generally, we can think of the

fixed cost investment as simply one that is prohibitively costly to change in the short-run.

Anticipating our empirical work, it may be reasonable to expect the duration of a patient

visit, given the need for advanced scheduling, to be costly to vary by patient and

therefore fixed for all patients.



  In this model, all forms of effort (induced or otherwise) are embodied in our effort variable. This
formulation does not alter our results, but simplifies the analysis by eliminating a third choice variable.
  It is interesting to note that increasing HMOconcentration has an ambiguous effect on the total effort
dedicated to indemnity patients. This ambiguity arises because on the extensive margin, the return to
indemnity effort is reduced as a result of the smaller fee-for-service patient population size.


                                                      11
         Physicians can, however, alter the variable components of effort to each type of

patient and thus incur variable costs as well. If the fixed cost investment in the practice is

more appropriate for lIMO patients, the marginal cost of variable lIMO effort will be

quite low and the marginal cost of variable effort to traditional fee-for-service patients

will be high. When the fixed cost investment in the practice is more appropriate for fee-

for-service patients, the opposite is true. Thus, there exists a tension when investing in

fixed costs that will be greatly influenced by practice composition. When a practice is

predominantly HMO patients, the fixed cost investment will be geared more towards

HMO patients, lowering the marginal cost of variable HMO effort and increasing the

marginal cost of variable fee-for-service effort. Formally, we represent this relationship

                                                                                    aCf          aCh
                                                         a) and Ch (eh ,a), where —> 0;
                                                                                                 aa <0;
between costs and population size as Cf (ef          ,



 a2c                  a2ch
         >0;and
aeaa                 aehaa

         The size of the FIMO population is assumed to have no effect on the production

function for services or on the price received for services rendered, i.e.

 a2qf = dp,, = 0.              ..

                  Thus, inspection of equations (4') and (5') suggest that physician
aefaa aa
effort for fee-for-service patients is decreasing and physician effort for FllvIO patients is

                                                         de          de
increasing in the 1-IMO population size, i.e.                   <0; —h- >0.. Like the excess capacity
                                                         c/ct        c/a

model described earlier, the fixed cost model suggests that practice patterns for IHItvIO and

indemnity patients within a practice will converge as the lIMO share increases. The


 We avoid formal modeling of the fixed cost investment, as it complicaies the maximization problem and
adds little insight. All the impacts of the fixed cost investment are realized through the marginal costs of


                                                     12
fixed cost of production theory also suggests that firms will tend toward more

homogeneous payment configurations over time (Glied, 1998).



Proposition 3: In a model with fixed costs of effort type, treatment intensity of fee-for-

service and lIMO patients will converge as HMO penetration increases within a practice.

The effort intensities will converge to some level between the two initial levels.




lID. Shadow Pricing - Market Patterns Model

         Thus far, we have discussed models that analyze the responsiveness of physician

effort to physician practice composition. In addition to these effects on physician

behavior, physicians may also respond to characteristics of the practice environment or

physician norms (Newhouse and Marquis, 1978). Physicians who treat HIv1O patients

may need to attract them away from traditional fee-for-service practice. If patients are

unfamiliar with HMO practice styles, physicians who adopt less intensive styles may find

it difficult to retain patients. In this type of quality competition model, the behavior of

other local physicians will affect the demand for services from other monopolistically

competitive physicians (Glazer and McGuire, 1993). This pattern is similar (at the

practice level) to that documented in the 1980s when competition between HtvIO and fee-

for-service insurers apparently led to shadow pricing by HMOs (Feldman and Dowd,

1993).

         The degree to which the low-intensity lIMO style must be limited depends on the

characteristics of other practices in the market, q, (eb, a). As the share of lIMO patients


effort to the two types of patients.


                                             13
in the market increases, physicians will be better able to reduce effort to managed care


patients,aq
          —<0; and d2q, <0.
         aa              aehaccf

       Inspection of equations (6) and (7) reveal that an increase in the market level

HN'IO population size has no effect on effort levels to indemnity patients and leads to

                                                       de         de
decreased effort levels to managed care patients, i.e. —s-- =     —— c 0. The latter
                                                       da         dcr
obtains because, as HMO market concentration increases, the threat of losing managed

care patients to indemnity plans as a result of lower intensity levels is diminished. At the

market level, we will see a divergence in practice style, as increases in HN'lO market

concentration lead all physicians to adopt less-intensive treatment styles for their

managed care patients.



Proposition 4: In a model where physicians who treat lIMO patients must lure them away

from traditional fee-for-service practices, treatment intensity of fee-for-service and HMO

patients will diverge as HMO penetration increases within a given market. Effort

intensity to FIMO patients decreases, while fee-for-service intensity remains unchanged.




lIE. Selection Model

       HMO penetration will affect observed physician behavior quite differently in

models where HIvIOs achieve savings mainly by selecting healthier than average patients.

In this case, the observed differences in the intensity of treatment of HMO and fee-for-

service patients will reflect differences in underlying health, not physician practice style.



                                             14
As HMO penetration increases, HtvlOs will be forced to enroll less healthy patients and


provide them with more intense services, q (eh , a1);           aq    > 0; and a2q, > 0.
                                                                aa1          aehaaf

         Inspection of equations (6) and (7) reveal that an increase in the market level

HIvlO population size has no effect on effort levels to indemnity patients and leads to

                                                    de       de
greater effort levels to managed care patients, i.e. —b = 0; —h— > 0. This increase in
                                                         da1           da1
effort intensity is a direct response to a constituency that is less healthy. At the market

level, the impact of increased FIMO market concentration on the differences in treatment

styles by payment type is ambiguous. Whether practice styles converge or diverge will

depend on the manner in which patients are allocated across physician groups, and the

ensuing health status of each groups' patients. If patients are uniformly allocated across

practices, practice styles will converge. If the less healthy patients are concentrated in a

handful of practices, styles will diverge. Consistent with this theory, Baker and Corts

(1996) find that indemnity premiums increase when the HIvIO market share rises above

20%.



Proposition 5: In a model where HMOs select healthy patients, the effect on treatment intensities

will be ambiguous as HlvIO penetration increases within a defined market. If the progressively

less healthy LIMO patients are allocated uniformly across practices, practice styles will converge.

If the allocation of patients is skewed, styles will diverge.



       Table 1 summarizes the empirical hypotheses suggested by these various theories of

HMO/fee-for-service. Basic theory suggests that service intensity will be lower for HIvIO



                                                  15
patients than for indemnity patients. The effect of an increased share of H?vIO patients in

a practice on intensity will be positive under the excess capacity and the fixed cost model,

and zero under the inducement model. The effect of increasing lIMO share on the

treatment of indemnity patients will be zero under the excess capacity model, positive

under an inducement model, and negative in a fixed cost model. The intensity of

treatment of indemnity patients will remain constant with an increase in HMO share at

the market level under the shadow-pricing model and will increase under the selection

model. At the practice level, the excess capacity and fixed cost models imply a

convergence in effort levels as lIMO penetration increases. The inducement model

implies a divergence. At the market level, the shadow pricing model implies a

divergence, while the selection model is ambiguous with regard to the difference in effort

levels.



III. Data and Methods

          We test these hypotheses using data from the 1993-1996 National Ambulatory

Medical Care Survey (NAMCS), an annual nationally representative survey of randomly

sampled physicians in office-based practice. Over 1100 physicians are sampled in each

survey year. The NAMCS asks physicians to report characteristics of about 30 randomly

sampled visits that take place within a sample week. In total, the surveys include

information on about 35,000 patient visits each year, including the expected source of

payment for the visit, the geographic location of the visit, and the physician's specialty.

The NAMCS payer categories vary slightly across years, in particular, PPO visits are

separated from other privately insured non-HIvIO visits only after 1994. The NAMCS




                                             16
data through 1996 do not contain detailed information about the type of payment. For

example, the data do not indicate whether a physician received capitation or fee-for-

service payment6.

         The NAMCS data contain considerable detail about patient characteristics and

about the treatment provided during a visit. These data include demographic information,

up to three diagnoses, services provided at the visit, medications ordered or provided, and

duration of visit. Information is available on the geographic location of the visit (region

and metropolitan area) and on the physician's specialty.

         We code insurance across all years using a consistent metric. The NAMCS

permits physicians to code multiple insurance types for a single visit. We omit all visits

paid by "unknown" or "other" or "no charge" insurance (these comprise about 8% of

visits in each year). We then rank insurance categories so that each individual falls into

only the highest ranked category. From lowest to highest, these categories are: self-pay

(which may include traditional indemnity coverage), private insurance, Medicaid,

Medicare, PPO (after 1994), HlvIO. Inmost of the analysis, we group together self-pay,

private insurance, and PPO and call this group TFFS (traditional fee-for-service).

Separate analyses suggest that these three groups closely resemble each other in both

patient and visit characteristics.

         Next, we use information on all visits to a specific physician and compute the

percentage of those visits paid by Medicaid, Medicare, }lMOs, and PPOs (after 1994).

We omit from the analysis any physician with fewer than 15 visits (observations) in the

data. We compute the share of all visits in the physician's market, defined as


6
  The 1997 data, which are in several other respects different from the preceding data, do include this
information. Using these data, we find that about 34% of visits paid by UMOs are capitated.


                                                     17
region*metropolitan area* specialty that are paid by each of the payers. Finally, we

compute interaction terms for TFFS insurance multiplied by the share of practice in

HMO and interaction terms for TFFS insurance multiplied by the share of the

marketplace that is lIMO.

       In all analyses that follow, we control for age, age-squared, female, black, other

race, Hispanic, metropolitan area residence, region of residence, sample year and patient

diagnosis. We limit the sample for analysis to privately paid visits (but control for the

share of visits paid by Medicaid and Medicare), leaving a sample of 68624 visits. It is

important to recognize, however, that the extent of actual variation in the data is more

limited than suggested by the sample size. The practice share coefficients are identified

from information on 2425 distinct practices. The NAMCS includes only limited

indicators of the physician's geographic market (region and metropolitan area) so that

there are only 111 distinct markets in this analysis.

       Standard measures of case mix do not reflect the demands of different types of

visits on outpatient visit characteristics. Instead, we code diagnosis using two sets of

variables. First, we include a variable for the number of separate diagnoses reported by

the physician for the visit. Second, we construct diagnosis categories for each outcome

variable. The diagnosis categories divide diagnoses into deciles according to their mean

effect on visit characteristics across the entire sample. For example, diagnoses are

divided into those with mean visit duration of 12-13 minutes, 14-15 minutes, and so on

for the analysis of duration. In some of the analyses, we omit these diagnosis categories

in order to assess the potential effects of HMO patient selection on the observed

outcomes.




                                             18
        We examine 4 principal measures of visit intensity: duration of visit, number of

tests ordered, number of medications ordered, and whether a return visit was scheduled

by the physician. Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for these outcome variables and

for the insurance variables that are the focus of this study. Duration is of interest because

it is an easily observable measure of visit intensity from the perspective of the patient.

Under either TFFS or lIMO payment, increasing the duration of visits makes it difficult

for physicians to see more patients. Under TFFS payment, however, the physician may

be able to bill more for a longer visit. Thus, we expect HlIvIO payment to reduce the

duration of visits. Note that we omit from the analysis of duration all visits with duration

equal to zero and all visits with duration greater than one hour. In these data, on average

visits last 19.8 minutes. Overall visit duration has increased slightly over the 1993-1996

period. FIMO visits average nearly one minute shorter than the sample average.

        Ordering more tests is one way for physicians to increase the intensity of

services—and billings—without using up much of their own time (McGuire and Pauly,

1991). Again, we expect HMO payment to reduce the number of tests ordered.

Unfortunately, the measure of test counts changes between 1994 and 1995 in these data.

In regression analyses, year dummies should capture this definitional change. Over the

whole period, the number of tests averaged 1.24 per person (about 1.1 per person prior to

1995 and 1.4 per person after 1994). HMO patients receive about 10% more tests than

the sample average. It is plausible that FllvIO physicians might order less expensive tests

than do other doctors. While the NAMCS data do contain information on the type of

test, the information is not sufficiently detailed to address this possibility.




                                               19
       The effect of HMO payment on medications is less clear. While reducing

medication orders may save money, other factors suggest that HMO patients are likely to

be prescribed more medications than are indemnity patients. First, lIMO patients are

more likely to have insurance coverage for pharmaceuticals, so that demand side

pressures to reduce intensity will, in this case, be stronger outside }IMO practice.

Second, providing patients with a prescription may be a way to reduce other more costly

interventions. Third, providing patients with prescriptions may reduce their propensity to

return for another visit, again saving the physician's time. The average visit in these data

included a new prescription order or medication continuation for 1.13 medications.

While coding changes did occur between 1994 and 1995, the number of medications

ordered or continued has remained quite steady over the four-year period. FIMO patients

received slightly more medications than the sample average. Again, HMOs may change

the types of medication ordered. In particular, they may substitute generic for brand

name drugs, or less costly for more costly prescriptions. The data do not allow us to

address this possibility.

       Finally, asking a patient to return at a specified time is the prototypical example

of demand inducement. Physicians paid capitation rates or salaries would prefer that

their patients returned seldom, while those paid fee-for-service rates would like them to

visit often. A return visit was specified for over 30% of all visits. The share was slightly

higher for HMO patients. For reasons that are not apparent in the data and may relate to

the ordering of questions, the percentage of patients asked to return dropped steeply

between 1994 and 1995.




                                             20
        For each outcome variable, we run successive analyses examining the effects of

individual insurance, practice composition, marketplace composition and interaction

terms. The fully saturated model is:

(8) Y = aX1 + 3HMO1 + Eö Share1 + pShareo,*Private+ Ey Marketj1 ÷

4Marketwio,j*Privatej + c

where X1 is a vector of individual and practice characteristics (demographic, regional,

specialty, and diagnosis related), j=Medicaid, Medicare, and FIMO, Sharej is the share of

visits in the practice visited by patient i paid by each of these payers, and Marketj is the

share of visits in the region-metropolitan area-specialty market visited by patient i paid

by each of these payers7.

        We use linear regression for analysis of visit duration, number of tests ordered

and the number of medications ordered, and logistic regression for whether a return visit

was specified.8 In each case, we estimate Huber-White standard errors. Finally, we

adjust the standard errors for intra-practice correlation. Initially, we examined the

behavior of generalists separately from the behavior of specialists. Coefficients on

variables of interest were very similar. We therefore grouped them together (controlling

for specialty effects) in the analyses reported here. This adjustment more than doubles

the standard error on coefficients associated with individual insurance status.




1
  We repeated the analyses using quartiles of HMO penetration at the practice level in place of the
continuous variable reported ahove. The results show a monotonic and approximately linear (in percentage
1-IMO) increase in effect sizes from quartile to quartile, suggesting that the linear specification is
appropriate.
8We repeated the estimates using negative binomial regression for tests and medications ordered. The
results were qualitatively similar to those reported here. Since a negative binomial regression is much more
computationally costly and more difficult to interpret, we used OLS regression instead.


                                                    21
IV. Results

       The bottom half of Table 2 describes the characteristics of the sample in terms of

insurance. About one-third of visits in the sample were paid by HIVIOs. In total, the

sample included information on 2425 distinct physician practices. In the average

practice, about 27% of its patients paid through lIMOs. Nearly three-quarters of all

doctors had at least one visit paid by an HMO. The average HMO patient visited a

practice where just over half of the patients were lIMO members. The sample included

information on 111 distinct region-metropolitan area-specialty markets. The average

market had 23% of its patient visits paid by lIMOs. One-quarter of markets had fewer

than 15% of visits paid by lIMOs, while one-quarter had more than 30% paid by lIMOs.

       As the HMO data above suggest, practices are relatively segregated. To assess

the extent of such segregation, we examine the distribution of patients across types of

practices in the NAMCS data. We measure the characteristics of the average practice

visited by a TFFS patient and by an lIMO patient. We report results in Table 3.

       While HIvIO patients constituted 1/3 of the sample, they made up only 16% of the

patients in the median practice. For each type of insurance, about 2/3 of a physician's

practice consisted of patients with the same insurance as the sampled individual. This

pattern was slightly more pronounced among generalists than among specialists.

       Despite the high degree of segregation, the average non-FIMO patient visited a

practice that also treated at least some lIMO patients. The median fee-for-service, self-

pay, or PIPO patient visited a practice at which about 4% of all patients were HlvIO paid.

More than ¼ of non-FIMO private patients visited a practice at which over 20% of all

patients were H?vIO paid. Similarly, the average HtvIO patient visited a practice at which




                                            22
about ¼ of all patients were TFFS paid and a further 12% were publicly paid. Only 10%

of all HIVIO patients visited practices that treated only HivIO patients. These results

confirm that there is substantial heterogeneity within physician practices.

IV. a. Visit Characteristics

       Table 4 reports the results of analyses that examine the effect of patient insurance

on treatment patterns. We report results for all independent variables (except 15 dummy

variables for specialist type). In general, the results for all independent control variables

are as expected. Older patients receive treatment of greater intensity than do younger

patients. Their visits are longer, they get more tests, and they are asked to return more

frequently. Quadratic terms in age are also positive indicating that intensity increases

faster at older ages. Women receive somewhat more intensive treatment than do men,

and are prescribed significantly more medications. Black patients have shorter visits,

more tests, and are less likely to be told to return than are White patients. As expected

the year dunmies are significant predictors of those variables where definition changes

occurred. Visits in the Midwest and south are shorter but include more medications and

are more likely to specify a return than visits in the Northeast. Visits in the west are more

likely to have a return specified than are those in the Northeast. Visits in metropolitan

areas are longer than visits in rural areas. Patients with multiple diagnoses are treated

more intensively than those with only one diagnosis. Most specialists have longer and

more intensive visits than do generalists, but they are less likely to specify a return visit

(not reported in Table).

       Turning to the effect of health insurance on intensity, HMO visits appear to be

only slightly less intensive than TFFS visits. They average nearly one minute shorter




                                              23
duration, but are somewhat more likely to include tests and about equally likely to

include medications. lIMO patients are (surprisingly) more likely to have a return visit

specified than are other patients.

       If selection is an important explanation of differences in HMO intensity, we

would expect the results of these analyses to be sensitive to exclusion of diagnosis codes.

We repeated the analyses excluding the dummy variables for diagnosis intensity.

Controlling for diagnosis substantially increases R-squared in these analyses, but it has

little or no effect on the HtvIO coefficient. While this result by no means conclusively

indicates that liMOs do not select healthier patients, it does suggest that selection is

unlikely to fully explain observed intensity differences.

IV. b. Practice and Market Characteristics

       The next set of analyses control for patient insurance, the composition of

insurance in the physician's practice, and the composition of the physician's market.

They also include interactions between the practice and market variables and patient visit

characteristics. Table 5 reports the results of these analyses.

       Practice composition has a large and statistically significant effect on most

measures of practice intensity. In each case, F-tests for the group of practice composition

variables strongly reject the null hypothesis that practice composition does not affect

outcomes.

       Market composition effects are much weaker than practice characteristics in

explaining patient treatment. Visits are shorter and the number of tests provided is higher

in HIvIO-dominated markets, but these and other market characteristics are never




                                             24
significant and always smaller in magnitude than practice composition9. This result is

consistent with the findings of Newhouse and Marquis (1978). Market-visit interactions

are never large or significant. Controlling for market characteristics has little effect on

the effect of individual insurance status on treatment intensity10.

         Visits in TFFS dominated practices are longer than are those in public-dominated

practices (not reported in table) or WvlO-dominated practices. The effects are sizable.

Moving from a practice without any HItvIO patients (the 25th percentile of practices) to

one with 50% HMO patients (slightly above the 75th percentile) reduces visit length by

1.45 minutes, or nearly 8%. Visits in HTMO-dominated markets are also shorter than

those in other markets (though the result is not significant). Once practice composition is

held constant, visits by HMO patients are no longer any shorter than are those of non-

FIIvIO patients)1 Interaction effects for duration are close to zero, suggesting that visit

length is set at the practice level and does not vary by insurance status. The inability of

physicians to vary individual visit duration may be partly due to the scheduling

difficulties associated with variable visit lengths. These results provide strong evidence

for a model of physician behavior with fixed costs in the duration of a visit.

         Results for tests ordered, medications prescribed, and return visits are quite

similar. Practices with large fractions of Medicare (not reported) or HMO patients order

significantly more tests and prescribe insignificantly more medications than do other


  Note that when we repeat the analyses and exclude practice characteristics, we find large and significant
market effects on duration and tests. This finding suggests that other researchers who find market level
effects may, in fact, be observing omitted practice composition effects instead.
WIn earlier analyses, we also included an interaction between practices and markets. This term was never
significant and has little theoretical importance, so it was omitted in further analyses.
t1One reason for this finding might be a tendency for physicians to report a constant length of visit for all
patients. We repeated the analysis omitting all practices where the reported visit length was the same for
all patients. The basic results were not affected. For the sample as a whole, over 40% of the variation in
duration is within practices.


                                                     25
practices. Conversely, physicians with Medicaid-dominated practices order significantly

fewer tests but order insignificantly more medications (not reported). The effect size for

moving from a practice at the 25th percentile to one at the 75th percentile of FIMO share is

just over 13% of the mean for tests ordered, 12% for medications prescribed, and 40% for

return specified. Market effects on tests ordered are positive, but effects on medications

are negative and effects on return specified are very small. After controlling for practice

and market composition, HIvlO-paid visits are slightly less likely to include tests (pc.05),

medications, or return visits than are TFFS visits.

       Interactions between practice composition and TFFS visit are always the same as

the sign of the coefficient on the lIMO term and opposite the sign on the lIMO-practice

variable. Interaction effects for tests (pcOl) and medications (pcOl) are nearly equal in

magnitude to those on the practice term, while the interaction effect for return visit is

about 2/3 as large as the practice term. This pattern suggests that the convergence in

treatment intensity occurs because HMO patients are treated more intensively in lIMO-

dominated practices while TIFFS patients are treated the same wherever they go. Thus,

for tests, medications, and return visits, the empirical evidence supports a model with

marginal cost pricing for excess capacity.

1V.c. Simulation Results

       To better understand the implications of these coefficients, we simulated

treatment intensity outcomes for representative practice and market characteristics. We

measured all independent variables at the mean for the generalist physician subsample

and tested the effects of varying the HIvIO practice and market shares from the sample




                                             26
25th percentile (or 0 and 0.1 respectively) to the sample 75th percentile (or 0.5 and 0.4

respectively). Thus, these are in-sample simulations.

       We predicted visit treatment intensity for an LIMO patient and a non-HtvlO patient

in each practice-market configuration. Table 6 reports the resulting levels of intensity for

an HMO patient and the differences in intensity between an otherwise identical non-

HTvIO and an H?vIO patient. The table also includes the baseline estimate of the

difference in means between HtvIO and non-HMO patients for each outcome variable.

       Turning first to the right-hand panel of results, the most striking finding in the

table is that the differences between non-LIMO and HN'IO patients are always greatest in

nontHMO practices whether or not in HMO-dominated markets. Even in these

situations, the differences are relatively small, always less than 15% of the variable

means. As the share of HIvIO patients within a practice increases, the differences

essentially disappear.

       The middle panel of results shows that, with the exception of visit duration, LIMO

treatment intensity increases as the HMO share of a practice rises and tends to increase

slightly as the HMO share of a marketplace rises.

       Looking at the results in more detail, the uncontrolled difference in visit duration

for non-HMO and lIMO patients is nearly two minutes (1.82 minutes). After including

all controls, the effect of moving that patient among practices with different

characteristics is quite substantial. LIMO visits in HN'lO-dominated practices and

marketplaces are nearly 2 minutes shorter, on average, than LIMO visits in low-HMO

practices and markets.




                                             27
       Comparing the effect of being a non-LIMO patient to an HTvIO patient, in the

right-hand panel of results, suggests that in a non-LIMO practice within an lIMO-

dominated market, non-HMO patients have somewhat shorter visit duration than HMO

patients (note that this difference is less than 1% of mean duration).

       The results for tests, medications, and return are very similar to one another. The

initial difference favors HtvlO patients relative to non-FIMO patients. Once practice and

market share are controlled, the point estimate for LIMO patients is that treatment is

somewhat less intense than among TFFS patients. Moving an HIvIO patient from a low-

lIMO practice and market to a high-HN'IO practice and market increases treatment

intensity. The increase for medications is about 8%, for tests it is about 5%, and for

return visits it is about 3%. The differences between HTVIO and non-HMO patients

virtually disappear at the 751b percentile of practice and market share.



V. Conclusions

       Most physicians treat a variety of patients within their practices and operate

within markets where a variety of insurance arrangements exist. While economic theory

suggests that, at an individual level, managed care patients will receive less intense

treatment than fee-for-service patients, the ability of physicians to modify their behavior

when the patient population is heterogeneous may be severely limited. This paper

develops several theoretical models of physician effort intensity in a mixed payment

environment, both within practice and across practices. When there are fixed costs of

effort or when managed care organizations pay marginal costs for excess physician

capacity, increases in managed care penetration lead to a convergence in effort levels to




                                             28
each patient within a practice. When physicians induce the demand of fee-for-service

patients to compensate for low payments from managed care, expansion of managed care

at the practice level leads to a divergence in effort levels. At the market level, if

physicians compete for patients, effort levels will diverge as managed care grows. If

managed care organizations enroll only healthy patients, the expansion of managed care

will force them to take on progressively less healthy patients. The impact of this

expansion on effort levels will depend on how patients are distributed across practices.

       Data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey are employed to test the

theoretical hypotheses. We find that financial incentives do matter. Treatment intensity

varies between patients, according to the method by which their insurers pay physicians.

But variations in treatment intensity depend as much—or more—on the insurance status

of other patients treated by the same physician as they do on the insurance status of an

individual patient. Market characteristics appear to be less important in determining

treatment intensity.

       The analysis suggests that physicians do not make up losses in income from their

TMvIO practice by increasing the intensity with which they practice TFFS medicine. Nor

does increasing the share of HMO patients in a marketplace appear to change the

underlying health characteristics of the practice allowing physicians to provide less

intense treatment (since the results are hardly affected by controls for diagnosis). Instead,

doctors with large HlvlO caseloads seem to change the way they do business altogether.

Physicians who treat mostly HMO patients appear to adopt a practice style that offers

equivalent treatment intensity along most measurable dimensions. In the case of visit

duration, strong evidence is provided for a model of physician behavior with fixed costs




                                             29
of effort. For tests ordered, medications prescribed, and return visits specified, the

evidence supports a model with marginal cost pricing for excess capacity.

       These results are consistent with the complaints of doctors who have just begun to

take on HMO patients. Physicians seem to have difficulty offering HIv1O-treatment

intensity in non-HTVIO practices. Visit duration tends to be relatively fixed across patients

so that only the other measures of intensity can be varied in these circumstances.

Physicians who set up their office to address the incentives associated with non-HMO

patients find it more difficult to treat TP'40 patients.

        Contrary to the fears of lIMO opponents (or the hopes of advocates), as the share

of HtvlO patients increases, HtvIO practice intensity comes to look more like non-HIv1O

practice. This, too, is not surprising. From the perspective of patients, physician office

visits are the most readily comprehensible part of the medical industry. In a market with

third-party payment, patients are unlikely to frequent physicians whom, they believe,

treat them with less than optimal intensity.

       Nonetheless, the differences in practice patterns do have important implications

for our understanding of the physician marketplace. If it is difficult to efficiently respond

to HMO incentives in non-HMO practices (and vice versa), practices are likely to become

increasingly specialized in the treatment of one or another group of patients. In turn,

such segregation is likely to lead to increased vertical integration in the physician

services market.




                                               30
References

Baker, Laurence C. and Kenneth S. CoPs. "HIMO Penetration and the Cost of Health
Care: Market Discipline or Market Segmentation." American Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings 86(2) May 1996: 389-394.

Feldman, Roger B., Bryan Down, and Gregory Gifford. "The Effect of FIMOs on
Premiums in Employment-Based Health Plans." Health Services Research 27(6)
February 1993: 669-811.

Glazer, Jacob and Thomas G. McGuire "Should Physicians be Permitted to 'Balance
Bill' Patients? Journal of Health Economics 11(1993): 239-258.

Glied, Sherry. "Payment heterogeneity, Physician Practice, and Access to Care."
American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 88(2) May 1998: 127-131.

Gold, Marsha, Lyle Nelson, Timothy Lake, Robert Hurley, and Robert Berenson.
"Behind the Curve: A Critical Assessment of How Little is Known about Arrangements
between Managed Care Plans and Physicians." Medical Care Research and Review
52(3) September 1995a: 307-341.

Gold, Marsha, Robert Hurley, Timothy Lake, T. Ensor, and Robert Berenson. "A
National Survey of the Arrangements Managed Care Plans Make with Physicians."
England Journal of Medicine 333(25) Dec.21, 1995b: 1678-83.

Hillman, Alan L., Mark V. Pauly, and Joseph J Kerstein. "How do Financial Incentives
Affect Physicians' Clinical Decisions and the Financial Performance of Health
Maintenance Organizations?" New England Journal of Medicine 321(2) July 13, 1989:
86-92.

Hillman, Alan, W. Peter Welch, and Mark Pauly. "Contractual arrangements between
HMOs and Primary Care Physicians: Three-tiered lIMOs and Risk Pools." Medical
Care 30(2) 1992: 136-148.

Krohn, Rick and Gregg Broffman. "Utilization Management in a Mixed-Payment
Environment" Healthcare Financial Management 52(2) Feb. 1998: 64-67.

Manheim, Larry M. and Joe Feinglass. "Hospital Cost Incentives in a Fragmented Health
Care System." Topics in Health Care Financing 21(1), Fall 1994: 24-35.

McGuire, Thomas G. and Mark V. Pauly. "Physician Responses to Fee Changes with
Multiple Payers." Journal of Health Economics 10(4) 1991: 385-410.

Miller, Robert H. and Harold S. Luft. "Managed Care Plan Performance Since 1980. A
Literature Analysis." Journal of the American Medical Association 271(19), May 18,
1994: 1512-1519.




                                          31
Newhouse, Joseph P. and M. Susan Marquis. "The Norms Hypothesis and the Demand
for Medical Care." Journal of Human Resources 13, Supplement 1978: 159-182.

Phelps, Charles E. "Diffusion of Information in Medical Care." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 6(3) Summer 1992: 23-42.

Remler, Dahlia K., Karen Donelan, Robert J. Blendon, et al. "What do managed Care
Plans Do to Affect Care? Results from a Survey of Physicians." Inquiry 34(3) Fall 1997:
196-204

Sheshinski, Eytan. "Price, Quality, and Quantity Regulation in Monopoly Situations."
Economica43 May 1976: 127-137.




                                          32
Table 1: Alternative Hypotheses of Physician Response to Increases in HMO Concentration at the Practice
and Market Level

                           Practice                Market
                           Level                   Level
Model                      Effort to   Effort to   Effort to   Effort to
                           FF5         lIMO        FF5         HtvIO       Practice      Market
                           patients    patients    patients    patients    Differences   Differences

Excess capacity               zero        (÷)                                Converge

Demand inducement             (+)        zero                                 Diverge

Fixed costs                    (-)        (+)                                Converge

Shadow pricing                                       zero         (-)                       Diverge

Selection model                                      zero         (+)




                                                   33
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics
                             Obs.     Mean          S.D.   HMO Mean       25th       75th7
Duration                      62534 19.76          12.27   18.54          10         25
Tests                         68624    1.24         1.36    1.32           0             2
Medications                    68624   1.13         1.27    1.15           0             2
Return Spec.                   68624   0.31        0.46     0.33
HMO patients                   68624 33.05
Practice Share HMO              2425   0.27        0.31     0.58           0             0.45
MarketSharellMO                   111  0.23        0.13     0.28           0.14          0.31




Table 3. Distribution of Patients by Practice Composition
                Self-Pay/        Medicaid Medicare lIMO            25th%          Median        75th%
                Private/PPO                                        HMO            HMO           lIMO
Self pay        0.64             0.07         0.17        0.12
Private         0.60             0.06         0.21        0.13
PPO             0.62             0.05         0.15        0.18
Self-pay or                                                        0.00           0.04          0.22
Private or
PPO
HtvIO           0.27             0.04         0.11        0.58     0.33           0.58          0.86
Total           0.50             0.05         0.17        0.28     0.0            0.16          0.45




                                              34
Table 4. Effect of Individual Insurance Status on Treatment
Dependent            Duration           Count of Tests      Medications       Return Specified
Variable                                                    Ordered
Intcpt                 30.81*                0.26-             0.11              -1.60'
                        (4.24)              (0.11)            (0.12)             (0.35)
Age                      0.06*               0.02*             0.00               0.01*
                        (0.01)              (0.00)            (0.00)             (0.00)
Agesq                    0.00*               0.00*             0.00*              0.00*
                        (0.00)              (0.00)            (0.00)             (0.00)
Female                   0.03                0.02              0.09*              0.03
                        (0.12)              (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.03)
Hispanic                -0.04               -0.03              0.02              -0.11
                        (0.30)              (0.03)            (0.04)             (0.06)
Black                   0.94*                0.08—             0.05              0.23*
                        (0.31)              (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.08)
Other Race              -0.38               -0.04             -0.05              -0.10
                        (0.48)              (0.05)            (0.04)             (0.07)
1994                     0.15                0.00              0.02              -0.08
                        (0.38)              (0.04)            (0.03)             (0.07)
1995                     0.35                0.17*             0.02              JJ59*
                        (0.37)              (0.04)            (0.03)             (0.07)
1996                     0.39                0.11*             0.04              .044*
                        (0.40)              (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.08)
Midw                    1.89*               -0.02              0.11*              0.05
                        (0.41)              (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.09)
South                   -0.48               -0.04              0.14*              0.16—
                        (0.40)              (0.04)            (0.03)             (0.08)
West                     0.10               -0.02              0.08—              0.14
                        (0.38)              (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.08)
Metro                    0.75—               0.05             -0.04              -0.10
                        (0.36)              (0.04)            (0.03)             (0.06)
Multi-Diag               1.23                0.21*             0.34*             0.18*
                        (0.11)              (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.02)
lIMO                    0.89*                0.03              0.00               0.08—
                        (0.22)              (0.02)            (0.02)             (0.04)
15 Spec.s             Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes
Diagnosis codes       Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes
R-sq.                    0.222               0.31              0.196              0.115
#obs:                62534              68624               68624             68624
(standard errors in parentheses with p<O.05 —, pcO.Ol *)Data are from 1993-1996 National
Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. Standard errors are corrected for clustering and
heteroskedasticity. Results are weighted by NAIvICS sample weights. Duration, tests, and
medications are OLS. Return is logistic regression.




                                              35
Table 5. Effect of Market and Practice Composition on Treatment with Interactions
Dependent           Duration            Count of Tests    Medications         Return Specified
Variable                                                  Ordered
Practice                                   0.32*             0.27*                0.25
WvIO %                (0.83)              (0.09)            (0.08)               (0.14)

Market                 -1.72                 0.25               -0.23                 0.05
HMO %                  (2.12)               (0.25)              (0.20)               (0.44)

lIMO                    0.07                -0.12—              -0.09                -0.09
                       (0.51)               (0.06)              (0.05)               (0.11)

FFS*Practice            0.33                0.30*               -0.23'--             -0.16
                       (1.00)               (0.11)              (0.10)               (0.19)

FFS*Market             -0.21                 0.08                0.14                 0.00
                       (1.85)               (0.18)              (0.18)               (0.36)

R-sq.                    0.223               0.311                0.196               0.115
#obs:                62534                68624               68624                68624
(standard errors in parentheses with pc0.05 —, p.cO.Ol *)Data are from 1993-1996 National
Ambulatory Medical Cam Survey.
Analyses also controls for all variables in Tables 3, 6, and 8 and for diagnosis. Standard errors
are corrected for clustering and heteroskedasticity. Results are weighted by NAMCS sample
weights. Duration, tests, and medications are OLS. Return is logistic regression.




                                                36
Table 6. Treatment Intensity under Alternate Practice and Market
Configurations
                                  HMO Visit            Non-lIMO - HMO
                                                         Differences
                          lIMO Practice Share HMO Practice Share
                              0           0.5           0          0.5

Visit Duration
Baseline         1.82
HMOMkt.             0.1       14.7            13.25      -0.09       0.08
Share               0.4       14.18           12.73      -0.15       0.02

Tests Ordered and Performed
Baseline       -0.12
HMOMkt.            0.1         2.12            2.28      0.13       -0.02
Share              0.4         2.2             2.35      0.15        0.01

Medications
Baseline    -0.02
HMOMkt.         0.1            0.75            0.88      0.1        -0.01
Share           0.4            0.68            0.82      0.15        0.02

Return Specified
Baseline      -0.02
HMO Mkt.           0.1         0.76            0.78         0.02     0
Share              0.4         0.76            0.78         0.02     0.01
Simulations based on results in Table 5. Simulations constructed at mean of
all independent variables and for a visit to a generalist physician.




                                                  37
