                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             AN OPTIMIZING IS-LM FRAMEWORK
                              WITH ENDOGENOUS INVESTMENT


                                          Miguel Casares
                                        Bennett T. McCallum


                                         Working Paper 7908
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w7908



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2000




The first version of this paper was written while Casares was a visiting scholar at the Graduate School of
Industrial Administration, Carnegie Mellon University. The authors thank Andrew Abel. Michael Dotsey,
Alexander Wolman, and Michael Woodford for helpful comments. The views expressed are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  2000 by Miguel Casares and Bennett T. McCallum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
An Optimizing IS-LM Framework with Endogenous Investment
Miguel Casares and Bennett T. McCallum
NBER Working Paper No. 7908
September 2000
JELNo. ElO, E30, E22
                                       ABSTRACT

        Dynamic optimizing models with an IS-LM-type structure and slow price adjustments have
been used for much recent monetary policy analysis, but usually with capital and investment treated
as exogenous—a significant restriction. This paper demonstrates that investment decisions can be
endogenized without undue complexity in such models and that these can be calibrated to provide
reasonably realistic dynamic behavior. It is necessary, however, to include capital adjustment costs;
models with no adjustment costs match cyclical data very poorly. Indeed, their match is considerably
poorer than models with constant capital. The paper also fmds that the preferred adjustment-cost
specification is not close to quadratic.




Miguel Casares
Department of Economics
Public University of Navarra
31006 Pamplona, Spain
Fax. (+34) 948 169 721
mcasares@unavarra.es


Bennett T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial Administration
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Tel. (412) 268-2347 Fax. (412) 268-7357
and NBER
bm05@andrew.cmu.edu
    1. Introduction.
    Numerous recent papers have effectively utilized dynamic macroeconomic
models with optimizing behavior that can be expressed in terms of relation-
ships that are similar in many respects to traditional models of the "IS-LM"
variety. Some noteworthy examples of such papers include Clarida, Gall
and Gertler (1999), Kerr and King (1996), Gali and Gertler (1999), Jeanne
(1998), Koenig (1990), McCallum and Nelson (1999a, 1999b), Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997, 1999), and Woodford (1995, 1999), plus discussions in
the textbook of Walsh (1998).1 The main difference between the models in
these papers and semi-traditional IS-LM formulations — i.e., ones that dis-
tinguish between real and nominal interest rates2 — is that the counterpart of
the IS function includes an additional term (with a unit coefficient) involving
expected future expenditure.
   The inclusion of this term gives a forward-looking aspect to expenditure
decisions, a feature that will typically result in significantly altered dynamic
behavior in these models, relative to the semi-traditional type. Of course,
these recent optimizing models still possess significant limitations.3 One of
the more notable weaknesses is that capital investment is typically taken to
be either non-existent (e.g., Woodford (1995)) or exogenous (e;g., McCal-
lum and Nelson (1999b)).4 Clearly this limitation is quite significant.5 Not
only does it eliminate the possibility of studying issues relating to capital
formation and growth, but in addition it removes the possibility of explain-
   'This list includes only papers that use or mention the IS-LM terminology. There
are numerous other papers with related models that make no such mention, including
Coodfriend and King (1997), Kimball (1995), King and Wolman (1996.1999), and Yun
(1996).
   2The IS-LM setups that we will be concerned with are ones that are intended torepre-
sent only the aggregate demand portion of a macroeconomic system, not ones that treat
the price level as a constant. In such models, real and nominal interest rates are clearly
distinguished. For more discussion, see McCallum and Nelson (1999a).
   3Most of the models being referred to are ones in which product prices are presumed to
adjust slowly. There is much disagreement concerning various models of price adjustment,
but in this paper we wish to focus upon limitations to the "IS-LM" portion of the mode],
not the "AS" portion (AS representing aggregate supply).
  4There are some exceptions, inc]uding Kollmann (1999), King arid Wolman (1996), and
Yun (1996).
  5For some purposes this weakness may not be serious, as is argued by McCallum and
Nelson (1999a), but for others it can be crucial.


                                            1
ing endogenously the contrasting variability of consumption and investment
spending, a contrast featured in much of the real business cycle literature.

    The first purpose of the present paper is to extend the basic optimizing
IS-LM framework so as to incorporate endogenous investment. This exten-
sion results in a model with an IS "sector" rather than an IS function, but
retains much of the attractive simplicity of the exogenous-investment models
and continues to facilitate a similar conceptual organization of behavioral
forces. A priori, it would seem likely that for capital and investment move-
ments to be even moderately realistic, it might be necessary to posit some
form of adjustment costs. Initially we focus on a particularly simple specifi-
cation used by Abel (1983) but in addition consider a more familiar version.6
For purposes of realism, the model presented includes sluggish adjustment
of prices and inflation rates; in that regard we utilize a price-adjustment as-
sumption related to that of Fuhrer and Moore (1995), which can be viewed as
an ad hoc generalization of the more theoretically-justifiable specification of
Rotemberg (1982) and Calvo (1983) . To represent the medium-of-exchange
role of money, we utilize a specification, very common in the recent literature.
in which the period utility function is separable in terms of consumption and
(the services of) real money balances. This specification is less plausible than
ones involving a non-separable transaction-cost function, but the differences
are insignificant for present purposes, as we explain in Section 2.

   Besides developing this extension, the paper explores various related is-
sues. One of considerable importance is whether enrichment of the optimizing
IS-LM framework, so as to incorporate endogenous investment, has a major
impact on properties of the model that are crucial for the study of alterna-
tive monetary policy rules. Does output, for example, respond differently in
terms of its magnitude and/or dynamic pattern to a monetary policy shock?
Or a technology shock? A second principal objective of the paper, accord-
ingly, is to conduct an investigation of this issue. In addition, we explore
the idea that investment adjustment costs are necessary to avoid unrealistic
movements of capital and investment magnitudes. In the process of doing
   61t is worth noting that with adjustment costs recognized, capital becomes a distinct
asset differing from government and private bonds, even abstracting from uncertainty.
   TRecently this model has been the subject of considerable interest and controversy;
see Walsh (1998, pp 224-26), Gali and Gertler (1999), Sbordone (1998), ajid Estrella and
Fuhrer (1998).


                                           2
so, we obtain results suggesting that such costs are necessary but that the
relatively familiar quadratic specification is inadequate.

   None of the paper's analysis depends, of course, on use of the IS-LM termi-
nology, which some economists find attractive and others find objectionable.
Our own use of these terms is partly motivated by a desire to illustrate that
actual analytical differences between proponents and opponents of "IS-LM
analysis" can easily be overstated.

    Organizationally, we begin in Section 2 with the specification of a model
of the type typically used in the recent papers featuring dynamic optimizing
models of the IS-LM type. Then in Section 3 we extend the setup so as to
include endogenous investment with — and, partly for comparative purposes,
without — adjustment costs. Section 4 is devoted to a quantitative calibra-
tion of the three model variants, and their dynamic properties are compared
in Section 5. Extensions are presented in Section 6 and a short summary
appears as Section 7.

    2. Reference Model with Exogenous Investment.
    We begin by specifying a typical model of the optimizing IS-LM form
in which investment is not determined endogenously. Thus, we consider an
economy populated by a large number of households making decisions in the
presence of uncertainty about the future. A typical household seeks at time
t to maximize the intertemporal utility function

                                   C+)
where fi = (1    + p)1, p > 0, is the household's discount factor. Ct is con-
sumption during t, and nit is the stock of real money balances at the end of
t.8 Also, E is the expectation operator conditional on information (assumed
complete) available in period t. Preference shocks Vt and ( enter the utility
function in ways that will be specified below. Different households produce
different goods; for the typical household c represents a Dixit-Stiglitz (1977)
   8We could alternatively let      denote real balances at the beginning of it. This would
result in a slightly different money demand function analogous to (14) below; on this point
see McCallum and Nelson (1999a).



                                            3
index denoting the number of bundles consumed. The reason that             ap-
pears in U(.) is that holdings of the economy's medium of exchange yield
transaction services that reduce the amount of time or matérial resources
needed for "shopping" — i.e., conducting transactions — for the many goods
that comprise consumption bundles. Such effects are often represented indi-
rectly by inclusion of t• It would not alter our results substantially to use a
theoretically preferable formulation that specified explicitly the time or ma-
terial resources that are needed for conducting transactions, with the amount
needed negatively dependent upon the quantity of real money balances held.
(For details, see Casares (2000) and McCallum (1999b)). If the relevant cost
function is not separable in ct and rnt, there would then be implications as
discussed below in footnote 13.

    The typical household's production of its specialized output is governed
by the production function Yt = f(Atn, k), where A is a labor-augmenting
technology shock, t is labor input, and k is the stock of capital held at
the start of t.9 This production function fG) is homogeneous of degree 1 in
its two inputs. Sales of the household's specialized output are restricted by
the demand function }'4(Pt/Pt)°,where Y/' is aggregate demand, P is the
money price of the household's product, and P is the aggregate price level.
The household inelastically supplies one unit of labor per period to a labor
market from which households purchase labor inputs at the real wage rate
Wt. Finally, b+1 is the number of one-period government bonds purchased
in t. Their real price is (1 + rt)' and each is redeemed in t + 1 for enough
money to purchase one unit of consumption. Letting ITt = (P14/PtA1) — 1
denote the inflation rate in period t, the household's budget constraint for
period t can be written as


 (1) YA(p/pA)1_9 —       tx —          — 1)   = + k+1 — (1 — b)k, + ni — (1 +
     wY1m_l + (1 + r)'b1 — b,

with production equal to quantity demanded


 (2) f(An,k2) = yA(p,/pA)_6
  9Below we introduce a market in capital goods.


                                         4
and with similar constraints applying expectationally for all future periods.
In (1), t.x, denotes lump-sum taxes (net of transfers) levied on the household
while 6 is the capital depreciation rate.

      In this setting, the household's optimality conditions include (1), (2).
and1°


  (3) Ui(c,rn,v,() —            =0

  (4)   U2(ct,     Vt,   () — t + /3E[+1(1 + lrt÷l)1] = 0
  (5) AW + Atfi(Atnt, k) = 0
  (6)   —
       + fiEA÷1(1 —6) + flEt[C+1f2(At+in+1, k+1)] = 0
  (7)   —(1 + rty1 + flEA1+1 = 0.
  (8) AYA(1 — 9)9/()1-8              +e      Agp_(O+1)/(pA)_9 = 0.

Assuming that the relevant transversality conditions are satisfied, these eight
relations determine the household's choices of c, nit, t, k+i, b+i. Pt, C and
A given the values of lrt, lift, r, and ix that it faces.

    For general equilibrium, the government's budget constraint must also be
satisfied. In per-household terms, it is

  (9) gt — tx    = in1 — (1 + irtY1m_i + (1 + r)1b÷i —

where gj denotes government consumption of goods and services. In addition,
there are the market-clearing conditions

(10) n =     1




and

  '°Here and below, f(.) represents the partial derivative of the functionf(.) with respect
to its i-th argument.

                                            5
         M
(11) rnt=-p-

where M is the per-household nominal money supply, and also the identity

             pA
(12) itt =          — 1.
             t—1




   Assuming symmetry across households, P, = pA will hold in equilibrium.
Then we have eleven conditions (apart from the relevant transversality con-
ditions) to determine the time paths of cm, n, k, b, A, C w, r, iv. and P in
response to exogenous, government-chosen paths of         and tx. Alterna-
tively, the government could be thought of as determining b, instead of Pt or
tx, with the other variable becoming endogenous. Similarly, the government
could implement monetary policy by means of the nominal interest rate R,
defined by 1 + R = (1 + rt)(1 + Eir÷1), instead of M.

   To express this system in an IS-LM fashion, we combine (3) and (7) to
yield


(13) Ui(c,         Vt, C)   = $E [U1(c+1, rnt+i, Vt÷l, ()] (1 + rt)

and also combine (3), (4), (7), and the definition of R to yield


(14) U2(,mt,vt,() = Ul(ct,m,vt,(t)1R.

   Next we assume that the period utility function can be expressed or
approximated by the form


(15) U(ct, mt,vt, () = T(1—c)' exp(vt)c+(l_T)(l_-y)_1                 exp(()rn


                                          6
with 0 < T < 1 and o, > 0. Accordingly, we have U,(ct,rn,v() =
T exp(vt)cr and U2(c, 7fl, Vt, () = (1 — T) exp((jrn17. Then (13) reduces
to

 (16) exp(vt)cia = Et[exp(vj)c)fl(1 + rj).

Here and below, we employ the techniques described extensively in Uhlig
(1999) to obtain log-linear approximations to nonlinear relations such as (16).
In doing so, "hat" variables are defined as (logarithmic) fractional deviations
from steady-state values, e.g., = log () with the ss superscript denoting
the steady state value. Thus, equation (16) can be transformed into11

 (17) Z =            —
                         c'(rt — T83) — C1(EtV+l — Vt),
We assume that the consumption preference shock follows the AR( 1) process

 (18) Vt = PVti + 6ut,

with pj < 1 and 6vt drawn from a normal distribution, i.e.,             E " N(0, a6).
Substituting (18) into (17) and using rt = — Ew+i yields

(19)     =           —
                         c-'(R —              — r) + c1(1 — p)v.

    Regarding the money demand formulation, for the utility function speci-
fication (15) the general expression (14) reduces to

                                    a              TR
(20) rnt = expV'(( — VtPc
                                        [(1   —
                                                  T)(l+ Ri)]
  "Here we also use log(1 +rt) r and logfl = —log(1+p)           —p = —rfl. Regarding the.
latter, note that in a Sidrauski-type optimizing model with no technological progress or
population growth, the steady state real interest rate r83 is equal to the rate of intertern-
poral preference (p =

                                               7
which can be approximated by the semi-loglinearized relation'2


(21) th =          — 53(R — W8) +        —
                                             Vt).



Defining the composite disturbance Xi = I(( — vi), equation (21) becomes
the following money demand expression:


(22)       =       —
                        (& — R88) + Xi


Clearly, (22) is of the familiar "LM" form, in which real balances demanded
depend positively upon a transaction variable and negatively upon an opportunity-
cost variable.

   Next, to put (19) into an "IS" form, let us first suppose — as in Woodford
(1995) and elsewhere — that k+1 is not a variable but is fixed at the value
iv. Then the relation (6) becomes inapplicable and we can write the overall
resource constraint


(23) f(Ari, k) = Ct + kt+j — (1 — S)?rt + m

as



(24) yt=c,+ök+g.

For a loglinear approximation to (24) we take


(25) =wiZ+w2,
 12Here   we use


                                     8
where w1 and w2 are the steady-state shares in output of consumption and
government expenditure, i.e., c = c88/y85 and w2 = gsa/ySs Then substitu-
tion of (19) into (25) results in


                        Wi
                         55                              —%                  1
(26) yt=Etyt+i——(R—E7r÷1—r  )+w2(gt—Eg1)+                                        a

The latter is an 'expectational IS function", in which demand for current
output is expressed not only as a negative function of rt, a positive func-
tion of ( — E+1), and a positive function of the consumption preference
shock Vt, but is also related positively to Et÷i (hence the designation ex-
pectational). The presence of the last term represents the only significant
difference from a semi-traditional IS specification, but this difference can
obviously be important for various dynamic issues.13

    In a system such as (26) and (22), analysis of the IS-LM type can be
carried out as follows. With exogenous processes specified for A1, , Vt, and
Xt, equations (26) and (22) determine the behavior of R and 7r, given the
identities rn, = M/P and lrt = pA/pA — 1, plus the resource constraint
(25)14 Alternatively, the monetary authority could specify the behavior of
    as central banks do in reality, in which case the model would determine
the behavior of M.

    In the flexible-price system just described, output yt fluctuates only be-
cause of the state of technology; it equals its "full-employment" value y =
f(Ai, Ic) in each period. Cyclical fluctuations in yt will be generated in a
real-business-cycle fashion by means of an appropriate stochastic process for
  '31n the case that a transactions-cost formulation is used, as we suggested above, the
IS-type function (26) will also include a term involving ffit—Ettht+i unless the transaction
cost function is separable. McCallum (1999b) suggests a plausible specification that is not.
separable. Quantitative calibration of the model's parameters suggests, however, that the
coefficient attached to this term will be quite small - e.g., less than 0.02. Accordingly,
it would appear to be entirely satisfactory to neglect such effects for the purposes of the
present paper.
   14This argument does not imply that money- demand and saving behavior, represented
by (22) and (26) respectively, are entirely independent, for the structural parameter a
appears in both of these relations. Also, their disturbances may not he stocha.stically
independent.


                                            9
the technology term A. Note that in this case, the symmetry condition
   = pA and equation (8) together imply that

 (27)        = (8- 1)/O.

    In addition, departures of yt from can be introduced by positing that
P does not adjust fully within each period — i.e., by assuming price stickiness
—
  and dropping the market-clearing condition nt = 1. Suppose, for example,
that we add a Calvo-Rotemberg-type price adjustment equation

(28) 7rt = flEtirt+i +         —




Then (22), (26) and (28) determine values of lrt, R, and         in response to
the exogenous processes and identitites described above. Again, policy could
specify behavior of R in which case M would be determined endogenously.
In the exercises conducted below we shall, for the sake of realism, focus upon
this latter case.
    3. Endogenous Investment.

    Now we are prepared to endogenize investment. Conceptually, this can be
done straightforwardly by merely recognizing k+1 as a variable and including
relation (6) in the system of first-order conditions.15 The resulting model is
unrealistic, however, in that it implies much more volatility than exists in
reality for capital, the marginal product of capital, and the marginal product
of labor. This important weakness will be documented below.

    It is possible to develop a well-behaved and tractable investment speci-
fication, nevertheless, by adopting the highly plausible assumption that the
process of capital investment — i.e., of "installing" capital goods — requires
the usage of some resources. Many previous studies have utilized such an
  '5Michael Woodford has pointed out to us that in some sticky price models producers
are unab]e to adjust prices in some periods. Thus the expected value of an additional
unit of capital in the next period is not simply the marginal product of capital times the
marginal revenue as given by the producer's demand function. In what follows, we assume
that the sticky price formulation is not of this type.

                                           10
assumption. including Eisner and Strotz (1963), Lucas and Prescott (1971),
and Hayashi (1982). An alternative approach would be to include exogenous
"time to build" constraints, as in Kydland and Prescott (1982) and many
subsequent papers. We consider it methodologically preferable, however, to
endogenize the postulated sluggishness of capital stock adjustments. The
particular adjustment-cost specification that we begin with is taken from
Abel (1983). Specifically, the assumption is that gross investment .Xj, defined
as


 (29) Xt   =    — (1 —


entails adjustment costs C(x) according to the formula


 (30) C(x) = 'x2         with       >0      and > 1.
Clearly, with 7) = 2, (30) would amount to quadratic costs of adjustment.
But other values of?) are permitted by (30), and as it happens our calibration
(in Section 4) suggests a larger value. One point regarding C(x) needs to be
added, as follows. We intend that non-zero values of it bring about positive
adjustment costs, even if it is negative. With some values of ij this would
appear not to be the case: (-1.5) = —3.375, for example. Accordingly, we
interpret x7 to be evaluated as (xfl. Thus, we have [(_1.5)2] 1.5 = 2.2515 =
3.375.

   The functional form (30) implies increasing marginal adjustment cost.
Since the production function f(.) is homogeneous of degree 1, we have a
production function net of adjustment costs f(Ant, k) — C(a) that implies
decreasing returns to scale. In other words, the ratio of total adjustment costs
to output would increase with the size of the production plant, discouraging
the existence of large plants. In Section 6, an alternative adjustment cost
specification will be introduced that has the property of constant returns to
scale.

    Recognition of adjustment costs implies that —C(z) appears as an addi-
tional term on the left-hand side (lhs) of the household's budget constraint

                                      11
(1), and also on the lhs of the overall resource constraint (23). With this
change, the first-order optimality condition with respect to k+1 (6) be-
comes,16 using (27) and the definition e = (U — 1)/U,


(31) (1+C'(x))

For simplicity, let us denote next period's marginal product of capital f2j±l =
f2(At+1nt÷i, k.+1). Using flEA÷1 = Aj(1+rt)1 from (7), the household first
order condition regarding the choice of bond purchases, we obtain

                 1   + eEtf2t÷i — 6 + (1 —
(32)   l+Vr  —




The left hand side of (32) is the return on the financial asset and the right
hand side is the (expected) net return on the real asset, adjusted by the
markup factor e. Taking natural logarithms on both sides of (32) and as-
suming that the real interest rate, the marginal product of capital net of
depreciation, and the marginal adjustment cost are small relative to 117 we
obtain the approximation


(33) C'j) =                 —8 —   r + (1   —



With our adjustment cost specification (30), equation (33) implies the fol-
lowing non-linear relationship


(34)          =              —S —   r + (1 —
Again using Uhlig's (1999) linearization rules, we can approximate the latter
with the following semi-loglinear investment equation

 16Note that C'(x)            =       and   C'(x1)               =
 '7That is, we use the approximation Iog(1 + z)   z for z < 1.

                                         12
 (35) Z = (1 — 8)E+1 +                            (eEf2÷1    —S—
                                                                     r)
                                    — l)CIGXSS)


where   C(f s) = lj(x8s)7/_l. This is an "expectational" investment equation
in which the current period's investment depends on next period's expected
investment and on the gap between the expected return on physical capital
adjusted by the factor e, and the return on the financial asset, Let zt denote
this premium:


 (36) Zt =              —S —   r.

When we sequentially substitute out expected investment, equation (35) can
be expressed as


(37) Xt =                              —
                — l)Ct(xas)Et0(1

Thus representation (37) of our investment equation indicates that current
investment depends on current and all expected future premiums on investing
in real assets. In addition, the value of            in (35) is the semi-elasticity
of investment with respect to (wrt) the real asset's premium. This number
directly affects the variability of investment over the economic cycle. Clearly,
both parameters of the adjustment cost function at hand influence the size
of this number. To issustrate this influence, Table 1 reports figures of the
semi-elasticity of the physical asset premium in (35) for various calibrations
of the parameters and i of the adjustment cost function.18

  18The values reported in Table 1 depend on x55, which depends upon values of 17, ',and
other parameters. Numerical values for thee are discussed below. Thus the presentation
here of Table 1 is logically premature, but is made nevertheless to aid inunderstanding of
the nature of the adjustment cost function.




                                           13
                                           Table 1
                                Semi-elasticity of investment
                      wrt the real asset premium in equation (35)
                                =0.1 =0.2 tL'=0.3 =O4
                                 7.16      4.10      3.04       2.48
                                 3.46      2.17      1.70       1.44
                      7) = 4     2.42      1.61      1.29       1.22
                        =   5    1.96      1.35      1.11       0.97

Thus a higher 7) reduces the semi-elasticity wrt Zt in the investment equation
(35). It should be recalled that 7) 5 the elasticity of the total adjustment
cost with respect to investment. When this cost increases more rapidly with
Xt, cyclical movements in investment will be more moderate. Likewise, a
rise in the scale parameter increases the size of the adjustment cost and
thus reduces the value of the semi-elasticity in (35). Notably, the absence of
adjustment costs ( = 0) implies CFC 88)= 0 and an "infinite response" of
investment to changes in the expected marginal product of capital premium
in (35)19
   Tn order to parameterize the marginal product of capital, let us assume
that our production function is Cobb-Douglas:

             f
(38) y = (Atnt, k) =            (An)1 k               with      0 < a < 1.

Then, with the recognition of variable capital and investment adjustment
costs, the system includes an "IS sector" consisting of

                     =E÷ —c1(R1—E+1 —r)+a(—p)v                                     (39a)
        =   (1
                 —
                     8)E÷1 + (_l)CFKSS)(eEf2+l —8— (R — Etir,+i))                  (39b)
                                 f2t = f2(SS k88)(ct — k)                          (39c)
                                        = (1 8)k + &%
                                             —
                                                                                   (39d)
                                    = W1C + W29t + 3Xt,                            (39e)
  19Finite responses when = 0 can be calculated by solving an analogous model without
explicit adjustment costs from installing capital. This will he done below considering the
setup described in the previous section with capital variable and so using equation (6).
Note that equations (6), (7), (8), arid (27) imply together: rt =          —8, in contrast
with the adjustment-cost case.

                                             14
in which (39c) is the log-linear approximation to the marginal product of
capital for our Cobb-Douglas functional form, (39d) is a loglinearised ver-
sion of the investment definition (29), and (39e) is the overall resource con-
straint now including investment. Consumption decisions (39a), investment
decisions (39b), and the amount of (exogenous) government purchases give
rise to current real demand as in (39e). The value of w3 in (39e) reflects
the weight of investment in total output from a steady-state perspective
(La3   = (x88 + C(x88))/y83).20

       To determine the system's endogenous variables, this five-equation IS
sector can be used together with the LM equation (22), and the specification
of natural-rate output,


(40)       = (1— a)logA        +a.

These relations can then be combined with a price adjustment specification
—
  full price flexibility or relation (28), for example — and policy rules for ,
and either M or R. The resulting eight relations will determine time paths
of t, t, C, X, k+i, f2t, lr±., and either R or M.
       4. Calibration.
    In this section we complete the specification of our model in numerical
terms, so as to permit quantitative analysis of its properties (considering
several variants). One step is to adopt a monetary policy rule. For the sake
of realism we will treat R as the monetary authority's instrument variable,
using a version of the well-known policy rule proposed by Taylor (1993).
Studies by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998) and others have indicated that
estimated versions of this rule generally benefit from inclusion of the variable
Ri_i, to reflect interest rate smoothing, with a positive coefficient in the
vicinity of 0.75-0.85. Accordingly, we represent monetary policy behavior as
follows:


(41) R = (1     —
                    p3)   [(1 + ,i)rt + p2E_i} + p1R1 + 6rn
  20Note that the reported value of w3 reflects the presence of adjustment-cost uses of
output in the overall resource constraint.

                                          15
where 6rn is a policy shock. Here, and in what follows, denotes — the
fractional difference between output and its market-clearing or natural-rate
value. We will refer to this as the output gap. In the model's variants with
full price flexibility this gap measure never departs from zero. In the variants
with slow price adjustments, however, the term represents policy feedback
intended to stabilize as in Taylor (1993) and Clarida, Gall and Gertler
(1998). The response is applied in (41) to Et..j rather than since actual
central banks do not have observations on or when setting R.
    For the same reason it would be desirable to utilize E_1ii- or
rather than lrj itself in (41). Tn the case with full price flexibility, however,
this would lead to a form of price level indeterminacy, because the relevant
portion of the model would then include no reference to the current inflation
rate. Thus we have assumed that Yrt appears in (41) so as to be able to use the
same policy rule for flexible and sticky-price variants. This departure from
operationality in the specification is not extremely serious since percentage
forecast errors are much smaller for lrt than for in actual economies. For
parameter values we adopt p.1 = 0.5, P2 = 0.1, and p = 0.8 as in McCallum
(1999a).

    Next we discuss the price adjustment model to be used in the sticky-
price variants. Although we have mentioned the Calvo-Rotemberg formula
(28) above, in our quantitative analysis we will utilize a related specification,
variants of which have been discussed by Fuhrer (1996), Walsh (1998), Gali
and Gertler (1999), and McCallum (1999a), among others. This generaliza-
tion incorporates the lagged inflation rate, and in some versions a lagged
output gap as well. The particular version used below can be written as

(42) ir = 0Eir+1 + (1 — Øo)irt_i +             + e'

where    is a white noise shock. Indeed, we will set     = 0.5, in which case
(42) becomes quite similar to a two-period version of the model developed by
Fuhrer and Moore (1995)21 which imparts a degree of inertia to the inflation
rate that is rather similar to that observed in actual economies. On this
point, see Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Nelson (1998), and Walsh (1998). For
  21FoI a demonstration of the similarity see Fuhrer (1997), and Walsh (1998, pp. 224-
225).


                                         16
the value of        we have used 0.03 and for the standard deviation of                  we
used 0.00222

    It remains to assign values to the other parameters, i.e.. to complete
calibration of the model. We do so with regard to quarterly U.S. data. For
the IS sector we adopt the following values; a = 5, 6 = 0.025, a = 0.36,
p=       = 0.005, = 0.125, ij = 3.42, w1 = 0.78, w2 = 0, and w3 = 0.22.23
Thus we set cx so as to imply an intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
consumption of 1/5, a magnitude consistent with various studies of the U.S.
data. The depreciation rate and capital-share parameters, S and a, are quite
conventional. The value of p = r' implies an average real interest rate of 2
percent per year.
    Calibration of the two parameters of the adjustment-cost function C(at)
is done to satisfy two assumptions. First, the total adjustment cost of
investment is in steady state equal to approximately 1% of output, i.e.,
C(x:') = 0.01.
               Secondly, after analyzing impulse-response function and some
simulation experiments, we found that the semielasticity wrt Zt in the invest-
ment function should be around 2.5 to yield business cycle fluctuations close
to the empirical evidence in the sense that investment variability is several
times the variability of consumption. These results will be reported and dis-
cussed in the next section. Then, we looked for the pair of values that imply
both this semielasticity and C(x5') = 0.01, and consequently set i = 3.42 and
   = 0.125.

    The money demand or LM relation (20) shows that the interest rate
semi-elasticity equals 1/(7R88), Thus if we were to adopt 7 = 7 and R38 =
r88 +   ir = 0.01, we would obtain a value of 14.3. But with R used as
the policy instrument, and with a separable period utility function, there is
no need to calibrate the money demand equation as it plays no role in the
evolution of most of the model's variables.

    Finally, we need to assign magnitudes to the parameters of the stochastic
disturbance processes. For the technology shock, which follows the process

  22We have also conducted exercises using Ø values of 0.05 and 0.0032, which span a
wide variety of estimates, and found that there was little qualitative effect on the results.
  231n the cases without adjustment costs, we have w1 = 0.7, w2 = 0, and w3 = 0.3.


                                            17
 (43) 1ogA = plogA1 +EAt,

where EAt is Gaussian white noise, we take PA = 0.95 and c = 0.006, val-
ues that are typical in the real-business-cycle literature.24 The other nonzero
serial correlation parameter pertains to the process (18) generating the con-
sumption preference shock v; we use 0.3 for m and a value of 0.003 for the
standard deviation of the innovation to the disturbance in (19).

  Regarding the variability of the monetary policy rule white-noise distur-
bance E, we have set      = 0.0017 as estimated for the United States by
McCallum and Nelson (1999b).

    5. Model Properties and Comparisons.
    We are now prepared to develop the paper's main results, which indi-
cate how the model's properties depend upon the exogeneity vs. endogeneity
of investment and the presence or absence of adjustment costs. The com-
parisons are developed for three model variants with both fully-flexible and
slowly-adjusting prices using (42). In describing these properties we focus on
impulse response functions for two shocks: the technology shock, EAt. and
the random component of monetary policy, ERt.

    Figures 1, 2, and 3 report paths for the variables Yb lTj — ¶SS
k, f2t — f8, r — r88, and fit — Ras in response to a unit realization of the
technology innovation EM when prices adjust fully within the period of the
shock. The constant capital case is presented in Figure 1, the endogenous
capital case with no adjustment costs is in Figure 2, and the endogenous
capital case with investment adjustment costs is in Figure 3. As mentioned
above, the "hat" figures represent deviations of these variables from their
steady-state values, Thus a magnitude of 0.5 indicates that the variable's
response is, in percentage terms, half as large as the shock.
  24Actually, the most used figure iii the literature for the standard deviation of the
technology shock is 0.007, For more recent sample per ods, however, the standard deviation
of output is smaller than in past empirical studies, which might imply
                                                                     a reduction in "Solow
                                                        a=
residual" variability. As documented iii Section 5, we found     0.0135 (i.e., 1.35 percent)
for the period 1980.1-1999.4, whereas for the period 1975.1-1994.4 the value is significant]y
higher (a = 0.0173).


                                         18
    Our first variant treats capital as a constant, therefore, there is no re-
sponse of      or k to a unit realization of EAt. Consequently, the reponse
of exceeds that of , which jumps up by 0.64 and then gradually tails
off. The marginal product of capital rises, as indicated by equation (39c),
but the real rate of interest on securities, Tt, falls. This somewhat surpris-
ing response occurs in order to induce an increase in consumption so as to
equate the current use of goods ( = (c58/y88)Z,) to the enhanced capacity to
produce goods (). With Vt thus given, the policy rule (41) and the Fisher
relation rt = — Etirt+i together determine inflation and the nominal in-
terest rate. In this determination the presence of 0.8R_1 in the policy rule
leads to a prolonged departure of R from its steady-state value, and thereby
influences the paths plotted.

   In Figure 2 investment and capital are generated endogenously and there
are no adjustment costs. Both investment and capital respond positively
to the technology shock. The response of Z is about three times as large
as for and about ten times as large as for . As for capital, its peak in
response to the technology impact is reached many quarters after the shock
and has a size of 2/3 of the shock, approximately. In this case the real interest
rate equals the expected value of next period's marginal product of capital,
adjusted by e and net of depreciation (rt =               — 5), so it must rise
with the positive technology shock. Again, the policy rule and the Fisher
relation determine paths of R aid lrj; in this case there is an upward blip in
inflation.

   The last result is reversed, however, in the case with adjustment costs
 (Figure 3). Here the presence of these costs of investing reduces the demand
for investment by enough that its rise is about five times as large as for E.
Accordingly, the value of Vj does not need to rise to equate overall supply
and demand; instead a slight fall is recorded. This leads to a temporary fall
in the inflation rate in a manner similar to that of Figure 1. The response of
the capital stock to the shock is somewhat muted (smaller) relative to that
of Figure 2.

   We need also to consider the effects of a shock to the policy rule, an
upward blip in epa. But for all the cases discussed thus far, the responses
to ERt are the same for each of the variables plotted. This is so because
with flexible prices the model possesses monetary neutrality; thus the only

                                       19
effect is a one-time drop in the price level (a one-period negative blip in 7rt).
Interestingly, this drop is just sufficient so that the net response of R is
zero, even though the R policy rule (41) is the equation shocked. This is
so because with neutrality Vt is not affected, and neither is expected future
inflation. No figures are presented for these cases, therefore, because all three
are alike, and in each there is no response for eight of the nine variables!

    Now we turn to the variant of the model in which goods prices respond
slowly, rather than instantaneously, to the shocks. In our opinion, this is the
more realistic specification, although we readily admit that the particular
price adjustment scheme adopted is open to objections.25 Figures 4, 5, and 6
report impulse response functions for both technology and policy rule shocks
for the three cases: constant capital, endogenous investment without adjust-
ment costs, and endogenous investment with adjustment costs (respectively).
We begin with Panel A of each of the figures, which pertains to technology
shocks. In Figure 4, we see that responds much as in Figure 1 and that
and k do not move at all (by assumption). For the remaining variables, the
patterns are distinctly different from those in Figure 1. The responses are in
the same directions but the movements are much more gradual and in some
cases are smaller as well.

    Next, in Panel A of Figure 5 we see that with endogenous investment
and no adjustment costs there is a very large spike (almost ten times the
size of the shock) in in the period of the shock, followed by almost no
departure from the steady-state level thereafter. Similar spikes appear in
and f2t — f8.It is interesting to consider why the response of x is so much
greater than in Figure 2 even though inflation behavior seems to be not
greatly different. The fact is that inflation behavior is just enough different
that expected inflation rises in the period of the shock by almost as much as
actual inflation, 50 Vt does not rise appreciably. Therefore with no adjustment
costs it is the case that Etf2t+icannot jump up because of the arbitrage
condition Vt =           — b.
                               Consequently, Etkt+imust jump upward to
keep Etf2t+i from rising in response to the technology shock. In other
words, investment must be very large. With the recognition of adjustment
  25As are all others. MeCallum (1999c) argues that price adjustment is the most poorly
understood aspect of macroeconomics; that there is great disagreement among scholars as
to the formulation that most nearly satisfies the dual requirement of theoretical plausibility
and empirical veracity.


                                             20
costs (Figure 6, Panel A), by contrast, the responses of , , and f2t —
are moderate and smooth. The maximum increase in k is somewhat smaller
than with no adjustment costs (compare to Figure 5).

    Responses to policy rule shocks are even more interesting in these sticky-
price cases. In Panel B of Figure 4 we see that an upward blip in Em brings
about a similar-sized jump in R, which decays slowly. Inflation falls grad-
ually and then slowly returns to its steady-state value. The magnitude of
the fall is small enough, however, that the real interest rate rt behaves much
like R. The temporary policy restriction drives , Z, and f2t — f8 down,
after which all of these gradually return to their steady state values as time
passes.

   With endogenous investment but no adjustment costs, the response (in
Panel B of Figure 5) to an 6Rt blip is truly enormous, 5 falling proportionally
by more than 400 times (!) as much as the increase in ERt. Output also falls
drastically (near 125 times) and even consumption drops by almost 2 times
as much (in relative terms) as the shock. It seems clear that this case is
highly unrealistic.

     With adjustment costs, however, the responses are quite moderate. These
are shown in Figure 6, Panel B. There falls by less than the shock mag-
nitude, and investment by about eight times as much. The maximum fall
in k is (in percentage terms) about one half as much as the shock magni-
tude. Since output is a weighted average of consumption and investment,
its response reaches an intermediate value—about two times the size of the
shock. The effect on inflation of the brief policy tightening is not large, hut
is distinct and reaches a maximum after 4 quarters. While this may be a bit
quicker than some practical analysts would say is realistic, the effect is still
noticeable even after 10-12 quarters.

    What is the verdict on the issue mentioned in the introduction, namely
whether the endogeneity vs. exogeneity of investment strongly affects the
model's properties in other respects? If we take the sticky-price variant to
be more realistic than that with fully flexible prices, and take the presence
of adjustment costs to be more realistic than their absence, this question
concerns the similarity of Figures 4 and 6. In fact, as can be seen, there
is considerable similarity between these two, in both the A and B panels.

                                      21
The magnitude of the output response is noticeably greater in the variable-
capital case since it incorporates investment responses but the shapes of the
seven plots excluding and k+1 are remarkably alike. Thus it would appear
that, judiciously utilized, the constant-capital — or exogenous investment —
analysis can provide a useful guide to the behavior of , V, ft, r, and 14.
Obviously it cannot do so for — , nor for or k+i 26

    Another message provided by the exercise is that the presence or absence
of price level stickiness in the model's formulation has rather strong effects
on its response properties. These differences are sharper for responses to
monetary shocks, but are also noticeable for responses to technology shocks
—
  see Figures 3 and 6 (or 1 and 4).


   In addition, the responses shown in Figure 5, for the sticky-price case with
endogenous investment but no adjustment costs, are extremely large for the
variables , t, kt÷i. and f2t         —      — especially
                                                   in response to monetary
shocks. Reliance on any single sticky-price specification is risky, without a
robustness study. Nevertheless, the results in Figure 5 are so implausible
that we are inclined to suggest that the inclusion of investment adjustment
costs (or some other sluggishness mechanism)27 is virtually mandatory for
models with endogenous investment and sticky prices.

    We have also obtained some stochastic simulation results to illustrate the
models' properties in another fashion and to provide a stringent check on their
realism. The models with constant capital (Model 1), with endogenous in-
vestment and ri adjustment cost (Model 2), and with endogenous investment
and decreasing returns to scale adjustment costs (Model 3) were simulated
using the sticky-price specification (42) and the calibration described in Sec-
tion 4. There were 200 observations in each simulation. Standard deviations,
coefficients of correlation, and coefficients of autocorrelation were calculated
for the main variables of the models. The experiment was repeated 200 times
and the resulting averaged statistics are as reported in the following tables:

  26Much the same caji be said for the flexible•price variant of the model, as can be seen
from Figures 1 and 3.
  27Such as the Kydland and Prescott (1082) time-to-build mechanism, as mentioned
above.




                                           22
                                  Table 2
                 Standard deviations (in percentage units).
              Model 1     Model 2      Model 3 US data28 EMU data29
                1.00       22.02         1.56        1.35     0.84
  c(a/a)   1.42(1.42) 1.53(0.07) 1.02(0.65) 0.77(0.57) 0.74(0.88)
                0(0)     72.77(3.30) 4.00(2.56) 4.00(2.96) 2.52(3.00)
                 0         47.56         3.92        5.19     3.41

                                       Table 3
                              Coefficients of correlation.
                  Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Us data EMU data
                      1          0.22       0.92        0.84          0.76
                      0          0.99       0.94        0.91          0.92
                      0          0.17       0.75        0.79          0.81

                                        Table 4
                            Coefficients of autocorrelation.
                   Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Us data EMU data
        pi_          0.88
                     0.88
                                 -0.20
                                  0.89
                                               0.87      0.82          0.79
                                               0.81      0.78          0.76
                      0          -0.21         0.86      0.83          0.87

    The simulation results lead to basically the same conclusion as obtained
from the impulse response functions. When capital is endogenously intro-
duced, some sort of sluggishness mechanism such as adjustment costs must
be included to avoid excessive variability of investment. Indeed, the intro-
duction of adjustment costs diminishes the standard deviation of investment
by more than 15 times! (see Table 2).
   28Quarterly observations were obtained for the US economy during the period 1980.1-
1999.4. Output is Real GDP, consumption is Real Personal Consumption Expenditures
on nondurable goods, and investment is Real Fixed Private Domestic: Investment. All
the original series are expressed in chained 1996 US dollars and seasonally adjusted. To
calculate the statistics, each series was logged and detrended using the Hodrick-Prescott
filter (A=1600) as is common in the literature. Source: US Department of Commerce,
Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   29Output is measured by the real Gross Domestic Product. Consumption definition
is real Private Final Consumption Expenditures whereas investment is real Gross Fixed
Capital Formation. The sample period and the way of calculating the statistics are the
same as for US data. Source: area-wide niodet data base, European Central Batik.

                                          23
    As for the coefficients of correlation and autocorrelation, our model with
adjustment costs again matches the empirical evidence reasonably well. By
contrast, the model without adjustment costs generates too little contempo-
raneous co-movement of consumption and output and very low (even nega-
tive!) serial correlation in output and investment (see Tables 3 and 4).
     6. Extensions.
    In this section we introduce a variant of the adjustment cost specification
used above, a variant in which the unit cost of installing capital depends posi-
tively on the ratio xt/kt, i.e., C(tt,ki) = h(x/k), with the properties h'(.) > 0
and 2h'(.) + 6W'C) > 0. Thus, the total adjustment cost of investment in
period t varies with both Xt and k:

     C(x, k) = xth(x/k).
With this functional form, the production function including adjustment
costs is homogeneous of degree 1, implying constant returns to scale. As
a consequence, the ratio C(xss W') is independent of the size of the produc-
tion plant. Moreover, Hayashi (1982) demonstrates that the average value of
Tobin's q is equal to its marginal value under this specification. The theo-
retically attractive features of this representation have led it to be used with
some frequency in the literature (e.g., Abel and Blanchard (1983). Blanchard
and Fisher (1989, p. 59), Obstfeld and Rogoff (1997), and Jermann (1998)).
Assuming the functional form h(x/k) = (x/k), one obtains


(44) C(z1,k) =

in   which = 1 represents the case with quadratic adjustment costs. Calcu-
lating C (xt, k) and G2(x11, k+1),and substituting the results in place of
C'(x)  and (1 — 5)C'(x+1) in equation (33) of our model with endogenous
investment, one obtains


            + 1) ( =                - 6- rt + (1 - )Vñ +
(45)
                                                                1)(t1)
                                      24
After loglinearization, the latter is approximated by3°

(AC\_
\U) Xt —                         I              tj2H-1 — — Vt) + i-;
                  t.tt+i + (I+5)Ci(rsskss)                               't

with C1 (xs8, k88) =    (+1)8". It will be noted that the appearance of the in-
vestment equation (46) is quite similar to the relation (35) obtained in Section
3 for our previous adjustment cost specification. In both of these, current
period investment is positively affected by the expected future (adjusted)
premiums for the physical asset over the financial asset. The semi-elasticity
with respect to the expected premium is determined by the parameters of
the adjustment cost function. There is also a component in (46) that did
not appear in the investment equation (35): the value of capital in use in
the current period k now enters the investment equation separately with
a positive coefficient    With that coefficient, however, the quantitative
significance of k will be very small.31 Therefore, the two investment equa-
tions (46) and (35) would appear to be virtually operationally equivalent if
they are calibrated according to the same criteria (i.e., to yield the same
semielasticity wrt the premium and the same fraction of output used up by
adjustment costs). In this case, impulse response functions and simulation
results would then be very similar for both adjustment cost specifications.
Thus, the same conclusions as reached in Section 5 would be applicable to our
endogenous investment model with the constant returns to scale adjustment
cost specification (44).

   Accordingly, let us now use the same criteria as before to calibrate the
values of the parameters and in (44). That is, the selected figures will be
chosen to imply a semi-elasticity of investment with respect to the expected
premium equal to 2.5 and a total adjustment cost equal to 1% of output in the
steady state. Values of the semielasticity for various and values are shown
in Table 5. On the basis of the implied relationship. we assign ' = 524.6
and = 2.55, Therefore, the quadratic adjustment cost specification, with
  = 1, is far from our calibrated value based on business cycle properties. If
  30Note that we used     = 6 and      = Sit + (1 — 6) from the   investirient definition
(29).
  31After calibration, the semi-elasticity of the physical asset premium is 2.5 and the
semi-elasticity of k is     = 0.024. The former is more than 100 times the latter.

                                          25
nevertheless it were set at       1, then we would be required to have either
a very high semi-elasticity with respect to Zt, i.e., too much variability of
investment, or an implausibly large magnitude of the total adjustment cost
in terms of output, i.e., a value of CV,ks that is too large.32

    Based on our assigned values of = 524.6 and = 2.55, impulse response
functions corresponding to the constant returns to scale case are shown as
dotted lines in Figure 6. The plots are almost indistinguishable from those
of the solid lines, confirming that in fact the two adjustment-cost functions
yield very similar results when calibrated according to the same criteria.33

                                     Table 5
                    Semi-elasticity wrt the real asset expected
                    premium in the investment equation (46).
                                =250 p5=500                O=75O
                       =2         1.04         0.52          0.35
                      = 2.5       4.51         2.26          1.50
                       =3         20.8         10.4          6.94


   One of our more striking findings is that the absence of capital adjustment
costs leads, with sticky prices, to implausibly large responses of both invest-
ment and output, especially with monetary policy shocks. It is natural to
ask whether this result is sensitive to our assumption that labor employment
is not constrained within each period by the quantity currently preferred by
households—i.e., that labor is demand determined. To investigate the effect
of relaxing this assumption, the model can be altered so as to (i) incorporate
elastic labor supply by including leisure in the utility function, (ii) require the
relevant first-order condition of the household to be satisfied in each period,
                          ._
  32When   we have the case  =     1   and we maintain the C( k'S) = 0.01 cnterion the
                                                      .




implied semi-elasticty of the real asset premium zt in the investment equation (46) is 11.31
(more than 4 times the calibrated figure). Likewise, for the case = 1 and maintining the
semi-elasticity of z in (46) equal to the calibrated figure 2.5, we find C(X = 0.0403
(more than 4 times the calibrated figure).
  33The constant returns to scale case reports slightly higher responses to shocks. Com-
pared to the decreasing returns to scale case, investment rises by approximately 3% more
when there is a technology shock and falls by 1% more (almost indistinguishable) when
there is a shock to the monetary policy rule.

                                            26
and (iii) make the price adjustment relation's gap variable pertain to real
marginal cost (as in Gali and Gertler (1999)) rather than to output.34 With
these modifications, a constant-elasticity labor supply specification with elas-
ticity of 1.0 (and average time spent working of 1/3 per period) leads to Xt
and Yt spikes of about -150 and -50, in comparison with the -400 and -120
values shown in Figure SB. Analogous magnitudes with a labor supply elas-
ticity of 2.0 are -230 and -70, while with an elasticity of 0.5 they are -90 and
-30. Thus the responses continue to be implausible, if less dramatically so
than with our basic setup. We believe, in any case, that our basic speci-
fication is more realistic, i.e., that quarter-by-quarter fluctuations in labor
input are governed by institutional arrangements (labor contracts, perhaps
implicit) that have producers unilaterally determine employment in each pe-
riod, with labor supply preferences affecting the natural-rate reference values
that current gap variables (and therefore price adjustments) refer to.
    7. Conclusions.
    In the foregoing sections we have explored the inclusion of endogenous
 investment decisions in dynamic optimizing models that are expressed in
 an expectational IS-LM framework, Such models, with sticky prices, have
 been used in much recent monetary-policy research but usually with fixed or
 exogenous capital. We have found that capital/investment decisions can be
 endogenized readily without undue complexity or loss of the IS-LM-style con-
 ceptual framework that is attractive heuristically. Specifically, we have found
that endogenous investment in the presence of capital adjustment ("installa-
tion") costs can be calibrated to yield reasonably realistic dynamic behavior
using either of two simple adjustment-cost functions, one of which features
constant (and the other decreasing) returns to scale in production. Our cal-
ibration suggests, however, that a quadratic specification for the adjustment
cost function, which has been used by various researchers, is apparently in-
appropriate. Specifically, it implies an excessively large responsiveness of
investment to monetary policy actions, at least under the realistic assump-
tion that these are implemented with an interest rate instrument.

   The paper's analysis also yields two additional conclusions that are quite
noteworthy. First, models with endogenous capital/investment choices but
  34Without this third modification, (i) and (ii) would merely call for altered fluctuations
in the. real wage rate with 110 effect on output or investment.


                                            27
no adjustment costs imply highly unrealistic responses to monetary policy
surprises under the assumption that price-level stickiness obtains. Such mod-
els appear to be less appropriate than ones with exogenous investment. Sec-
ond, although explicit inclusion of endogenous investment is both attractive
and readily accomplished, analyses with exogenous capital are not drastically
misleading with respect to the cyclical behavior of output and real interest
rates. Thus such models can, if judiciously utilized, be useful for some types
of business-cycle and monetary policy analysis.




                                    28
   APPENDIX

  Steady state analysis in a Sidrauski-type model when adjust-
ment cost of installing capital goods are considered.
   Let us take the capital first order condition with adjustment costs of
investment (32) in steady state. Recalling that r83 = p, we obtain
            1   + ef — 6 + (1 —
    1+j=              1+c,
which after some algebra implies that the steady state marginal product of
capital becomes

   1k   =

   Note that 1k — 6 > p and thus there is less capital employed than in the
perfect competition setup with endogenous investment and no adjustment
costs in which fk —6 = p. Furthermore, even in the absence of the inefficiency
due to monopolistic competition (i.e., 0 = 1), the presence of the adjustment
cost creates a deviation of the marginal product of capital from the real rate
of interest.
    As for the stock of capital in a steady state, /c, we can illustrate how it is
determined by using a Cobb-Douglas technology in the previous expression:
   ak' = [(p+ 6)(1 + C')]
After rearrangment, the result is
                              I
   k= (________
      (p+6)(1+C'))
Thus the stock of capital depends positively on the capital share in the
production function a and on the mark-up factor 0, and negatively on the
rate of depreciation 6, the rate of intertemporal preference p, and the steady-
state marginal adjustment cost C' = C'(ök).



                                       29
                             REFERENCES


Abel, Andrew B., 1983. "Optimal Investment Under Uncertainty,"
American Economic Review 73 (March), 228-233.

Abel, Andrew B., and Olivier J Blanchard, 1983. "An Intertemporal Equi-
librium Model of Saving and Investment," Econometrica 51 (May), 575-692,

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Stanley Fischer, 1989. Lectures on Macroeconomics.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1983. "Staggered Pricing in a Utility-Maximizing
Framework," Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (Sept.), 383-396.

Casares, Miguel, 2000. "Dynamic Analysis in an Optimizing Monetary Model
with Transaction Costs and Endogenous Investment," Doctoral Thesis, 61-
103.

Cla.rida, Richard, Jordi Gall, and Mark Gertler, 1998. "Monetary Policy
Rules in Practice: Some International Evidence," European Economic Review
42 (June), 1033-1067.

           and      , 1999. "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Key-
nesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature 37 (December), 1661-
1707.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1977. "Monopolistic Competition
and Optimum Product Diversity," American Economic Review 67, 297-308.

Eisner, Robert, and Robert Strotz, 1963. "Determinants of Business Invest-
ment," Impacts of Monetary Policy. Prentice-Hall Pub. Co., Englewood
Cliffs, NJ.

Estrella, Arturo, and Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, 1998, "Dynamic Inconsistencies:
Counterfactual Implications of a Class of Rational Expectations Models,"
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper No. 98-5,

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C., and George R. Moore, 1995. "Inflation Persistence,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 127-159.

                                    30
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C.,1997. "The (Un)importarice of Forward-Looking Behavior
in Price Specifications," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 338-350.

Gall, Jordi, and Mark Gertler, 1999. "Inflation Dynamics: A Structural
Econometric Analysis," Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (October), 195-
222.

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert C. King, 1997, "The New Neoclassical Syn-
thesis and the Role of Monetary Policy." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997,
B. M.Bernanke and J. J. Rotemberg, eds. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982. "Tobin's Marginal and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation," Econometrica 50 (January), 213-224.

Jeanne, Olivier, 1998. "Generating Real Persistent Effects of Monetary
Shocks: How much Nominal Rigidity Do We Need?," European Economic Review,
42 (June), 1009-1032.

Jermann, Urban J., 1998. "Asset Pricing in Production Economies,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 41, 257-275.

Kerr, William, and Robert G. King, 1996. "Limits on Interest Rate Rules in
the IS Model," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 82
(Spring), 47-75.

Kimball, Miles S., 1995. "The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomon-
etarist Model," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (Nov.,Pt. 2),
1241-1277.

King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman. 1996. "Inflation Targeting in
a St. Louis Model of the 21st Century," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review 78,83-107.

     and      ,  1999. "What Should the Monetary Authority Do When
Prices are Sticky?" In Monetary Policy Rules, J. B. Taylor, ed. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Kollman, Robert, 1997. "The Exchange Rate in a Dynamic Optimizing Cur-
rent Account Model with Nominal Rigidities: A Quantitative Investigation,"
Working Paper 97-7, International Monetary Fund.

                                    31
Koenig, Evan, 1989. "A Simple Optimizing Alternative to Traditional IS-LM
Analysis," manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, 1982. "Time to Build and
Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica 50 (November), 1345-1370.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Edward C. Prescott, 1972. "Investment Under
Uncertainty," Econometrica 39 (September), 659-681.
McCallum, Bennett T., l999a. "Analysis of the Monetary Transmission
Mechanism: Methodological Issues," NBER W.P. 7395.
       1999b. "Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nom-
inal Interest Rates," NBER W.P. 7677.
     1999c. "Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules," in
Handbook of Macroeconomics, J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, ed. North-
Holland Pub. Co., Amsterdam.

McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson, 1999a. "An Optimizing IS-LM
Specification for Monetary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis,"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 31 (August, part 1), 296-316.
      and      , 1999b. "Performance of Operational Policy Rules in an Esti-
mated Semiclassical Structural Model," in Monetary Policy Rules, J.B. Tay-
lor, ed. University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1996. Foundations of International
Macroeconomics. MIT Press, Cambridge. MA.
Rotemberg, Julio J., 1982. "Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate
Output," Review of Economic Studies 44, 517-531.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, 1997. "An Optimizing-Based
Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, B.M. Bernanke and J.J. Rotemberg,
eds, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
     and       , 1999. "Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky Price
Model," in Monetary Policy Rules, J.B. Taylor, ed, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL.

                                    32
Sbordone, Argia, 1998, "Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price
Stickiness," Working Paper, Rutgers University.
Taylor, John B., 1993. "Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,"
 Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39 (Nov.), 195-214.

Tobin, James, 1969. "A General Equilibrium Apprach to Monetary Theory,"
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 1 (February), 15-29.

Uhlig, Harald, 1999. "A Toolkit for Analyzing Nonlinear Dynamic Stochastic
Models Easily," Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economics,
Ramón Marimón and Andrew Scott, (eds.), Oxford University Press.

Walsh, Carl E., 1998. Monetary Theory and Policy. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Woodford, Michael, 1995. "Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a
Monetary Aggregate," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
43 (Nov.), 1-46.

      1999. "Interest and Prices", manuscript.

Yun, Tack, 1996; "Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogenity. and
Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.




                                    33
                  y                 ybar               inflation
                             I

                                                 0


            -1                                  -2
                 2O4O 60                                           60
                             I
                             11




                                  20 r4° 601                       60


                            01

      -0.                                     a; cl
Figure 1. Fully-flexible prices. Constant capital. Technology unit shock.




                                  34
                  y                  ybar              inflation




               2O4O 60              2040 60                        60




         3_HHH
       o.o
                         60
                              0.0
                                    20 r4° 60
                                                0.0—
                                                       20R40 60




      -O.O66O.OHOON 0
Figure 2, Fully-flexible prices. Variable capital and no adjustment costs.
                         Technology unit shock.




                                    35
                     y                   ybar                inflation


                                                       0


                                                     -0.2
         -1
                                                          20k4° 60
                                                       4 ________
          1                     2

                                I
          0                                            0
                                0

         -1                    -
                                    20 r4°      60          20 R 40      60
        0.0                   0.0                     0.1


          0                     0                      0


                20       40         20     40 6001          20    40     60
  Figure 3. Fully-flexible prices. Variable capital. Adjustment costs on
investment with either decreasing returns to scale (solid lines) or constant
         returns to scale (dotted line). Technology unit shock.




                                    36
                            N'                              ybar                            inflation
                 II



              oH?
                Ho:oH
                                                                                 _
             —1      _________________          _________________ -0.2________________________
                         2O4O 60                       2O4O 60                           20k40 60
                 I



              oH:_
                                                                                 _______________________________




             -1
                                                       20 r4° 60
                                                                                 _______I
                                                                                 ________________________

                         20f240      60                                                  20R4° 60




                                                       20      40      60                20        40        60
Figure 4. Panel A. Sticky prices. Constant capital. Technology unit shock.



                            y                               ybar                            inflation
              I                                                                  ___________________________




              __TH
              oH
             —1



              I
                            10 15          -1

                                            I
                                                            10 iS°.2
                                                                             I
                                                                                 ___________
                                                                                 ____________________
                                                                                                             15




             :H _ _H
             oRoH
                            f2°      15
                                                             r1°      15
                                                                                              R0
           0.0                                                               1




          -0.02________________________                                     —1
                                                ________________________
                     5        10      15             5        10      15                5         10         15
Figure 4. Panel B. Sticky prices. Constant capital. Monetary Policy Rule
                                                unit shock.



                                                       37
                      y                     ybar                  inflation
            3
            2
            I
            0
           •1                                                                 H
            I
                               60      2OaO 60 20k40 60

            0


          -1
                               60      20 40 60               20R40 60

            0!

         -0.1
                 20       40   60      20       40 60 2040 60
Figure 5. Panel A. Sticky prices. Variable capital. No adjustment costs.
                               Technology unit shock.
                      y                     ybar                  inflation




           .: 0
           .4
                 $        10   15
                                       S lO 15



                                       5        10
                                                        0.




                                                     j5_o.5   $
                                                                    R10




                                                                      10

Figure 5. Panel B. Sticky prices. Variable capital. No adjustment costs.
                   Monetary policy rule unit shock.
                                                                              15




                                           38
                 HM
                                                        ybar                         inflation




                —1

                         2O40 60                                     60
                                                                                 20k40




           0.09



                 00
                —1




                         20        40   660.0
                                              -1

                                             O0
                                                   20




                                                   20
                                                            r   40




                                                                40
                                                                      10




                                                                     60

  Figure 6- Panel A. Sticky prices. Variable capital. Adjustment costs on
                                                                           0.1


                                                                             0


                                                                           -01



investment with either decreasing returns to scale (solid lines) or constant
                                                                                 20       40     60




           returns to scale (dotted line). Technology unit shock.
                              y                        ybar                          inflation
                I                             I                            0_s




                I
                              0 15            oHoH
                                             -1



                                              0
                                                is s    io                             1c10




           —1




           0.
                oH   5 10 15                            r1°                                      15




          -0.
                     5            10    15         5            10   15          5       10      15
 Figure 6. Panel B. Sticky prices. Variable capital. Adjustment costs on
investment with either decreasing returns to scale (solid lines) or constant
     returns to scale (dotted line). Monetary Policy Rule unit shock.


                                                       39
