

#   

       
       
 !"
# "$%&'$()
 '*+%,("'-./
&&(00111%2"' ',0(("'301-./
         
3343"&&35"%"
$2'+!,"678
4& 2"'7




            
  ! "        #$$$ %%  " &''' ( )   *  % 
 +,-  .(/  *  "" 0 1
 *   +*(  *  ) 0
2#$$$+30)  ,0,*0% "  0,  *1
1  "+4  1     *     "2
  "  

+3& '+4"3& )&"+"2 &9( &"3+3 4"&"' ,"%"+&9)' $& 
 !"%!# "$%&'$()
  '*+%,("' -./
4& 2"'7
:  ;-6-686
 
"+"2 &9( &"3+361+43&&"3&&+%!+5+!31+4 3&"3393 '&&"$3"5"34' 33
 44 $$%+&+"344 '!+%,& &"+'(2+4, !('")"'"%4"36+3&"1 '* '3" )&" 4(2+4
)+%%4"+&"'&'"+3(("'!"5" (3&"3& )&"+"2 &9( &"3+33+%,+3& '+45'+&+ %+%
$ 2++&94 3&3'"<&"%3+ % )&"+"2 &$ !"& +%4 '( '&"344 3&39+"!3&")  1+%,
4 $('&+5"3&&+433$ 2++&94 3&3)6&""&"' ,"%"+&94' 334 $$%+&+"3 )+%!+5+!(2+4
, !('")"'"%4"3%!6%!"'3 $"3&%!'!33$(&+ %36 )(2+4,

!(' 5+3+ %$3&=1"*9>

+%4'"3"+5"%$ 2++&94 3&35")"% 5"'&+$"6%&'&"3& )&"+"2 &9( &"3+3+3&
&*"&"3"('"!+4&+ %3& &"!&?"'"4 %&+"3 5"'&"@("'+ !

%&''9& &"

('"!+4&+ %361")+%!!"4'"3+%,"&"' ,"%"+&92"&1""%4 %&+"3+%( +49 &4 $"3= 4"!4&+ %
3("%!+%,%!& &&<"3 ''"5"%"3>%!+%1+!"5'+"&9 )(' <+"3) '(2+4, !('")"'"%4"3
=," ,' (36 "!4&+ % "5"36 ""4&+ % &4 $"36  $" 1%"'3+(6 +%4 $"6 '4"6 %! '"+,+ 3
))++&+ %>3+%,&"

3& %343"3&!961"3 1&&&""&"' ,"%"+&9&'"%!3'"

3+$+'&&"$%+4+(%!4 %&9"5"3"3"'"3&33,,"3&&&) '4"31 '*+%,+% (( 3+&+ %
& +"2 &3 '&+%,5"! $+%&"!+%!+5+! 4&+ %!"4+3+ %3 5"'&"(3&4"%&'9

30) 
*  
.(5 
 677$8
5 (#98''
 ( )
 : 0 0 

,0,*
*  
.(5 
5 (#98''

I. Introduction
In recent years there has been renewed emphasis on decentralized governance in
many countries including the United States. A key rationale for this shift is the belief that
local governments provide policies better suited to citizen preferences. This wisdom is
grounded in the Tiebout (1956) hypothesis which states that individuals will costlessly
sort themselves across local communities according to their public good preferences.
This simple theory is the workhorse of the local public finance literature and has been the
subject of over one thousand economics and political science articles.1 One of its central
assumptions is that individuals are perfectly mobile. While this assumption simplifies the
theoretical analysis, real-world individuals who change communities often face
substantial moving costs. This paper utilizes historical changes in mobility costs to
develop a new test of the Tiebout hypothesis.
We first generalize a standard Tiebout model to incorporate mobility costs and
derive the following comparative static: as mobility costs fall, preference heterogeneity
among residents across communities (weakly) increases.

Under some standard

assumptions (such as restricting individual preferences to a quadratic loss function), the
variation of policies across communities will also increase. The empirical section begins
by documenting the dramatic reduction in mobility costs over the last century. This
suggests a natural test of the Tiebout hypothesis is to see whether heterogeneity across
communities increases in the historical record. For this task, we assemble a vast dataset
comprising all of the counties in the United States (except Alaska) over the 1850-1990
period. The county is the smallest government unit for which consistent detailed data are
available for such a long period.
Almost all of our empirical results stand in opposition to the Tiebout prediction of
increasing heterogeneity across communities. We first consider measures of local policy
outcomes.

Our analysis shows that the heterogeneity of local per capita education

spending has declined significantly. The coefficient of variation across counties fell from
0.66 in 1890 to 0.25 in 1992. A similar reduction in heterogeneity occurred in per capita
taxes and revenues over the 1870-1992 period. These trends are robust to adopting
1

See for example Bewley (1981), Dowding et al (1994), Epple and Sieg (1999), Kollman et al (1997) and
the references therein.

1

various heterogeneity measures (such as the proportion of money which must be
reallocated to create a uniform distribution across counties) and to controlling for statespecific factors and outliers.

To test the comparative static prediction regarding

preference heterogeneity, we consider numerous proxies for public good preferences
including electoral behavior, race, religious affiliation, age, nativity, and over the postWorld War Two period, education, home ownership and income.

Almost every

preference proxy exhibits diminishing heterogeneity across communities over our sample
period.2 Two of the more graphic examples are that the proportion of blacks living in
black majority counties decreased from 48 percent in 1890 to 9 percent in 1990, and that
the dissimilarity index of presidential vote shares decreased from 0.27 to 0.17 between
1892 and 1988.

These patterns are not solely driven by the South, by rural-urban

migration, or by states where counties have few fiscal responsibilities.
Finally, we address two possible criticisms. One concern is that our preference
proxies may lose their salience over the sample period. To the contrary, we find that the
proxies can explain roughly the same proportion of variation in local fiscal policies and
vote outcomes in the beginning and end of the sample. A second concern is that our
county-level analysis is inappropriate because Tiebout sorting occurs only over smaller
jurisdictions such as municipalities. We show that most counties have important fiscal
responsibilities, implying at least a weakened version of Tiebout sorting should hold. As
a more formal test, we re-evaluate the government policy and preference proxy measures
using the 92 municipalities in the Boston SMSA over the past century. All of the
heterogeneity measures follow similar patterns at the municipal- and county-level in this
sample, suggesting that our county-level analysis is not masking sub-county Tiebout
sorting.
In total, these results suggest that the Tiebout model cannot be the complete
explanation of individual locational choices and that Tiebout sorting has been historically
overwhelmed by forces reducing across-community heterogeneity. This implies that any
theoretical or empirical model which adopts a pure Tiebout framework is misspecified.
(The final section suggests several alternative motives for individual moves which might

2

Heterogeneity is measured with the dissimilarity index and the Gini coefficient. For income, the withinand between-Theil measure is also used.

2

explain the data in this paper). While such a conclusion may not seem surprising, several
an ongoing literature takes a literal interpretation of the Tiebout model. In a recent
empirical paper, Epple and Sieg (1999) assume that all locational choices are the result of
costless sorting over community-specific housing prices and other “factors.” In the
empirical implementation, they assume these factors are public good provisions and
estimate the underlying preference parameters under the maintained hypothesis of a
Tiebout equilibrium. In addition, most theoretical locational choice models assume that
community choice is driven exclusively by local public goods and taxes.

Some

prominent recent examples include Fernandez and Rogerson (1998) and Nechyba (2000),
who consider education quality/spending, Epple and Romer (1991), who investigate
redistribution, and Glomm and Lagunoff (1999) and Nechyba (1997), who analyze
generic local public goods. In addition, these models all assume no mobility costs.3 The
latter assumption has also played an important implicit role in empirical papers (e.g.
Cutler and Glaeser, 1997). Given that our work suggests that non-Tiebout motives must
matter, a more general focus is needed.4
This paper develops a sharp test of the Tiebout hypothesis. In contrast, most of
the existing literature investigates the extent of heterogeneity within communities, the
motives for household mobility, and the degree to which fiscal policies are capitalized
into property value (see Dowding et al, 1994).

But these results do not provide

satisfactory tests of the Tiebout hypothesis because, for example, it is unclear how large a
deviation from perfect sorting is necessary to reject the hypothesis.5 Our comparative
static provides a more meaningful test of Tiebout because it implies a direction of
change—to greater sorting—that is empirically refutable. We recognize that no single
piece of evidence presented here is convincing by itself, but the lack of strong support for

3

Mobility costs have been added to other locational choice models. Some examples are Carrington et al
(1996), Hercowitz and Pines (1999), and Kennan and Walker (2000).
4
Some fruitful approaches here could utilize club theory, which allows individuals to explicitly care about
their neighbor’s type (Scotchmer, 1994), and computational models, which can be constructed to deal with
complex and non-analytical migration motives (Kollman, Miller and Page, 1997). Bayer (2000) improves
upon the empirical literature by allowing residential choice to depend upon employment location and
community racial composition (i.e. neighbors’ “type”).
5
An implicit assumption in many empirical tests of Tiebout is that the system is in a consistent state of
disequilibrium perhaps due to random shocks. These frictions are needed to explain why individuals move
or why communities are heterogeneous. This is problematic since most Tiebout models consider static
equilibria.

3

Tiebout sorting in any of the dozen or so measures we analyze constitutes a serious
challenge to the hypothesis.
The empirical results are of independent interest because they contribute to two
current literatures. First, they advance the segregation literature, which explores the
spatial dispersion of racial, religious, and ethnic groups. No other paper has explored
segregation trends over such a long time period using such a wide variety of variables.
Our analysis complements Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor (1999) who analyze the
segregation patterns of blacks in urban areas between 1890 and 1990. Second, this paper
contributes to the growing literature on of the efficiency implications of heterogeneity
(e.g. Benabou, 1996). Alesina and La Ferrara (2000) show that community heterogeneity
reduces participation in various social groups. Goldin and Katz (1999) find that variation
in high school graduation rates across US states at the beginning of the twentieth century
was tied to the degree of religious heterogeneity. Our work provides new evidence on
historical trends in several measures of community heterogeneity, thereby informing
future work on this topic.
This paper is organized as follows. The next section extends the Tiebout model to
include mobility costs and derives the theoretical prediction that the remainder of the
paper tests: as mobility costs fall, heterogeneity across communities increases. Section
III documents the long-run decline in selected measures of moving costs. Section IV
investigates historical changes in the variation of local policy outcomes while Section V
examines trends in the dispersion of population characteristics that proxy for public good
preferences.

Section VI addresses some critiques of our tests and investigates

heterogeneity trends at the municipal level. Alternative explanations and implications are
briefly explored in the concluding section.

4

II. Adding Mobility Costs to the Tiebout Model
This section develops a model in which communities provide public goods and
individuals, who belong to types characterized by their preferences for public goods,
choose communities subject to mobility costs. As in the original Tiebout model, there is
no property or employment, and communities cannot exclude individuals. We make no
assumption about the initial distribution of types across communities.
Setup.
Consider a population of N individuals, indexed by i, allocated across C
communities. Letting ci be the community containing agent i, call A=(c1, c2, …, ci,…,
cN) the allocation of the N individuals over the C communities. Each community c
provides public goods, Gc∈G where G is a compact set. Gc can be a vector of local
policies, each of which may be real valued (such as taxes and spending) or unordered and
categorical (such as school curriculum contents).
We will assume that agents only care about Gc in their community.6 Further
assume that each agent belongs to a fixed type t characterized by the continuous utility
function, Ut(Gc). Let Gt be the unique ideal Gc∈G for type t, and presume there are T
types where T≤N.

In some of the results derived below, we will consider special

assumptions. In order of increasing restrictiveness they are:
Assumptions:
A1. Single-peaked preferences: Gc∈Â and Ut(Gc) is a twice-differentiable concave
function in Gc, where Ut”(Gc)<0, Ut’(Gc)>0 for Gc<Gt, Ut’(Gc)<0 for Gc>Gt, and
Ut’(Gt)=0.7
A2. Quadratic preferences: Gc∈Â and Utc=-(Gt-Gc)2.
Community decisions.
Suppose that each community c chooses Gc* to maximize the utility of its current
residents. Thus,
6

That is, individuals only care public good provision and not the characteristics of their neighbors. In
principle, richer neighbors are more desirable because they contribute a greater tax share to the community
budget constraint. The model implicitly rules out such income heterogeneity or presumes that only head
taxes are possible.
7
Single-peaked preferences can be understood as an individual maximizing a utility function containing a
public good G and a private goods x subject to a budget constraint including a tax for the public good. See
Romer and Rosenthal (1977).

5

(1)

Gc* = argmaxGc∈G ΣjUtj(Gc)

This Gc* exists given our assumptions. (1) is equivalent to majority rule with side
payments.8 Denote the set of community public goods as G=(G1*, G2*,… , GC*). Note
that some of the communities, z, may be empty, implying Gz*∈∅. In the migration
decisions, assume each agent treats any empty community as setting Gz* equal to her
ideal Gt.
Individual Location Decisions and the Equilibrium Concept.
Assume that the agents can move in some sequential order, i.e. one individual at a
time. This ordering may be deterministic or stochastic, so long as each agent’s expected
order in the sequence is finite. Refer to each agent’s turn to move as her location
decision event. When her decision event occurs, agent i can change communities at the
cost of mi units of utility. This “mobility cost” may be individual specific.9
Assume that the mobility decisions are myopic. That is, each agent i takes the
prevailing policies, G, as given (thereby ignoring how her move affects the communities’
decisions or causes other individuals to move) and only considers migrating to the
community currently yielding the highest utility for her type.
Definition of a myopic move: Under the myopic movement rule, agent i of type ti moves
from community d to community c at her location decision event if and only if:
(2)

Gc* = argmaxGe*∈G Uti(Ge*); and

(3)

Uti(Gc*) > Uti(Gd*) + mi.

In equilibrium, no individual will ever move from her current community no matter how
many times her decision event occurs.
Definition of an equilibrium: An equilibrium is an allocation A of individuals across
communities such that no agent would choose to move at her location decision event
given her mobility costs, mi.

8

Imagine individual locations are fixed. Assume that the majority rule outcome, GC’, does not maximize
aggregate welfare. The result is obvious if GC’ is Pareto dominated by GC*, so assume that some individuals
(“losers”) are better off under GC’ than with GC*. Then by the definition of argmax: (i) some individuals
must be better off under GC* (“gainers”); (ii) there must be a Pareto improving transfer from the gainers to
losers. This shows that GC’ could not be the majority rule outcome.

6

Social Welfare.
The aggregate measure of social welfare for any allocation A is the sum of all
agents’ utility:
(4)

W = ΣcΣi Uti(Gc*).

Note that W is defined without reference to the mobility costs, mi, because we are mainly
interested in using welfare to measure heterogeneity.
Results.
Tiebout’s famous claim is that if mobility costs are zero and the number of
communities C is at least as large as the number of types T, then individuals of each type
will sort themselves into homogeneous communities providing their ideal public good
bundle.

It is easy to show the following proposition, which captures the Tiebout

Hypothesis.
Proposition 1. If C³T and policies are set via (1), then W is maximized when each
community contains only one type.
Proposition 1 makes it clear that population heterogeneity reduces welfare in the Tiebout
model. This point can be further illustrated by the following example. Consider a model
with quadratic preferences, A2. To maximize total welfare via (1), a community c (with
Ntc residents of type t, making a total of Nc=ΣtNtc) should set Gc*=Σt(Ntc/Nc)Gt, the
population-weighted mean of the ideal policies. Welfare per capita in community c will
then equal the negative of the population-weighted variance of the ideal policies:
(5)

Wc* = -Σt(Ntc/Nc)(Gt- Gc*)2 = -Σt(Ntc/Nc)Gt2 +(Σt(Ntc/Nc)Gt)2.

Obviously, if preferences over public goods differ across types, per capita welfare in
community c would be maximized if its population were homogeneous. In this example,
the degree of heterogeneity of the community’s population can naturally be measured by
the population-weighted variance. In the general case, appropriately measuring or even
defining the degree of heterogeneity is more difficult. The important point is that in the
Tiebout model population heterogeneity is inversely related to social welfare.
9

We are assuming that mobility costs for individual i are constant across communities. The results below

7

By assuming that preferences satisfy the single-peaked condition A1 and that
public good provisions are set via (1), we can show that sorting is a self-reinforcing
process. The movement of an individual of type s increases the attractiveness of the
receiving community-- and reduces the attractiveness of the sending community-- for all
type s agents.

It has the opposite effects for some other types. (This is formerly

developed in Appendix A.) Even if other agents’ mobility costs are fixed, the movement
of a single agent can have cascading effects, inducing the movement of others.
In general, the dynamics can be quite complicated. The outcome depends upon
the distribution of agents (their types and individual mobility costs) across communities
and upon the specification of the sequential moving order (which may be stochastic).
This complexity motivates the myopic moving rule, which supposes an agent does not try
to solve through the general equilibrium implications of her move on the subsequent
public good provisions or the movements of others.10 An additional motivation is that in
a large population, a single individual has a negligible direct effect on the provision of
public goods.
Proposition 2 shows that any myopic move has a positive effect on social welfare
and, as a consequence, any reduction in mobility costs has a non-negative effect on social
welfare. Notice that no restrictions on individual preferences are needed for this result.
Proposition 2: When individual moves obey (2) and (3) and policies are set via (1),
a. Any individual move strictly increases W.
b. If mi falls, then individual i either stays or moves and if she moves, then W increases.
The process yields a new equilibrium with a higher W.
Proof:
a. Suppose that individual i moves from community d to c. The utility of three groups of
agents will be affected. First, the net effect among residents of community d except i is,
(6)

Σj/i [Utj(Gd/i*)-Utj(Gd*)] ≥ 0

where the inequality follows from the definition of argmax in (1) (over d/i versus d
alone). Second, the net effect among the initial residents of region c is,
(7)

Σj/i [Utj(Gc+i*)-Utj(Gc*)] ≤ 0

where the inequality follows from the definition of argmax in (1). Finally, the effect on
agent i has two components. From her myopic comparison of d and c,
will not change if these costs vary with some measure of “distance”.
10
For a sense of the complexity of this process, see Kollman et al (1997).

8

(8)

Uti(Gc*)-Uti(Gd*) > 0

where the inequality follows from (2) and (3). The other component considers how her
move will change G in c,
(9)

Uti(Gc+i*)-Uti(Gc*).

But (7)+(9) equal,
(10)

Σj/i [Utj(Gc+i*)-Utj(Gc*)]+Uti(Gc+i*)-Uti(Gc*) = Σj [Utj(Gc+i*)-Utj(Gc*)] ≥ 0

by definition of the argmax in (1). Thus the total effect (6)+(7)+(8)+(9) is positive.
b. If agent i moves, this may induce others to migrate. By part a, no matter how many
moves occur, W increases. This process must end in a finite number of moves (that is,
there exists an equilibrium) because there are a finite number of possible allocations and
each agent’s expected order in the location decision sequence is finite. No allocation can
re-occur because W is strictly increasing with each move.
Q.E.D.
Comments:
(i) The intuition of the argmax argument in (6), (7), and (10) is as follows: A
community cannot be made worse off by adjusting G to maximize the welfare of its
current residents. The remaining residents of d (excluding i) are, by definition, at least as
well off in aggregate under Gd/i* as under Gd*. Similarly, in aggregate the residents of c
(including i) are at least as well off under Gc+i* as under Gc*. The change in Gc may harm
its initial residents, but the gain to i more than offsets their losses.
(ii) Proposition 2 also holds in a world of Leviathan governments where the G is
fixed. Here, (6), (7) and (9) are each zero, but (8) is positive by (2) and (3).
(iii) The myopic moving rule, which implies that (8) is positive, plays a key role
in Proposition 2. Suppose instead that individuals are forward-looking and move if
(8)+(9) is positive. If (8) is negative, then in principle (6)+(7)+(8)+(9) could be negative
and the proposition does not hold (W decreases).11
11

In general, mobility inherently involves externalities, both positive and negative. Under the myopic
movement rule, an individual moves only if the receiving community is ex ante preferable. This means that
any move that benefits the individual also benefits society on net; that is, the benefits received by the mover
and the other residents of the sending community exceed the costs imposed on existing residents of the
receiving community. Under the non-myopic rule, an individual may find moving beneficial simply
because it makes the receiving community closer to her own tastes (ex post). This can impose costs on its
existing residents that are greater than the benefits that mover and the other members of the sending
community enjoy. Note that under either the myopic or non-myopic rules, there may be socially beneficial
moves that are not made when the private benefits fall short of the mobility costs.

9

A further issue of interest is how a reduction in mobility costs affects the
distribution of policy outcomes.
Observation: Under A1 with C=T=2 or under A2, when local polices are set via (1) then
sorting is associated with increased variation of policy outcomes across communities.
A formal demonstration of the result is contained in Appendix A. Consider first when A1
with C=T=2 holds.12 In this case, a community’s policy will be the weighted average of
the two types ideal policies where the weight on a type’s preference depends positively
on its population share. Any myopic move will widen the difference in policies between
the two communities by pushing the policy in the receiving (sending) community toward
(away from) the mover’s ideal G.

Now consider the second case which assumes

quadratic preferences, A2. Under (1) and A2, the policy in a given community is the
mean of residents’ ideal policies and the aggregate population-weighted mean policy is
independent of the distribution of types across communities. Any move obeying (2) and
(3) will widen the difference in policies between the sending and receiving communities,
increasing the total population-weighted variance of policies.
To summarize, the theoretical model developed in this section extends the Tiebout
framework to include mobility costs. Our results, while somewhat novel, are clearly in
the spirit of Tiebout’s argument. Mobility costs may prevent individuals from sorting
into homogeneous communities of their own type-- the allocation that maximizes social
welfare according to Tiebout. A reduction in mobility costs has a non-negative effect on
social welfare. Because social welfare in the Tiebout model is positively related to
sorting according to type, falling mobility costs increase heterogeneity between
communities. We also find that sorting increases the variation of local policy outcomes
under several variants of the model. The remainder of the paper tests these predictions
empirically.

12

The observation also holds in a generic case when the population is initially completely diffuse, implying
policies are identical across communities. At any level of greater sorting, the variation of policies across
communities will be weakly greater, and in the fully sorted equilibrium, the variation will be strictly
greater.

10

III. Documenting Declining Mobility Costs
The conventional wisdom holds that mobility costs have fallen over time. Yet
constructing a comprehensive measure to document this “truism” is difficult. Anyone
who has relocated knows that out-of-pocket expenditures represent only a fraction of the
costs of moving. As human capital theory suggests, these costs include the lost work
time-- organizing before departure, traveling, and getting back up to speed at the
destination. Given that real wages have generally risen, the value of this lost time would
be increasing.

However, several opposing forces more than offset this effect.

Improvements in transportation and the increased similarity of regional cultures mean
less time is now lost in the move.

During the colonial period, the rigors of the

transatlantic travel and the effects of exposure to a new disease environment were
purportedly so severe that newly imported slaves and indentured servants required six
months to two years to achieve positive levels of net output. Few migrants suffer such a
loss today.13 And, as we argue below, communication improvements have reduced one
of the key costs of moving, the lost contacts with one’s friends and extended family in the
home community.
There is clear evidence that physical moving costs have fallen over the last
century. The most obvious change is the spread of the personal automobile. In 1900,
there was roughly one passenger car for every 10,000 Americans; today, the ratio is
nearly one car for every two.

This change was due in part to sharp reductions in the

costs of owning and operating automobile. The careful calculations of Hiram Maxim, a
leading engineer, showed driving costs in 1903 equaled 143.8 cents per mile in 1998
dollars. The American Automobile Association estimates that the cost of driving the
more reliable, comfortable cars of today average 54.9 cents. Also facilitating the spread
of the personal car were massive investments in the nation’s system of public roads,
nearly doubling its mileage from 2.3 million in 1900 to almost four million today.14 An
13

D. Galenson, "Settlement and Growth of the American Colonies” Ch. 4 of Cambridge Economic History
of the United States, Vol. 1,
14
Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association, Motor Vehicle Facts and Figures: 1999, p. 51; Hiram Percy
Maxim, "Some Data on the Cost of Operating Automobiles for Commercial Purposes" Scientific American
Supplement No. 1479, 7 May 1904, pp. 23694-95. US Federal Highway Administration, Highway
Statistics, various years. This growth in mileage understates the true improvement in transportation access
because most early roads were little more than dirt pathways. In 1904, for example, “surfaced” roads made

11

important consequence of the spread of the automobile was to weaken the link between
work and residence locations, allowing greater Tiebout sorting.
Improvements in trains and airplanes have also significantly lowered mobility
costs. As the series in Figure 1 reveal, the real cost of railroad service was about onethird as expensive in 1995 (13.4 cents per passenger mile) as it was in 1895 (37.4 cents).
The real cost of air travel also fell sharply, with average airline revenues per passengermile dropping from about 108 cents in 1929 to 13.7 cents by 1995 (rough parity with
railroads). In addition, the speed of air travel nearly tripled since the early-1940s.
We also know that the real cost of moving household goods has fallen
substantially. Circa 1995, the real rate per ton-mile for a private COD shipment by a
household goods carrier averaged 57.8 cents, which is far less than the 88.1 cents charged
a decade before.

Tariff schedules filed with the Interstate Commerce Commission

indicate that the real rate per ton-mile for a “modern” shipment was approximately 147
cents in 1936, implying costs have fallen by over 60 percent between 1936 and 1995.15
The costs of in-town moves have declined as well. For example, when L. S. and Anna
Shoen established the U-Haul Co. in 1945 at Ridgeway, WA, they charged $2 per day for
a small trailer. Today renting such a trailer at I-5 Auto Sales near Ridgeway (or at many
of the firm’s other 15,000 retail locations) would cost $9.95 or about 40 percent less in
real terms.16
Long-run movements in communication costs reveal similar trends.

This is

important for several reasons. Lower communication costs improve information flows
about other regions, reducing uncertainty. In addition, they allow migrants to maintain
contacts with friends and family “back home.”

Finally, easier communication

up less than seven percent of total mileage. The first coast-to-coast auto trip across North America,
completed in 1903, purportedly took 65 days (http://www.nam.org/AboutMfg/timeline1901.html).
15
It appears that the average weight of shipments has also risen, climbing from somewhat under 2-tons in
the early period to 3-tons today, but this proportional increase is less than the fall in rates and is of course
endogenous to the price decrease. Over the 1994-96 period, the average billed shipment weighed just under
three tons (5919 pounds) and traveled 1261 miles. “Revenue Need and the Cost of Transporting Household
Goods Personal Effect Shipments,” http://www.avatar-moving.com. For 1936 rates, see Household Goods
Rates of A. D. Rymers & Sons, 12 MCC 541-544 (1939). For estimates of the average weight of shipments
in the past, see William Ashby, et al. Motor Truck Red Book 1940 Edition (New York: Traffic Publishing
Co. 1940) p. 24.
16
1945 information is from http://www.uhaul.com/corporate/company_history.html; downloaded 16 June
2000; current rental rates are based on a 19 June 2000 phone conversation with I-5 Auto Sales, Woodland
WA.

12

encourages more dispersed production activity, implying people are less tied to a
particular community for employment reasons (rather than for local policies). Figure 2
shows the real costs of making three-minute daytime telephone calls from New York to
Chicago and San Francisco have fallen almost continuously. To place a three-minute
transcontinental call in January 1915 (when service first became available) cost $20.70 in
current dollars, which was almost $314 in 1998 dollars. The real cost of such a call in
1995, even at ATT residential daytime rates, was less than three-tenths of one percent as
high.17
These falling mobility costs have apparently set more Americans on the move. In
1940, about 11 percent of the American population (five years and older) had lived in a
different county five years earlier. This fraction increased to 17 percent in 1970 and to
19 percent by 1990.

Another useful measure of long-trend mobility rates is the

percentage of the native population residing in their state-of-birth. In 1870, almost 77
percent of the native population resided in their state-of-birth. Since 1900, the fraction
has continuously fallen, with the most rapid rate of decline occurring during the 1940-70
period. By 1990, only about two-thirds of the native population resided in their state-ofbirth.18

Today’s migration rates appear sufficiently high to allow the American

population to achieve significant sorting across local jurisdictions according to policy
preferences, if they so desired.19
IV. Trends in the Dispersion of Local Taxes and Revenues
Given the secular decline of mobility costs, a natural test of the prediction of the
generalized Tiebout model is to examine historical trends in the dispersion of local fiscal
17

The reduction in postal rates, especially across country, was also notable. In 1860, during the Pony
Express period, it cost $10 in species to send a one-ounce letter between New York and San Francisco. By
1886, the cost fell to two cents in the currency of the day. “History of the US Postal Service,” USPS Web
Site, http://www.usps.gov/history.
18
The data on migration in 1940 are from IPUMS sample, http://www.ipums.umn.edu/~pmigration/; 1970
data are from the 1980 Census of Population Vol. 1 Characteristics of the Population Ch. C General Social
and Economic Characteristics pt. 1 United States Summary PC80-1-C1 (Dec. 1983) p. 1-18; 1990 are from
http://venus.census.gov/cdrom. Data on residence of state of birth are from the US Historical Statistics,
Series C1-14; 1980 Census of Population Vol. 1 Characteristics of the Population Ch. C General Social and
Economic Characteristics pt. 1 United States Summary PC80-1-C1 (Dec. 1983) p. 1-18; and from
http://venus.census.gov/cdrom.
19
Consider a population composed of two equally sized groups that are initially evenly distributed across
two regions. If 4 percent of the population moved every year in accordance with Tiebout “voting with their
feet” thinking, the regions would be completely segregated within 12.5 years.

13

outcomes and in the sorting of population types across localities. We now examine such
trends over the 1850-1990 period using counties-- the smallest government for which
consistent historical data are available-- as our unit of analysis.20 Whenever possible the
sample includes all counties in existence in a given year and the annual sample sizes are
presented in the tables and figures discussed below.21
The first test involves variation in local policy outcomes. We initially consider
per capita education spending, one of the most prominent local policies. As discussed
more fully in the Data Appendix, each county’s data includes all direct education
spending within its boundaries. Table 1 presents two heterogeneity measures over the
1890-1992 period. The first measure is the population-weighted coefficient of variation
(CV).

This measure increases with the standard deviation across counties while

controlling for changes in the mean (education spending grew significantly as income
increased). The second measure (DG) calculates the proportion of total spending in each
year which would have to be re-allocated across counties to yield a uniform, per capita
distribution (this is related to the dissimilarity index which is discussed in the next
section).22 Table 1 shows that both measures markedly decrease over time. The values
in 1992 are less than half of the 1890 values.
We consider two robustness checks (but omit the formal results in the interest of
brevity).

The first is to control for outliers by using the ratio of the inter-quartile

difference to the median (this is analogous to the CV but is less sensitive to outliers).
This ratio has a similar downward trend. The second is to control for state-fixed effects.
This is useful because intergovernmental grants and income, key determinants of local
20

It is worth noting that the growth in the number of counties by itself will increase the measured degree of
heterogeneity across counties. The number of counties rose from 1626 in 1850, to 2867 in 1900, 3065 in
1920 and 3141 in 1990. Much of this growth was due to splitting counties rather than incorporating new
area (for a graphical depiction, see http://www.ac.wwu.edu/~stephan/Animation/us.gif). Increasing the
number of communities induces a “statistical sorting,” which means that even if the spatial distribution of
types remains constant we should observe greater heterogeneity of either individual type or policy outcome.
To see this point, consider first the extreme case where every person lives in his own county. By definition
this case will have maximal heterogeneity since each county is composed of exactly one type of person. In
contrast, when there is only one county, there is minimal heterogeneity. (See Dowding et al, 1994 for a
detailed discussion of this issue.) This biases our indices in favor of accepting the Tiebout model, which
predicts a trend towards greater heterogeneity across counties. Finding the opposite pattern will be strong
evidence against the Tiebout model.
21
Data sources and detailed descriptions of all variables are contained in the Data Appendix. Alaska is
omitted due to inconsistencies in its county codes.

14

spending, vary widely across states.

(Note that intergovernmental grants mitigate

Tiebout sorting, thereby casting doubt on rigid use of Tiebout models.)

To create

heterogeneity measures controlling for state fixed effects, we substitute state-level
averages for the national average in the formulae. The modified measures continue to
decline, indicating that even within states there is decreasing heterogeneity of education
spending.
The second set of local policy outcomes we consider are real per capita taxes and
revenues. These measure the overall level of government activity in the county. Due to
data availability problems, we use four different variables: Tax1, taxes collected by
counties; Tax2, taxes collected by all local governments within the county; Rev1,
revenues collected by counties; and Rev2, revenues collected by all local governments
within the county.

The main difference between taxes and revenues is inter-

governmental grants, which were typically small before 1945.23 Table 2 presents the two
heterogeneity measures discussed above for the 1870-1992 period. As with education
spending, there is a sharp drop in the dispersion across counties of all four fiscal
measures. As an example, the CV for Tax2 fell by nearly one-half between 1870 and
1992. These downward trends are still apparent when we use state fixed effects or use
the ratio of the inter-quartile difference to the median as our heterogeneity measure
(results omitted).24
In conclusion, we find that local fiscal policies have converged substantially
across counties over the last century. This conflicts with the prediction of the generalized
Tiebout model that local policies should become more heterogeneous as mobility costs
decline. The rationale for the theoretical result was that falling mobility costs induce
greater sorting of individual preference types. We next investigate whether heterogeneity
of types across counties has in fact increased as predicted.

22

Formally, the second measure is 0.5G-1Σj Pj|Gj – G| where Gj is per capita spending in county j, G is mean
per capita spending for all counties, and Pj is the share of total population in county j.
23
For example, in 1902 local government taxes are 83.2 percent of local government revenues (U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1948). While intergovernmental grants grew in importance, local government taxes are still
39.4 percent of local government revenues in 1992.
24
Another concern is that there may be returns to scale in government services. Our county-level regression
analysis finds no consistent relationship between any of the per capita fiscal data and population and
population-squared (results omitted).

15

V. Trends in the Dispersion of Individual Types
The Tiebout framework presumes that an individual’s location decision depends
on his policy preferences. With the secular drop in mobility costs, the extended Tiebout
model predicts that policy preferences should become more heterogeneous across
communities. Such preferences are not directly observable, leading us to adopt the
strategy of examining numerous characteristics that proxy for individual types.25 For
each characteristic, we partition the population into mutually exclusive and exhaustive
categories. Our proxies are admittedly imperfect measures of the true types. But as we
argue in the next section, even if the observable characteristics are noisy signals or
available categories are too coarse, our measures of population heterogeneity should
remain informative.26
A. Proxies for Types
This sub-section motivates the preference proxies we use (details on their
construction and sources are in the Data Appendix). The first variable we consider is
party vote shares in presidential elections. The idea is that individuals vote for the party
whose platform is closest to their own ideal policy, implying those voting for a particular
party have similar preferences. If all individuals in a local area vote for the same party,
they are relatively alike and the area is homogeneous. If they split their votes, the area is
heterogeneous.27
Second, it is often observed that members of racial groups share economic
interests and maintain strong common party affiliations. For example, the General Social
25

An ideal test of our model would involve construction of multi-dimensional measures of individual types
(i.e. using the characteristics discussed below as inputs in a hedonic model of type). However, this would
require detailed, individual-specific information about all persons living in a given local jurisdiction. Such
data simply do not exist for the modern era.
26
There is also evidence that several of our type measures are transmitted from parents to children. Piketty
(1995) cites the extensive literature showing that political preferences have an important hereditary
component even after controlling for income and social class. Newport (1979) finds that in the mid-1970s
over two-thirds of individuals maintain their childhood religion.
27
It is important to notice that this measure only makes sense for elections over national office. This is
because party platforms are strategically set with the objective typically being vote maximization. Even
relatively homogeneous areas may split their vote on local offices because the local party platforms are
likely to be quite similar. For national offices, however, parties are likely to set their platforms in a way to
split the national vote. Individuals in a relatively homogeneous area are likely to have similar preferences
over national parties, and so they will cast their votes for only one party.

16

Survey (GSS) reports 39.3 percent of blacks (N=1,864) identify themselves as “Strong
Democrats” while only 12.5 percent of whites (N=3,675) do so. There are also notable
racial differences in the GSS over political ideology and attitudes towards government
redistribution.28 We use the black population share to proxy for these beliefs.
Third, we consider religion. Individuals affiliated with a particular religion share
their faith’s set of beliefs, values, and cultural traditions and are, therefore, likely to have
relatively similar policy preferences.29

In the GSS, 26.5 percent of self-identified

religious fundamentalists (N=162) and 23.1 percent of evangelicals (N=208) consider
themselves to be “Strong Republicans” while only 4.5 percent of religious liberals
(N=265) do so. One of the advantages of using religious affiliation is that it allows a fine
partition of the population: we can employ up to 27 denominational families.
We consider five other demographic proxies (some of which are only available
over a limited period). The first proxy involves age groups. The young population share
(those between 5 and 20 years old) proxies for families with children; such households
presumably prefer higher spending on local schools. Alternatively, the old population
share (those at least 65 years old) is used, since the elderly are more likely to oppose
education spending.30 The second proxy is the fraction of the adult population that is
married, which is also related to family structure and demand for school spending. Our
third proxy is the proportion of homes which are owner occupied. Home owners are
typically wealthier and have greater civic involvement in the community. The fourth
proxy is education level which is likely to be related to income, wealth, and attitudes
toward government. We use three groups: less than a high school degree, at least a high
school degree but not a college degree, and a college degree or more. Fifth, the foreign28

The General Social Survey (1999) is a micro dataset of individual attitudes collected over the 1972-96
period. The variables we consider here are “race,” “partyid,” “polviews,” “religid,” “nateducy,” and
“govunemp.”
29
Based on the 1990 National Election Study, Leege and Kellstedt (1993) show that affiliation with many
of the denominational families used in our analysis are strong predictors of individual voting behavior and
ideological preference. Iannaccone (1998) suggests that the link between religion and politics is largely
limited to moral and social issues such as school prayer and abortion. However, he only focuses on
evangelical-fundamentalist Protestants. Noll (1990) also documents the historical link between religion
and politics using largely non-quantitative analysis.
30
There is also some support from the GSS that age groups have distinct political beliefs. For example,
while 5.8 percent of those aged 18-20 (N=1,181) consider themselves “Strong Republicans,” 16.8 percent
of those aged 75 or older (N=2,311) do. The GSS also indicates that similar age differences exist for the
appropriate level of education spending.

17

born represents another distinctive population with important ramifications for local
politics. The foreign-born share is of additional interest because immigrants may sort
across communities for non-Tiebout motives, for example, to take advantage of social
networks or ports of entry.
Finally we consider income, the most natural measure of type. Unfortunately, the
Census did not begin reporting data on local income distribution until 1949. Categorical
information is available for both families and households (which include unattached
individuals). The Census lists 14 income groups in 1949, 17 income groups in 1979 and
25 groups in 1989. Although the county-level data cover only fifty years, we still expect
to see increased sorting by income across local communities if the generalized Tiebout
hypothesis holds.
B. Heterogeneity Measures
To measure the heterogeneity of the discrete types across communities, we
employ the dissimilarity index and the Gini coefficient.31 These measures, which are
commonly used in the segregation literature, have three important properties. First, they
vary between zero (when each type is equally represented in each community) and one
(when the types are completely segregated).

Thus a higher value indicates greater

heterogeneity. Second, they are normalized to control for the changing proportions of
types in the aggregate population, implying they are unaffected if the groups grow at
different rates nationally.32 Third, the measures weight the counties by their population.
The dissimilarity index is the most widely used segregation measure.

It shows

the proportion of individuals who would have to change communities to create an evenly
distributed population, expressed as a ratio of the number who would have to move if the
types were completely segregated. The Gini coefficient generalizes the dissimilarity
index. The main difference is that the Gini is sensitive to any change in the population
distribution whereas the dissimilarity index is affected only by shifts in types between

31

See Duncan and Duncan (1955), Massey and Denton (1988), and Reardon (1998). In all cases, we also
calculated an entropy index, which yielded essentially identical results and is omitted for space reasons.
32
More formally, suppose that each group reproduces at a different rate and that the offspring live in the
same community as the parents. If there are two groups, then both indices are invariant to the group growth
rates (proof available upon request).

18

‘surplus’ and ‘deficit’ communities. In multiple (≥2) type comparisons, the dissimilarity
index, D, and the Gini coefficient, GC, are defined as:
(11)

D = ½ ΣtΣjNj|Ptj – Pt|/(NΣtPt(1-Pt)).

(12)

GC = ½ ΣtΣkΣjNkNj|Ptk – Ptj|/(N2 ΣtPt(1-Pt)).

where, Nj is the total population in community j, N is the total population, Ptj is the share
of type t in community j and Pt is the share of type t in the total population.
Because the income distribution data is in ordered categories, we can perform a
more detailed within- and between-decomposition. We employ two additively separable
Theil measures,
(13)

I1 = m-1ΣjPjΣsPsjmsjlog(msj/mj) + m-1ΣjPjmjlog(mj/m)

(14)

I2 = ΣjPjΣsPsjlog(mj/msj) + ΣjPjlog(m/mj)

where mj is the mean income, Psj is now the proportion of individuals in income group s,
msj is the mean income of group s, all for community j, and m is the aggregate mean
income (Shorrocks, 1980). In the formulae, the first term is the within- component and
the second term is the between-component.

To investigate within-community

heterogeneity further, we also consider the Gini income coefficient and the CV.33
C. Empirical Results
This section investigates the historical evolution of the heterogeneity indices of
the type proxies. Figure 3 plots the heterogeneity measures for presidential votes in
elections between 1848 and 1988. (To register the importance of third parties, the figure
also shows the two-party vote share.)

Contrary to the prediction of the generalized

Tiebout model, there is a gradual downward trend, especially after 1892.34 For example,
the Gini trend line has a slope of ¾0.01040 per decade over the entire period, and of
33

Because the available data is grouped in income ranges, both lower- and upper-bound Gini’s are
computed for each community j,

GLj = (2mj)-1ΣsΣt PsjPtj |msj–mtj|
GUj = GLj + (mj)-1Σs Psj2 (msj–as-1)(as-msj) (as-as-1)-1
where as is the upper income boundary for income group s (see Gastwirth, 1972).
34
The 1860 election was highly unusual because four major parties- Republicans, Democrats, Southern
Democrats, and Constitutional Unionists- participated in the sectionally-divided contest.

19

¾0.01357 from 1892 on (the index decreases from 0.38 to 0.24 between 1892 and 1988).
Heterogeneity also falls (to a lessor degree) in the post-World War Two period. The
convergence of county election results could be due to the declining importance of third
parties.

But Figure 3 shows there is no such trend, and more importantly, the

heterogeneity measures calculated only for the two major parties also fall (figure
omitted). Nor are these patterns explained by the Democratic party’s slow loss of control
of the South. Figure 4, which plots the heterogeneity measures dropping the South from
the sample, displays the same general reduction in voting heterogeneity.35
The heterogeneity indices for the black population share decline more noticeably.
Figure 5 shows the dissimilarity index and Gini coefficient as well as the fraction of
blacks living in black majority counties. All series remain relatively flat from 1850 to
1890 and then begin falling. This reduction was quite dramatic: while 48.2 percent of
blacks lived in black majority counties in 1890, only 9.0 percent did so in 1990. This
pattern is consistent with the Great Migration of African-Americans from the South,
where they were over-represented (see Carrington et al, 1996). Nonetheless, excluding
the South yields indices that are lower than the national series but follow exactly the
same declining pattern (figure omitted). Our results run counter to Cutler, Glaeser and
Vigdor (1999) who find that black urban segregation increased from 1890 to 1970 and
then sharply declined. These contrasting results are likely due to the differences in the
scope and level of spatial aggregation of the two analyses. They consider segregation
within a city at the census-tract level whereas we are looking at all of the counties in the
U.S. Their analysis captures within city heterogeneity while our data largely measures
differences across urban and rural areas. So while the black rural-urban migration
tended to reduce heterogeneity at the county-level, it increased heterogeneity within cities
if new black migrants tended to live in disproportionately black census tracts.
The data on religious affiliation, displayed in Figure 6, also reveal counties are
becoming more alike over time.36 (The series has a break in 1890 when the unit of
35

The South includes Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.
36
One caveat to these results is that the group sizes do not sum to one because some individuals are
affiliated with religions not in the sample or are unaffiliated. When these two groups are lumped together,
the series is essentially flat. We are skeptical of the validity of this series since it groups together two quite
different groups of individuals, the unaffiliated and the non-sampled.

20

observation shifts from seatings to church members.) A similar pattern is present when
the South is omitted. Figure 7 presents data for the age groups. The heterogeneity
indices for the young population share have no strong trend, though dispersion clearly
falls in the post World War Two period. In this same period there is a slight growth in
the heterogeneity of the old, but this is swamped by the reduction since 1850.37 The
overall decline in heterogeneity among the elderly is particularly noteworthy because it
runs counter to the tremendous growth of retirement communities in Florida and Arizona.
Figure 8 shows the heterogeneity trends for home-owner occupation and
education levels for roughly the last fifty years. The home-ownership indices each fall by
a quarter over the 1930-90 period while the education indices decline slightly between
1940 and 1990. Figure 9 shows information about the foreign-born population share.
There is a slight downward trend in heterogeneity over the whole sample but a noticeable
rise between 1960-90.

The increase at the end of the sample is due to the

disproportionately rapid growth of Hispanics in California, Texas, Florida, New Jersey,
and New York. The one proxy which exhibits increasing heterogeneity is the proportion
married (figure omitted). The dissimilarity index has a small increase from 0.06 in 1930
to 0.10 in 1990.
It is also interesting to consider the absolute level of sorting. Of all the proxies,
only race in the pre-1940 period displays a high degree of heterogeneity, that is, a
dissimilarity index exceeding the conventional standard of 0.6 (see Cutler, Glaeser and
Vigdor, 1999, p. 458). This also seems to be at odds with Tiebout’s predictions of sorting
by type.
Finally, Table 3 presents income inequality/heterogeneity measures for 1949,
1979 and 1989. The generalized Tiebout model predicts that decreasing mobility costs
will induce better sorting by individuals according to income groups, leading to
decreasing income inequality within counties and increasing inequality between counties.
We first create two within-county measures. We calculate a CV and Gini index for the
income distribution in each sample county and then average the county values using
population-weights. Contrary to the prediction that the within-county measures should
37

While there is no county-level electronic data for the elderly between 1870 and 1940, we were able to
compile a state-level time series over the period 1870-1970. The dissimilarity index computed from this
data falls continuously, particularly during the period where we have no county data.

21

fall, these measures in 1989 were generally close to their 1949 levels. (Note that the
measures fell slightly between 1949 and 1979, but the increases over the next decade
more than offset these changes.) We next create two Theil decomposition measures to
account for inequality both within- and between-counties. The empirical results in the
second panel of Table 3 also undermine the generalized Tiebout model because the
within-county inequality measures are roughly constant while the between-county
measures decrease.
In conclusion, this evidence indicates a reduction in heterogeneity of preference
types across counties over the twentieth century. The actual decline in heterogeneity is
even greater than our figures suggest due to the statistical sorting induced by the growing
number of counties (cf. footnote 20). This is in conflict with the prediction of the
generalized Tiebout model since mobility costs have fallen over this period.
VI. Potential Criticisms
This section addresses two possible criticisms of applying our empirical results to
test the Tiebout hypothesis: the use of preference type proxies and the use of counties
rather than smaller governments.38 We consider each of these issues in turn. One
concern is that we are only using proxies rather than actual policy preferences in Section
V. But even if the observable characteristics are noisy signals of the true types or
available categories are coarse, our measures of population heterogeneity should remain
informative. Consider the case where the available proxies are coarse, and consequently
combine several distinct types. According to Tiebout’s reasoning, each of the types will
sort into separate homogeneous communities. Our heterogeneity measures using the
coarse proxies will still register the sorting.
Now take the case where the proxies are noisy signals. As a simple example
developed in Appendix A shows, as long as the conditional probabilities linking the
38

It has also been suggested to us that the observed decline in heterogeneity across counties was driven by
the shift from a rural to urban society. The idea here is that rural areas are closer to Tiebout's homogeneous
communities while cities tend to be a more diverse. To investigate this conjecture, we repeated our
analysis with a sample restricted to those counties where at least 85 percent of the population was rural in
1990. (Roughly 30 percent of the counties meet this criterion.) For all measures but one, the same
downward heterogeneity trends are apparent. (The one exception is race, which remains roughly constant
over the 1890-1990 period.) Overall, these results run counter to the prediction that these rural counties
should have constant or increasing heterogeneity over time.

22

proxies to the true types are distinct and constant, when the unobservable types sort, there
is also increased sorting of observable proxies.

This suggests an explanation for

decreasing observed heterogeneity that is compatible with the Tiebout model, namely that
these conditional probabilities have become less distinct over time. For example, Baptist
affiliation could provide a weaker signal about political preferences in 1990 than in 1850.
Thus, the observed types might appear less sorted over counties even if the true types are
becoming more sorted.39
To investigate whether our proxies have lost their salience, we estimate the
regression,
(15)

Y = a×tproxy + e

where Y is either taxes per capita, revenues per capita, or the presidential vote share and
tproxy is the vector of our proxies available over the full sample. We evaluate this
equation separately for each year at the county level using least squares with population
weights. If the proxies became less relevant over time they should do a poorer job
explaining the variation in local policies or presidential vote shares. No such trends are
apparent. In regressions explaining local taxes, the R2 equals 0.56 in 1870 and lies in the
0.4-0.7 range over the 1962-92 period. In regressions explaining presidential vote shares,
the R2 actually rises, climbing from 0.16 in 1852 to 0.44 in 1988. Moreover, the
decreasing salience argument cannot be used to explain all of the data within the Tiebout
framework. It is difficult to understand the reduced heterogeneity across counties in
presidential voting, education spending, local taxes, and revenues, since these are direct
measures of preferences and policy outcomes.
A second concern is that the county is too coarse a unit of analysis and that
Tiebout sorting applies only to smaller government units, such as municipalities and
school districts, which provide most local public services. We offer four responses to this
critique. First, Tiebout (1956, p. 418) originally argued that his sorting argument applied
to all local governments and “with less force to state governments.” (We have replicated
39

Suppose the true type is a linear combination of the proxy and some unobserved component, t = atproxy +
(1-a)tunobs with aÎ[0,1], tproxy^tunobs. Say that initially the proxy is a perfect measure of type but eventually
becomes uninformative (ainitial = 1 ® afinal = 0), and that there is always complete sorting of the true t’s
across communities. The observed proxies will be perfectly sorted initially but by the end of the sample
will be completely unsorted.

23

our heterogeneity analysis at the state level and found the same basic patterns.) Second,
counties often do have important fiscal responsibilities. Over the sample period, the
county government share of total local taxation ranged between 24 percent (1992) and 37
percent (1870). While many county expenditure programs are low profile, counties
typically control or strongly influence highway and police spending policies. Given
voters care about such policies and taxes, Tiebout sorting should occur at the county
level. In fact, our results indicate reduced sorting of type proxies even in states where
counties have major fiscal responsibilities.40 Also, it is worthwhile recalling that counties
are the most important local governments in many southern and southwestern states.
Third, this critique does not explain the observed reduction in heterogeneity across
counties. If Tiebout sorting is occurring at a sub-county level, there must be increased
mixing within counties of different types of municipalities and school districts over time.
Fourth, we can offer a direct test of the critique by replicating our analysis on the
92 municipalities in the Boston SMSA (1980 definition).41

This area provides an

attractive test case for several reasons. Boston has been intensely studied and is often put
forward as the archetype of the Tiebout model. Massachusetts counties have few fiscal
responsibilities and municipalities typically directly provide public schooling, one of the
most prominent local public goods. This means any Tiebout sorting occurring at the subcounty (municipal) level should be apparent here. In addition, there is clear evidence of a
secular decline in intra-Boston SMSA transportation costs.42 Finally, detailed municipal
demographics, election outcomes, and government finances are available for the Boston
area dating back to the late-nineteenth century.
Three results are apparent in Table 4 and Figure 10. First and most importantly,
the same heterogeneity trends are found at the municipal and county levels. (This is not
surprising given both sets of indices are principally driven by high-population areas.)
40

Our formal test is to limit the sample to counties in states that have high per capita county spending. We
use the 1992 data reported in the US Bureau of the Census (1997) as our benchmark and define a state as
“high spending” if per capita county spending is greater than $850. The U.S. average is $691. The high
spending states are California, Florida, Hawaii, Maryland, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, Tennessee,
Virginia and Wyoming (Alaska is also a high spending state but it is omitted in all samples). We repeated
all of our former analysis on these counties and found the same downward trend in heterogeneity though it
is not as steep as in the full sample.
41
The Data Appendix contains details on the data sources.
42
For example, see the discussion of the development of the Boston mass transit system in George
Sanborn, The Chronicle of the Boston Transit System. www.mbta.com.

24

This suggests that our general focus on county-level data is not masking sub-county
Tiebout sorting.

Second, the municipal-level political and government expenditure

measures are not consistent with increased Tiebout sorting. As Table 4 shows, the
population-weighted CV of total government spending, measured by the per capita
current operation budget, falls over the 1906-92 period. We also investigate two major
spending categories, protection (basically police plus fire services) and education, which
typically comprise over one-half of total spending. The CV for per capita protection
spending falls while the CV for per capita education spending remains roughly
constant.43 Figure 10 shows no clear trend in heterogeneity across municipalities of
presidential election votes over 1868 to 1988. There is even a trend towards reduced
heterogeneity over the last fifty years.44 Third, the demographic variables often do show
growing heterogeneity between communities as the generalized Tiebout model predicts
(figures omitted). But none of the dissimilarity indices ever reach 0.6, the conventional
standard for a high degree of heterogeneity.45 The population of the Boston SMSA is far
from the level of sorting that Tiebout would predict.
In conclusion, it appears that counties do provide an appropriate test of the
generalized Tiebout model. Not only do counties have important fiscal responsibilities
but they manifest similar trends in heterogeneity as do municipalities (at least for the
Boston area). And despite selecting a case study where municipalities have significant
fiscal powers, we do not find strong evidence for Tiebout’s prediction of increased
sorting at a sub-county level.

43

There is a spike up in education spending heterogeneity in the 1960s which stems from Boston’s relative
reduction in education spending. Sacks (1972) documents that most urban school districts reduced
spending relative to their suburban counterparts during this period. The elimination of the urban-suburban
spending gap by the mid-1970s can likely to be linked to costs associated with forced busing in Boston (see
Sheehan, 1984) and changes in the state school aid formula (see Weiss, 1970).
44
The same pattern remains if we only consider votes for the two largest parties in each year.
45
It is more difficult to say what a “small” degree of heterogeneity is for income. However, our
(unreported) within- and between-Theil indices are comparable to those in Mookherjee and Shorrocks
(1982) who decompose income inequality between age groups for the entire UK over 1965-1980. They are
also similar to our earlier county-level values for the US as a whole. Strong Tiebout sorting should have
induced smaller within- and larger between-inequality for the Boston municipal-level sample.

25

VII. Conclusion
This paper considers a new test of the Tiebout hypothesis related to the secular
decline in mobility costs. The augmented Tiebout model predicts greater heterogeneity
across communities in both resident preferences and government policies as movement
becomes easier. However, we find little evidence that the Tiebout mechanism played a
dominant role in sorting over the last 150 years. In fact a wide variety of preference and
policy variables indicate that communities (as measured by counties) have become more
alike one another. These results call into question the local public economics literature
that adopts a rigid Tiebout framework to explain community composition and mobility
choices.
Although a full investigation of the forces causing the decline in heterogeneity
across communities must be reserved for future work, we briefly consider several
alternatives. One possibility involves changing production relationships. For example,
the complementarities between different types of labor may have increased. If it has
grown increasingly important to reside near others with different characteristics (and
correlated preferences), then Tiebout sorting may not occur. A second factor could be
changing attitudes. There may be a growing fraction of the population who prefer to live
in more diverse communities. Such demand for heterogeneity may be a normal good, so
income growth would promote greater mixing of different types of individuals. A related
point involves the dramatic changes in racial attitudes in the post-World War Two period.
The fear of being a minority, subject to exploitation or simply to having one’s political
preferences ignored, may have decreased, leading members of small groups to spread out.
A third mechanism involves immigrants.

It is common to think of first-generation

migrants clustering together with others of their own type (language, religion, ethnic
capital). As immigration rates fell (until the most recent period), these “ports of entry”
have declined in importance, leading to less apparent sorting. However, the increased
segregation of the foreign-born over the last 30 years seems to run contrary to this
explanation.
Finally, the rapid growth of the federal government since the New Deal may have
made local-level policies less significant factors in individual residential decisions. The
alternative motives discussed above may have become more important as the independent

26

role of local governments has waned.

But this point raises concerns regarding the

contemporary movement to devolve political decision-making to a more decentralized
level. Tiebout is often invoked, explicitly or implicitly, to justify decentralized provision
of government policies. Tiebout argued that because the residents of each community
share relatively similar preferences, local provision can avoid the free-rider problem
associated with public goods.

The results in this paper cast serious doubt on this

presumed advantage of decentralization. Whatever benefits devolution provides in the
long run, our analysis leads us to expect local conflict and population re-sorting in the
short run.
Regardless of the underlying mechanisms, it is clear that in aggregate the forces
driving individual location decisions are neither consistent with nor simply independent
of Tiebout motives. Over the past century, these forces have worked powerfully to
counteract Tiebout sorting.

While Tiebout predicts that heterogeneity across

communities should increase, we find the opposite for a wide variety of local policy
outcomes, elections, and demographic measures. Incorporating these new results into
models of local public finance will be an important and challenging avenue for future
work.

27

References
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2000). Participation in Heterogeneous
Communities. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Bayer, Patrick (2000). Tiebout Sorting and Discrete Choices: A New Explanation for
Socioeconomic Differences in the Consumption of School Quality. Yale
University working paper.
Benabou, Roland (1996). Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic
Implications of Community Structure and School Finance. American Economic
Review. 86: 584-609.
Bewley, Truman (1981). A Critique of Tiebout's Theory of Local Expenditures.
Econometrica. 49: 713-40.
Carrington, William, Enrica Detragiache and Tara Vishwanath (1996). Migration with
Endogenous Moving Costs. American Economic Review. 86: 909-930.
Cutler, David M. and Edward L. Glaeser (1997). Are Ghettos Good or Bad? Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 112: 827-72.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser and Jacob L. Vigdor (1999). The Rise and Decline
of the American Ghetto. Journal of Political Economy. 107: 455-506.
Duncan, O. and B. Duncan (1955). A Methodological Analysis of Segregation Indices.
American Sociological Review. 20:210-17.
Dowding, Keith, Peter John and Stephen Biggs (1994). Tiebout: A Survey of the
Empirical Literature. Urban Studies. 31: 767-97.
Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer (1991). Mobility and Redistribution. Journal of
Political Economy. 99: 828-858.
Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg (1999). Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local
Jurisdictions. Journal of Political Economy. 107: 645-81.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson (1998). Public Education and Income
Distribution: A Dynamic Quantitative Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform.
American Economic Review. 88: 813-833.
Gastwirth, Joseph L. (1972). The Estimation of the Lorenz Curve and the Gini Index.
Review of Economics and Statistics. 54: 306-16.

28

Glomm, Gerhard and Roger Lagunoff (1999). A Dynamic Tiebout Theory of Voluntary
vs. Involuntary Provision of Public Goods. Review of Economic Studies. 66: 659677.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz (1999). Human Capital and Social Capital: The
Rise of Secondary Schooling in America, 1910 to 1940. Journal of
Interdisciplinary History. 29: 683-723.
Hercowitz, Zvi and David Pines (1997). Migration Between Home Country and
Diaspora: An Economic Analysis. Journal of Public Economics. 65: 45-59.
Iannaccone, Laurence R. (1998). Introduction to the Economics of Religion. Journal of
Economic Literature. 36: 1465-95.
Kennan, John and James Walker (2000). Geographical Wage Differentials, Welfare
Benefits and Migration. Working paper.
Kollman, Ken, John H. Miller and Scott E. Page (1997). Political Institutions and Sorting
in a Tiebout Model. American Economic Review. 87: 977-92.
Leege, David C. and Lyman A. Kellstedt, ed. (1993). Rediscovering the Religious Factor
in American Politics. M.E. Sharpe, Armonk, NY.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton (1988). The Dimensions of Residential
Segregation. Social Forces. 67(2): 281-315.
Mookherjee, Dilip and Anthony Shorrocks (1982). A Decomposition of the Trend in UK
Income Inequality. Economic Journal. 92: 886-902.
Nechyba, Thomas (1997). Local Property and State Income Taxes: The Role of
Interjurisdictional Competition and Collusion. Journal of Political Economy. 105:
351-385.
Nechyba, Thomas (2000). Mobility, Targeting, and Private-School Vouchers. American
Economic Review. 90: 130-146.
Newport, Frank (1979). The Religious Switcher in the United States. American
Sociological Review. 44: 528-52.
Noll, Mark A., ed. (1990). Religion and American Politics: From the Colonial Period to
the 1980s. Oxford University Press, New York.
Piketty, Thomas (1995). Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics. Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 110: 551-84.
Reardon, Sean (1998). Stata module to compute multiple-group diversity and segre-

29

gation indices. ideas.uqam.ca/ideas/data/Softwares/bocbocodeS375001.html.
Romer, Thomas and Rosenthal, Howard (1977). Bureaucrats Versus Voters: On the
Political Economy of Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy. Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 93: 563-87.
Sacks, Seymour (1972). City Schools/Suburban Schools: A History of Fiscal Conflict.
Syracuse University Press, Syracuse.
Scotchmer, Suzanne (1994). Public Goods and the Invisible Hand, Chapter 4 in Modern
Public Finance edited by J. Quigley and E. Smolensky, Harvard University Press.
Sheehan, J. Brian (1984). The Boston School Integration Dispute: Social Change and
Legal Maneuvers. Columbia University Press, New York.
Shorrocks, A. F. (1980). The Class of Additively Decomposable Inequality Measures.
Econometrica. 48: 613-26.
Tiebout, Charles (1956). A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political
Economy. 64: 416-24.
Weiss, Steven (1970). Existing Disparities in Public School Finance and Proposals for
Reform. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Research Report 46.

30

Appendix A
This appendix contains the example of sorting with single-peaked preferences, proofs of
cases where sorting is associated with increased policy variation, and an example
mapping observed characteristics into unobserved true types.
Example A: Sorting with Single-Peaked Preferences
A preliminary: define the initial level of variable X as X0 and the level after one agent of
type s moves as X1.
Example A: Suppose individual preferences satisfy A1 and communities set their policies
according to (1). If an agent of type s moves from community d to c, then
(i)
|Gc*1-Gs|≤|Gc*0-Gs| and |Gd*1-Gs|≥|Gd*0-Gs|;
(ii)
Us(Gc*1) ≥Us(Gc*0) and Us(Gd*1)≤Us(Gd*0);
(iii) Ut(Gc*1)≥Ut(Gc*0) ∀ t such that sign(Gt-Gc*1)= sign(Gs-Gc*1);
(iv)
Ut(Gc*1)≤Ut(Gc*0) ∀ t such that sign(Gt-Gc*0)= -sign(Gs-Gc*0);
(v)
Ut(Gd*1)≤Ut(Gd*0) ∀ t such that sign(Gt-Gd*0)= sign(Gs-Gd*0);
(vi)
Ut(Gd*1)≥Ut(Gd*0) ∀ t such that sign(Gt-Gd*1)= -sign(Gs-Gd*1).
To explain this example, we focus on the case for the receiving community because the
case of the sending community is analogous. If public good provision is set by (1), the
first order condition Σt Ntc Ut’(Gc*)=0 must be satisfied, where Ntc is the number of type
t in community c. If one more person of type s moves in, holding the other Ntc constant,
the weight on the Us’(Gc*) increases. Unless Us’(Gc*0)=0, the community must move
Gc* closer to Gs to satisfy the new first order condition. This increases the utility of type
s and all types on the same side of Gc*1 as s and reduces the utility of all types on the
other side of Gc*0. The inequalities are strict unless Us’(Gc*0)=0.
Proof of the Observation.
Examples B and C provide conditions under which sorting is associated with increased
variation of policy outcomes across communities.
Example B: If preferences satisfy A1 and there are two communities and two types of
individuals, then migration obeying (2) and (3) increases the differences between the
communities’ policies. Call the two communities c and d and the two types r and s,
where Gr<Gs. Let Ni be the total population of type i and let Nic be the number in
community c. Given Nrc and Nsc, Gc* will be set where NrcUr’(Gc*)=-NscUs’(Gc*). Note
that Ur’(Gc*)<0<Us’(Gc*) and that d[Us’(Gc*)/(-Ur’(Gc*))]/dGc*<0. By the implicit
function theorem, we can solve for Gc*=H[Nrc/Nsc] where H’<0, H[0]=Gs and H[∞]=Gr.
By a similar argument, Gd*=H[(Nr-Nrc)/(Ns-Nsc)].
If Nrc/Nsc>N1/N2, then
Gr≤Gc*<Gd*≤Gs. Community c will be the preferred community for type r and
community d for type s. Migration obeying (2) and (3), which increases in Nrc and Nsd,
causes greater segregation and widens the differences between the communities’ policies:
d|Gd*-Gc*|/dNrc>0 and d|Gd*-Gc*|/dNsd>0.

31

Example C: If preferences are quadratic A2, then any move obeying (2) and (3)
increases the aggregate population-weighted variance of policies. Under A2 and (1), the
policy in a given community is the mean of members’ ideal policies and the aggregate
population-weighted mean, χ, is independent of the distribution of types across
communities. An agent i of type s will move from community d (initially with Nd0
members) to community c (with Nc0 members) if (Gc*0-Gs)2+mi<(Gd*0-Gs)2. Such a
move will change the policy in community d from Gd*0 to Gd*1=(Gd*0Nd-Gs0)/(Nd0-1)
and that in c from Gc*0 to Gc*1=(Gc*0Nc0+Gs)/(Nc0+1). Such a move will not affect the
population-weighted mean of policies in c and d, i.e. Nc0Gc*0+NdGd*0=(Nc0+1)Gc*1
+(Nd0-1)Gd*1. Nor will it change the aggregate mean or policies in communities other
than c and d. But such a move does raise the population-weighted variances of policies:
Σe[Ne1(Ge*1-χ)2-Ne0(Ge*0-χ)2]/N
= [Nc0(Gc*0)2+Nd0(Gd*0)2-(Nc0+1)(Gc*1)2-(Nd0-1)(Gd*1)2 ]/N
= [(Nc0/(Nc0+1))(Gc*0-Gs)2-(Nd0/(Nd0-1))(Gd*0-Gs)2]/N > 0
where the inequality follows from (Nc0/(Nc0+1))<1<(Nd0/(Nd0-1)) and (Gc*0-Gs)2<(Gd*0Gs)2.
Example of Proxies as Noisy Signals
Example D: Suppose there are two true preference types, say ‘yes’ and ‘no’ opinions
regarding a particular policy. Suppose that the ‘yes’ camp makes up a fraction, p, of the
population and the ‘no’ camp the remainder, but that these fractions are unobservable.
Suppose, instead, we can observe the proportion of the population, s, possessing some
characteristic that plays no direct role in the sorting behavior. Denote the probability of
choosing ‘yes’ conditional on the presence of the characteristic as q and conditional on its
absence as r. These probabilities must satisfy the equation: p=sq+(1-s)r. Note that either
(i) p=q=r; (ii) q>p>r; or (iii) q<p<r.
If the observable types have any distinct opinions (case (ii) or (iii) holds), then the
distribution of the characteristic will be related to the unobservable type. Without loss of
generality, let q>r. This means that individuals possessing the characteristic are more
likely to favor the policy. We know that the fraction of the population possessing the
characteristic is s=(p-r)/(q-r). Simple calculus shows ds/dp>0. This means an increase in
the fraction of individuals favoring the policy implies an increase in the fraction
possessing the correlated characteristic.

32

Data Appendix (not for publication, to be made available on the web).
Mobility Costs: Sources of Figures 1-2
Figure 1: Transportation Costs
Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States on CD-ROM: Colonial
Times to 1970 - Bicentennial Edition, Susan B. Carter et al., ed., Cambridge University
Press 1997), Vol. I, pp. 210-11; Vol. II, pp. 727, 769-70; 1998 Economic Report of the
President, H. Doc. 105-176, Washington, DC. GPO, Table B-60. US Department of
Transportation, Transportation Statistics Annual Report, various years.
Figure 2: Real Cost of Communications
Historical Statistics of the United States, Vol. I, pp. 210-11; Vol. II, pp. 784, 790; Federal
Communications Commission, 1999 Statistics of Communications Common Carriers,
Table 7.1-AT&T Historical Rates at Years’ End; 1998 Economic Report of the President,
H. Doc. 105-176, Washington, DC. GPO, Table B-60.
County Data
The variables below are considered at the county level. All counties are included though
data for Alaska is omitted because of inconsistencies in its county codes. The number in
parentheses following each data source indicates the years for which that source is used.
Policy outcomes
Education Spending
Frequency: Sporadic (1890, 1932); every five years (1957-1992). Sources: US Census
Office, 1895 (1890), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1935 (1932), ICPSR study 7736 (19571972), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1998 (1977-1992).
Notes: In all cases the values sum up education spending by all governments within each
county and include capital expenditures. The exact definitions of the spending categories
are: for 1890, “ordinary expenditures on public common schools;” for 1932 “[school]
government-cost payments operation and maintenance;” for 1957-1992 “direct general
expenditures for education” which include spending on all education institutions within
the county. See also the note in the taxes and revenues section below regarding New
York area counties.
Taxes and Revenues
Frequency: Approximately every 10 years (1870-1942); every five years (1957-1992).
Sources: the Census of Government. ICPSR study 3 (1870-1880), US Census Office,
1895 (1890), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1908 (1902), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1915
(1913), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1924 (1922), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1935 (1932),
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1944 (1942), ICPSR studies 7736, 8256, 9251 (1957-1987),
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1998 (1992).
Notes: (i) Data for the five counties in the greater-New York area (Bronx, Kings, New
York, Queens, Richmond) are aggregated into one county. This is necessary since the
Census puts all city spending in just one county, but shifts the identity of this county over

33

time. All results are qualitatively similar if instead these five counties are excluded. (ii)
Rhode Island is excluded because its counties have no fiscal responsibilities. (iii) Only
certain variables are available each year. The four possible categories are: taxes collected
by counties, Tax1; taxes collected by all local governments—county, minor civil
divisions, school districts, etc.—within the county, Tax2; revenues— including intergovernmental grants but excluding inter-local government grants— collected by
counties), Rev1; and revenues collected by all local governments within the county, Rev2.
The available data are: 1870-80: Tax1, Tax2; 1890-1913: Rev1 (“gross receipts”); 1922:
Tax1; 1932: Rev1; 1942: Tax1, Rev1; 1957: Rev2; 1962-92: Tax2, Rev2.
Preference Proxies
Party vote shares in presidential elections
Frequency: every 4 years. Sources: ICPSR studies 8611 (1850-1972) and 13 (1976-88).
Each election includes vote shares for Democrats and Republicans (except 1852 when
Whigs are included) and significant minor parties (Socialists are included in 1912-32). In
addition, each election included an “all others” category to ensure the vote shares sum to
1. For certain observations in ICPSR study 8611, the sum of the party vote shares is less
than or greater than 1 (these discrepancies were confirmed by Erik Austin, the data
archive director at ICPSR). In such cases the vote share are re-allocated in proportion to
their stated values with the resulting shares now summing to 1.
Black population share
Frequency: every 10 years. Sources: ICPSR studies 3 (1850-1970), 9693 (1980) and U.S.
Census Bureau, 1994b (1990). The data for 1850-60 are the sum of the population
categories “free colored” and “slave.” The data for 1870-80 are for the population
category “colored.” The data for 1890-1970 are for the population category “negro.”
The data for 1980-90 are for the population category “black.”
Religion shares
Frequency: every 10 years for 1850-70, 1906-36, 1980-90. Additional observations in
1890, 1952, 1971. Sources: ICPSR studies 3 (1850-70, 1890), 8 (1906-52), and Roper
Center (1952, 1971, 1980, 1990). The data for 1850-70 is for the number of
accommodations or sittings; the data for 1890 is for both the number of seatings and
members; the data for the remaining years is for the number of members. No data was
collected in 1880. The data for 1952 is from both ICPSR study 8 and Roper Center.
Because the particular groups included in the files change over time (due largely to
schisms and mergers), the data was aggregated into the following 27 denominational
families: Adventist, Baptist, Black Baptist, Catholic, Communal, Congregationalist,
Disciples of Christ, Eastern Liturgical, Episcopalian, Friends, Fundamentalist, Holiness,
Jewish, Lutheran, Mennonite, Metaphysical, Methodist, Black Methodist, Moravian,
Mormon, New Age, Pentecostal, Presbyterian, Reformed, Unitarian-Universalist,
Members of other bodies, and Non-classified. This classification scheme is based on the
list in Melton (1978). Some denominations are not present in all years. All values are
normalized by the county population. In one of our classification schemes we also
generate an “unaffiliated” or non-sampled group to ensure the groups sum to 1. In certain
years the sum of the group shares exceed 1 due to the manner in which the data is
collected (these cases were confirmed by consulting the hard-copy versions of the various
34

studies). When this happens, the groups are re-allocated in proportion to their stated
values with the resulting shares now summing to 1. We uncovered some errors in the
data which we corrected by consulting hard-copy versions of the statistics. A full list of
these discrepancies as well as details of our classification scheme are available upon
request.
Young population share
Frequency: every 10 years. Sources: ICPSR studies 3 (1850-1950, 1970), 7736 (1960),
9693 (1980), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1994b (1990). Generally, the young are defined
as those 5-20 years old. Because of data coding, this had to be modified in several years.
1850-60: young = 5-19 years old; 1870: young = 5-18 years old; 1880: young = 5-17
years old; 1910: young = 6-20 years old; 1920-30: young = 7-20 years old; 1980: young
= 6-17 years old + 0.5´18-24 years old.
Old population share
Frequency: every 10 years (with gaps). Sources: ICPSR studies 3 (1850-60), U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1932 (1930), 7736 (1950-70), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1998b (198090). The old are defined as those at least 65 years old. In 1850 and 1860, half of the
individuals in the age category 60-69 year olds were counted as old as well as all
individuals 70 years and older. No electronic data exists for this age group between 1870
and 1940.
Marriage rate
Frequency: every 10 years (with gaps). Sources: ICPSR study 3 (1930, 1950), U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1964 (1960), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1973 (1970), U.S. Bureau
of the Census, 1998b (1980-90). No marriage data are available for 1940. The Census
defines these groups for those who are at least 14 years old (in 1950-70) and for those
who are at least 15 years old (in 1930, 1980-90). These age categories are used to
normalize the marriage rate and also serve as the population weight in the heterogeneity
measures. The data for 1970 only include males.
Owner-Occupied Homes
Frequency: every 10 years. Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1933 (1930), ICPSR
studies 3 (1940), 7736 (1950-70), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1998b (1980-90). This
variable is defined as the percentage of all homes which are owner occupied. Housing
data for 1930 is unavailable in tape form. Instead we use values for the variable
“families” listed in the hardcopies (the prefatory remarks of the 1930 Census reads:
“Since a home is defined as the living quarters occupied by a family, the number of
homes is always the same as the number of families”).
Education
Frequency: every 10 years. Sources: ICPSR study 3 (1940-50), U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 1964 (1960), ICPSR study 7736 (1970), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1998b
(1980-90). Our categories are those with only a high school degree and those with a
college degree or more. The Census defines these groups for those who are at least 25
years old (this age category is used to normalize the education groups and also serves as

35

the population weight in the heterogeneity measures). No education data are available
prior to 1940.
Foreign-born population share
Frequency: every 10 years. Sources: ICPSR studies 3 (1850-1950), 7736 (1960), 9694
(1970), 9693 (1980), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1994b (1990). The data for 1850-60
include both free and slave population. The data for 1910-30 are just for white foreignborn (these values are normalized to the total white population); in 1900 and 1940 the
white and overall foreign-born shares are comparable. For 1950 the data is just for
foreign-born aged 21 years or older (these values are normalized to the total population
aged 21 years or older).
Income Distribution
Frequency: 1949, 1979, 1989. Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1952 (1949), U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1998 (1979, 1989). Observation unit: we separately consider both
families and households (“families and unrelated individuals” in the 1949 Census). Data
note: the distribution is reported as the number of families/households whose income falls
in a given income interval. There are 14 listed income groups for 1949, 17 income groups
in 1979 and 25 groups in 1989. The Census did not begin collecting income data until
1940 and detailed, county-level income distribution data is not available in electronic
form prior to 1970 (records in the County and City Data Book generally include only 3
income groups). We collected a random, 1-in-10 sample (N=311) for 1949 from
hardcopies in U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1952. To maintain comparability, the same 1in-10 sample counties are used in the later years.

Boston SMSA Data
All data are for the 92 municipalities in the 1980 definition of the Boston SMSA.
Party vote shares in presidential elections
Frequency: every 4 years. Availability: 1868, 1884-1988. Source: Massachusetts General
Court (various years).
Current expenditure
Frequency: Approximately every 10 years (1906-55); every five years (1962-92).
Sources: Massachusetts Department of Corporations and Taxation, various years (19061955), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1963 and 1968 (1962, 1967), ICPSR studies 69, 8118,
8394, 9484 (1972-87), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1994 (1992). Category definitions:
Total is “total maintenance spending” (1906-55) which is basically current expenditures,
“total spending other than capital outlay” (1962, 1967), the sum of all current operations
categories (1972-92); Protection is “protection of life and property” current expenses
(1906-42), “public safety” current expenses (1955), police plus fire protection current
expenses (1962-92); Education is “education” current expenses (1906, 1913), “schools”
current expenses (1923-55), “education other than capital outlay” (1962-67), “local
schools current operations” (1972-82), “elementary/secondary education current

36

operations” (1987, 1992). The 1962 and 1967 data are supplemented with observations
in Massachusetts Department of Corporations and Taxation (various years).
Demographics (population, race, nativity, age)
Frequency: Approximately every 10 years (1875-1915, 1930-90). Sources:
Massachusetts, Bureau of Statistics and Labor, 1877, 1888, 1900, 1910, 1918 (18751915), U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1932, 1943, 1952b, 1962, 1973, 1982, 1992 (1930-90).
Note that the 1950 and 1960 data are aggregated from tract-level statistics. Age data does
not include 1885 or 1905. See the discussion for the county-level, national sample for a
fuller description of the demographic variables.
Income
Frequency: 1949 and 1989. Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1952b (1949), U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1992 (1989). Observation unit: households (“families and
unrelated individuals” in the 1949 Census). Data note: the distribution is reported as the
number of households whose income falls in a given income interval. There are 14 listed
income groups for 1949 and 25 groups in 1989.

Data References
All ICPSR files are available at www.icpsr.umich.edu/. Census and Massachusetts
documents with no on-line or CD-ROM reference were used to manually input data.
General Social Survey (1999). GSS 1972-1996 Cumulative Datafile. Survey
Documentation & Analysis Archive. csa.berkeley.edu:7502/.
ICPSR study 3 (1992). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
States, 1790-1970. Investigator: Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research.
ICPSR study 8 (1992). Censuses of Religious Bodies, 1906-1936 and NCC 1952.
Investigator: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
ICPSR study 13 (1995). General Election Data for the United States, 1950-1990.
Investigator: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
ICPSR study 69 (1975). Census of Governments 1972: Finance Files. Investigator:
U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census.
ICPSR studies 7736, 8256, 9251 (various years). County and City Data Book.
Investigator: U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census.
ICPSR study 8118, 8394, 9484 (various years). Census of Governments: Finance
[Summary] Statistics. Investigator: United States Department of Commerce.
Bureau of the Census.

37

ICPSR study 8611 (1992). Electoral Data for Counties in the United States: Presidential
and Congressional Races, 1840-1972. Investigators: Jerome M. Clubb, William
H. Flanigan, and Nancy H. Zingale.
ICPSR studies 9693, 9694 (1992). Census of Population and Housing, 1970/1980
[United States]: Extract Data. Investigator: Terry K. Adams.
IPUMS. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series. www.ipums.umn.edu.
Massachusetts, Bureau of Statistics and Labor (1877). Census of Massachusetts: 1875.
Vol. I. Population and Social Statistics. Boston, Wright and Potter.
Massachusetts, Bureau of Statistics and Labor (1888). Census of Massachusetts: 1885.
Vol. I. Population and Social Statistics. Boston, Wright and Potter.
Massachusetts, Bureau of Statistics and Labor (1900). Census of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts: 1895. Vol. IV. Population and Social Statistics. Boston, Wright
and Potter.
Massachusetts, Bureau of Statistics and Labor (1910). Census of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts: 1905. Vol. I. Population and Social Statistics. Boston, Wright
and Potter.
Massachusetts, Bureau of Statistics and Labor (1918). Decennial Census, 1915. Vol.
IV. Population and Social Statistics. Boston, Wright and Potter.
Massachusetts, Department of Corporations and Taxation (various years). Report on the
Statistics of Municipal Finances. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Boston.
Massachusetts, General Court (various years). Manual for the General Court.
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Boston.
Melton, J. Gordon (1978). The Encyclopedia of American Religions. McGrath Publishing
Company, Wilmington NC.
Roper Center (various years). Churches and church membership in the United States.
Unpublished data tape at the Social Science Data Center of the University of
Connecticut, Storrs, CN.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1908). Wealth, Debt, and Taxation, 1902. Washington DC,
US GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1915). Wealth, Public Debt, and Taxation: 1913, Vol. II, Part
VII. County Revenues, Expenditures, and Public Properties. Washington DC, US
GPO.

38

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1924). Wealth, Public Debt, and Taxation: 1922, Taxes
Collected. Washington DC, US GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1932). Fifteenth Census of the United States: 1930.
Population, Vol. III, Pts 1-2. Report by States. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1933). Fifteenth Census of Population. Vol. VI. Families.
Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1935). Financial Statistics of State and Local Governments:
1932.Washington DC, US GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1943). Sixteenth Census of the United States: 1940.
Population, Vol. II, Characteristics of the Population. Part 3: AlabamaMichigan. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1944). Census of Governments, County Finances: 1942
Compendium. Washington DC, US GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1948). Historical Review of State and Local Finances. State
and Local Government Special Studies No. 25. Washington DC, US GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1952). Census of Population, 1950: Characteristics of the
Population. Washington DC, US GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1952b). U.S. Census of Population: 1950 Vol. III, Census
Tract Statistics, Chapter 6: Boston. Bulletin P-D6. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1962). U.S. Census of Population and Housing: 1960.
Census Tracts: Boston, Mass. Final Report PHC(1)-18. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1963). 1962 Census of Government. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1964). Census of Population, 1960. Vol. I:
Characteristics of the Population. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1968). 1967 Census of Government. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1973). 1970 Census of Population, Vol. I, Characteristics
of the Population. Washington DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1982). 1980 Census of Population, Vol. I, Characteristics
of the Population. Chapter B: General Population Characteristics. Part 23:
Massachusetts. Washington DC, GPO.

39

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1992). Census of Population and Housing, 1990: Summary
Tape File 3A. http://venus.census.gov/cdrom/lookup/.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1994). 1992 Census of Governments, CD-ROM. Washington
DC, GPO.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1994b). County and City Data Book: 1994. Washington DC,
US GPO. fisher.lib.Virginia.EDU/ccdb/.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1997). Census of Governments, Vol. 4, no 3: Finances of
County Governments. www.census.gov/prod/www/abs/gc92fin.html.
U.S. Bureau of the Census (1998). USA Counties 1998. CD-ROM. Washington DC, US
GPO.
U.S. Census Office (1895). Eleventh Census: 1890. Wealth, Debt, and Taxation, Part II,
Valuation and Taxation. Washington DC, US GPO.

40

Table 1: Dispersion of Per Capita Education Spending Across Counties
Year
1890
1932
1957
1962
1967
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992

N
2623
3084
3091
3103
3102
3106
3110
3110
3110
3112

CV
0.663
0.487
0.335
0.302
0.285
0.297
0.270
0.251
0.247
0.249

DG
0.212
0.183
0.124
0.116
0.104
0.109
0.103
0.087
0.084
0.089

Table 2: Dispersion of Per Capita Taxes and Revenues Across Counties
CV
Year
1870
1880
1890
1902
1913
1922
1932
1942
1957
1962
1967
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992

N
2098
2302
1308
2679
2902
3024
3083
2497
3087
3093
3095
3097
3104
3103
3104
3104

Tax1
1.179
0.878

Tax2
0.933
0.889

DG

Rev1

Rev2

Tax1
0.349
0.282

Tax2
0.338
0.327

1.015
0.745
0.868
0.695
0.677
0.689

0.473

Rev1

Rev2

0.364
0.297
0.338

0.640
0.755

0.463
0.373
0.346
0.385
0.419
0.421
0.363
0.372
0.350

0.464
0.467
0.485
0.524
0.503
0.522
0.497

0.255
0.248
0.261

0.191
0.192
0.187
0.197
0.206
0.183
0.187
0.182

0.234
0.258

0.187
0.150
0.139
0.143
0.159
0.154
0.134
0.137
0.129

Definitions: CV = Std Dev(G)/Mean(G) where G is the vector of per capita spending and
where each county receives a population-weight. DG = 0.5G-1Σj Pj|Gj – G| where Gj is
per capita spending in county j, G is mean per capita spending for all counties, and Pj is
the share of total population in county j. For Table 1, the G’s involve education
spending. For Table 2, the G’s are taxes or revenues (G1 = just county government G; G2
= county + sub-county government G). Empty cells are due to missing data. See the
Data Appendix for further details about the data.

41

Table 3: Income Heterogeneity Within- and Between-Counties
Within-Indices
Year
1949

N
311

CV
GL
GU
0.808
0.390
0.396
(0.132) (0.046) (0.047)

I1-W
0.261

I1-B
0.031

I2-W
0.327

I2-B
0.035

1979

311

0.776
0.376
0.379
(0.075) (0.031) (0.031)

0.244

0.018

0.284

0.017

1989

311

0.833
0.395
0.397
(0.086) (0.036) (0.036)

0.273

0.025

0.314

0.024

1949

311

0.896
0.433
0.439
(0.124) (0.039) (0.041)

0.322

0.028

0.413

0.031

1979

311

0.857
0.414
0.417
(0.074) (0.027) (0.027)

0.294

0.018

0.346

0.017

1989

311

0.909
0.428
0.431
(0.082) (0.030) (0.030)

0.319

0.025

0.372

0.023

Families

Households

Within-/Between- Decomposition

See Section V.B. for definitions of the indices. As described in the Data Appendix, these
values are based on a random, 1-in-10 sample.
“W” is within, and “B” is between. The within-measures are population weighted
averages of each of the county indices. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses
below the within-measures.
To compute the indices, we need to know for each county the proportion of people in
each income category and the mean income in each group. Because the latter is
unavailable, the mid-point of each income interval was used as the mean. For the topcoded income group, a mean of 1.5 times the lower bound was used (several other values
were considered and the results do not appear to be sensitive to this choice). For the Gini
measures the upper and lower bound of each income interval is also needed. For the
upper bound of the top-coded group, 20 times the lower bound was used (again the
results are robust to using other values for the top-coded group).

42

Table 4: Municipal Spending (Current Operations) in Boston SMSA
Coefficients of Variations
Year
1906
1913
1923
1932
1942
1955
1962
1967
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992

N
92
92
92
92
92
92
59
59
92
92
92
92
92

Municipal-Level
GTotal GProtection GEducation
0.359
0.490
0.197
0.297
0.402
0.218
0.267
0.351
0.203
0.281
0.346
0.181
0.220
0.297
0.160
0.236
0.350
0.190
0.189
0.311
0.311
0.216
0.281
0.356
0.293
0.399
0.267
0.242
0.365
0.177
0.233
0.276
0.206
0.243
0.334
0.187
0.267
0.340
0.194

N
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

Aggregated to County-Level
GTotal GProtection GEducation
0.289
0.402
0.107
0.202
0.291
0.136
0.130
0.207
0.081
0.202
0.204
0.102
0.138
0.159
0.082
0.174
0.267
0.104
0.139
0.241
0.189
0.173
0.208
0.198
0.170
0.333
0.115
0.152
0.266
0.034
0.106
0.148
0.046
0.133
0.254
0.042
0.150
0.270
0.052

See the Data Appendix for a list of sources and definitions of these series. All values are
population-weighted. In 1962 and 1967 there are no values reported for the 33
municipalities which have populations less than 10,000. The CV’s in the remaining years
do not change significantly when these 33 municipalities are omitted (because the
measure is population-weighted and these are all small communities).

43

Constant 1998 Dollars per Mile

0
1880

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1900

Average airline speed

1920

Real airline revenues per passenger mile

Real railroad revenues per passenger mile

44

1940

1960

Figure 1: Transportation Costs

1980

0
2000

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

Miles per Hour

Real 1998 Dollars (Logarithmic Scale)

0.1
1900

1

10

100

1000

1910

1920

1930

1940

45

1950

1960

1970

New York-Chicago

1980

New York-San Francisco

Figure 2: Real Cost of a Three-Minute Phone Call

1990

2000

1868

2 Party Share

Gini

Dissimilarity

1888

1908

Year (Sample Size): 1852 (1551), 1860 (1864), 1872 (2177), 1880 (2315),
1892 (2667), 1900 (2730), 1912 (2970), 1920 (3031), 1932 (3091), 1940 (3067),
1952 (3097), 1960 (3101), 1972 (3105), 1980 (3111), 1988 (3113)

0.00
1848

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

46

1928

Figure 3: Presidential Vote Shares

1948

1968

1988

Gini

1868

Dissimilarity

1888

1908

47

The South: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia

0.0
1848

0.2

0.4

0.6

1928

1948

Figure 4: Presidential Vote Shares (excluding the South)

1968

1988

1870

1890

Proportion of blacks living in
majority black counties

Gini

Dissimilarity

Year (Sample Size): 1850 (1596), 1860 (2030), 1870 (2185), 1880 (2400),
1890 (2743), 1900 (2777), 1910 (2950), 1920 (3064), 1930 (3100), 1940
(3097),

0.00
1850

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1910

48

1930

1950

Figure 5: Black Population Share

1970

1990

Gini

1870

Dissimilarity

1890

1910

Year (Sample Size): 1850 (1596), 1860 (2030), 1870 (2185), 1890 (2677),
1906 (2767), 1916 (2948), 1926 (3064), 1936 (3096), 1952 (3072), 1971 (3077),
1980 (3068), 1990 (3080)

0.25
1850

0.50

0.75

1950

1970

49

Note: 1850-1890 data is based on seatings while 1890-1990 is based on members
(both sources are available for 1890). Unaffiliated and affiliates of minor
denominations are excluded.

1930

Figure 6: Religion Denominational Shares

1990

1870

1890

1910

Year (Sample Size): 1850 (1607), 1860 (2055), 1870 (2230), 1880 (2421),
1890 (2780), 1900 (2832), 1910 (2955), 1920 (3071), 1930 (3102), 1940 (3099),
1950 (3102), 1960 (3114), 1970 (3112), 1980 (3115), 1990 (3117)

0.00
1850

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

50

1930

1970

Note: there is no county-level data for the old
population share between 1870 and 1940.

1950

Gini (Young)

Dissimilarity (Young)

Gini (Old)

Dissimilarity (Old)

Figure 7: Young and Old Population Shares

1990

1940

1950

Year (Sample Size): 1930 (3100), 1940 (3097), 1950 (3099), 1960 (3103), 1970
(3109), 1980 (3108), 1990 (3110)

0.00
1930

0.10

0.20

0.30

51

1960

1970

1980

Gini (Education)

Dissimilarity (Education)

Gini (Home-Owner)

Dissimilarity (Home-Owner)

Figure 8: Home-Owner Occupation and Education Levels

1990

Gini

1870

Dissimilarity

1890

1850, 1860: includes slave population; 1910-1930: just white
population; 1950: just >= 21 years old. See "Young and Old
Population Share" figure for sample size.

0.00
1850

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1910

52

1930

1950

Figure 9: Foreign-Born Population Share

1970

1990

0.0
1868

0.1

0.2

0.3

1888

Dissimilarity (County)

Dissimilarity (Municipal)

1908

53

1928

1948

Figure 10: Presidential Vote Shares in Boston SMSA
(Municipal and County Level)

1968

1988

