+ #

, ! !   

    
       
 
!"# $% 
#%&'()!*&-.$*//0001&%&)/**&/0-.

+   
  
23$" 4"
1&( )5 678
3%1&6






               
              
    
              !"  #
$  #  %   !  &     '  #  (  )         
  **   +(  "   ,  *  -   
      .        "               ,      
-      "   ,  .   * ,  
 '             
          /        ,  
    / 0          
+   ,   
12333   &(

 !     

$(99"(%%9$&3%&( &(3 )&(3""&
   !"# $% 
+ #%&'()!*& %-.3%1&6
: % 265 775;
  
$(**&<($(*3  (99"(%%9$)%(&3%&( &(3)&(3""&
'=9"&%9$&((%9&%$%&%&3%&0%)(& ()0$1%$
% %9*%0&0&" %$9&$((&)=<*( ($3$(3(((%
%9&=&3%&

((%50<*%&$%0&"&&' (("(% >" %93((

(99"(% "&("%"?"(%&)&(%=(&4$9&3 &3%& %*(%
$  *%((45 ( *  993 % 3$ %$&  (=5 0 =@ (99"(%   3*(
&*3*&%150$(3$&4$$$(9%$03$%%)=39&%%&$$
)&=1$%")$

  &( 
/ )
   
-      "
" 45676

! 
"   ,  
-+   .
89935
 . + 2:544
 +,
 ;   

The gasoline tractor was one of the most significant technological innovations in
the history of modern agriculture, vastly increasing the supply of farm power, raising
productivity, and reshaping the rural landscape. The tractor’s emergence was not without
controversy. At the same time, it was lauded as a symbol of progressive agriculture and
condemned for destroying a traditional way of life centered around the horse. Given its
importance, scholars have long pondered the factors underlying the tractor’s diffusion: the
evolution in tractor design, the long coexistence of the animal and mechanical modes of
production, regional variations in adoption patterns, the impact of farm scale on diffusion,
and the tractor’s effect on farm structure and productivity are all themes of continuing
interest.1
This paper takes a fresh look at the coming of the tractor, examining its economic
impact, its diffusion pattern, and the factors governing its spread. Our analysis of the
diffusion process goes beyond a narrow accounting of relative costs to examine how rural
markets and institutions evolved to facilitate diffusion. Our work provides a different
view of the social and economic relations in rural America from that found in much of the
existing literature. This literature offers many conflicting claims about the determinants
of tractor diffusion and the impact of the tractor on farm scale and production
relationships. To help disentangle these claims, we model the tractor adoption and farm
scale in a simultaneous-equations framework. Our econometric analysis suggests that
farm scale had a positive and significant effect on tractor adoption and that tractor
adoption had a significant, albeit smaller positive effect on scale. These findings are in
line with the commentary of the contemporary authors of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) and experiment station power studies. In addition, we argue that
numerous variables that typically have been treated as exogenous, such as the prices of
1

Ankli, “Horses Vs. Tractors,” pp. 134-48; Ankli and Olmstead, “Adoption,” pp. 213-30; Clarke,
Regulation; Musoke, “Mechanizing,” pp. 347-75; Sargen, “Tractorization;” Whatley, “Institutional
Change.”

1

horses and feed, were endogenous to the diffusion process. Recognizing these points
leads us to model the diffusion process as a capital replacement problem. This analysis
helps explain why many previous studies found little difference in the relative costs of the
tractor and horse modes and why the two modes coexisted for several decades. Our work
suggests a dramatically different picture of both the tractor’s competitive advantage and
of the timing of the tractor’s ascendancy in American agriculture.

The Impact of the Tractor
Most of the literature on tractors by economic historians has focused on its
diffusion and all but ignored the issues of the machine’s impact on the American
economy. Agricultural historians have not been so remiss. Here we compliment the
more general history literature by adding new data and perspectives pertinent to our
understanding of the impact of the tractor. In doing so, we focus on the macro issues that
shaped the very structure and character of American development.2
One of the hallmarks of the American experience over the nineteenth century was
the westward march of commercial agriculture. This process symbolically ended in 1890
with the closing of the frontier. As newly settled areas matured, the acres of cropland
harvested continued to increase until 1920 and then reached a plateau. But, by allowing
farmers to convert land used to feed draft animals to the production of food and fiber for
human consumption, the tractor essentially continued the process of land augmentation
for another four decades. Given the crop yields prevailing over the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, a mature farm horse required about 3 acres of cropland for feed
each year. In aggregate, farm draft animals consumed the output of roughly 22 percent of
all cropland harvested over the 1880 to 1920 period; draft animals in cities and mines
consumed the output of another 5 percent. The cropland used to feed horses and mules
peaked in 1915 at about 93 million acres; 79 million acres for maintaining work animals
2

For an analysis of a number of important farm level and sociological issues, such as the tractor’s effect in
reducing the drudgery and the intensity of farm work, an excellent entry point is Williams’ three chapters
on the tractor’s impact. Fordson, pp. 131-90.

2

on farms and 14 million acres for those off farms. From 1915 on, there was a steady
decline. In 1930, 65 million acres of cropland were used to feed horses and mules, with
all but 2 million acres devoted to farm stock. By 1960 only 5 million acres were needed.
The released land was roughly equal to two-thirds of the total cropland harvested in 1920
in the territory of the Louisiana Purchase.3
There were also significant changes in the use of pasture that hitherto have not
been fully appreciated. Circa 1910, farm horses and mules consumed the product of
roughly 80 million acres of pasture. By 1960, most of this pasture land was freed, chiefly
for the use of dairy cows and beef cattle. The impact of the tractor on the effective crop
and pasture land base almost surely depressed crop and livestock prices and contributed
to pressure for government farm programs. In addition to increasing the effective stock of
land, the tractor also was land augmenting via its effect on increasing yields. The
timeliness of work could affect yields in many operations, but it was often crucial during
the grain harvest where tractored-powered combines could make the difference between
success and failure in the race against an impending storm.4
Rivaling the importance of changes in the land use was the tractor’s impact on
farm labor. The decline in the farm population after 1940 represents one of the great
structural shifts in American history, yet the economic history literature examining the
diffusion of the tractor is all but silent on the machine’s role in this transformation.
USDA authorities estimated that in 1944 the tractor saved on net roughly 940 million
man-hours in field operations and 760 million man-hours in caring for draft animals
relative to the 1917-21 period. The combined savings of 1.7 billion man-hours per year,
represented about 8 percent of the total agricultural labor requirements in 1944, and
translates into about 850 thousand workers.5

3

USDA, 1962 Agricultural Statistics, p. 537.
Baker, Graphic Summary, p. 52; Williams, p. 150
5
Cooper, Barton, and Brodell, Progress of Farm Mechanization, esp. p. 62. Autos and trucks also had an
enormous impact, saving an additional 1.5 billion man-hours in hauling and travel time in 1944 relative to
the 1917-21 level. Finally, there was a saving of roughly 1.1 billion man-hours because farmers no longer
had to raise as much feed for horses and mules. Taken together, the tractor, motor vehicle, and feed saving
equaled about 23.8 percent of the 1944 labor requirements. These calculations hold the land base constant
and do not account for the increase in worker and land productivity due to the increase in net output
resulting from no longer having to devote a sizable portion of the acreage to feeding draft animals.
4

3

Unfortunately, the USDA offers no comparable assessment of the impact of the
tractor after it was fully diffused. Estimating the tractor’s savings of labor is extremely
difficult in the post-WWII period because the adoption of the new generation of harvest
equipment—combines, corn pickers, field forage harvesters, cotton pickers, and hay
balers—was closely intertwined with the existence of the tractor.

These machines

operated more efficiently in tandem with a tractor (driven by the power takeoff) than if
towed by horses; moreover, tractors increasingly became embodied in the harvesting
equipment as farmers opted for self-propelled units. Calculating the ‘independent’
contribution of the tractor becomes somewhat arbitrary. Nevertheless, it is possible to
rein in the estimates by making explicit assumptions. We know that using the 1944 landto-labor ratios, cultivating and harvesting the 1959 acreage of major field crops would
have required about 3.67 billion more man-hours than were actually used. Of this total,
an extra 1.55 billion hours would be devoted to preharvest operations and 2.12 billion to
the harvest. Taking the conservative assumption that tractors accounted for 75 percent of
the saving in pre-harvest operations and none in the harvest operations yields a total
savings (including reduction of hours for animal care) of roughly 1.74 billion man-hours
annually between 1944 and 1959. Taking the more liberal assumption that tractors
accounted for all of the pre-harvest saving and 25 percent of the harvest saving yields an
estimate of 2.65 billion man-hours. The lower bound estimate represents 18 percent of
the total reduction in man-hours in U.S. agriculture between 1944 and 1959; the upper
bound estimates, 27 percent. It is important to note that our lower bound estimate of
labor-savings for the post-1944 period exceeded the USDA estimate for the pre-1944
period.6
By 1960, the tractor reduced annual labor use by at least 3.4 billion man-hours of
field and chore labor from the level required using the horse power technology. This was

6

Hecht, Farm Labor Requirements; and McElroy, Hecht, and Gavett, Labor Used. According to the
USDA, the number of man-hours devoted to care for horse fell from 792 million in 1944 to 109 million in
1960. Offsetting this decline is a roughly 100 million increase in the hours required for repairing and
maintaining tractors and related equipment.

4

the equivalent of 1,740 thousand workers, which represented 24.6 percent of farm
employment in 1960 and 27.6 percent of the decline since 1910.7
We can perform a crude calculation to gain a better handle on the impact of the
tractor on the number of farms and their average size. We begin with the observation that
the ratio of workers (including both family and hired labor) per farm was remarkably
stable over the 1910-60 period, hovering between 2.1 in 1910 and 1.7 during World War
II.8 Based on the 1960 ratio of 1.8 workers per farm, the labor savings estimated above
suggests that there would have been 967 thousand more farms in 1960 in the absence of
the tractor. The average farm size, assuming a constant land base, would have been 239
acres (instead of the true value of 297 acres). This implies that 37 percent of the growth
in farm size since 1910 was due to the tractor.
It is often noted that the purchase of a tractor exposed farmers to more of the
vagaries of the market. Where once farmers could “grow” their own power and fuel, they
now had to buy these from farm machine and oil companies. Anti-tractor forces such as
the Horse Association of America argued that the tractor-induced loss of self-sufficiency
caused many of the farm bankruptcies of the early 1920s.9 To date, the discussion of the
loss of self-sufficiency has been long on rhetoric and short on analysis and precision. Just
how serious was the problem? In 1955, farmers spent roughly $2.2 billion on tractors, of
which $0.7 billion was for the net cost of new purchases, $1.1 billion for fuel and

7

For estimated labor requirements over the 1910-60 period, see 1962 Agricultural Statistics, p. 577. These
estimates deal only with the direct impact of the tractor. The machine also promoted structural changes
such as the growth in farm size and an increase in specialization. To the extent that these changes saved
labor, it would enhance the tractor’s overall impact.
8
This tight relationship between the farm labor force and the number of farms is borne out in the statelevel dataset introduced below. The results of an OLS regression of the log of number of farms in a state
on the log of the number of male farm workers (including family and hired labor) and a time trend using
decadal data over the 1910 to 1960 period yields the following (where the standard errors are in the
parenthesis):
2
lfarms= -23.49
+ 1.059 male labor +
0.01056 year,
R =0.966
-2
-4
(8.145*10 ).
(1.601)
(1.196*10 )
The constancy of this relationship reinforces the interpretation offered by Brewster, “Machine Process” and
Kislev and Peterson, “Prices” regarding the central role of labor supervision in the internal organization of
the farm.
9
There is a valid point here. Clearly, the tractor added to the country’s stock of land producing a
marketable output. But this change in output represented the gross savings to farmers and society. To
obtain the net savings one must subtract out the costs of the fuel and other off farm inputs associated with
mechanization. See also Olmstead and Rhode, “Controversy.”

5

lubrication, and $0.4 billion for repairs and maintenance. The total represented only
about six percent of all farm production and living expenses and only about one-quarter
of farm expenditures for motor vehicles and machinery in that year.10 This seems a
modest price compared to the extra freedom, flexibility, and productivity that farmers and
their families gained from owing a tractor. In addition, one must remember that the
effects of the tractor were not all one-sided because it significantly increased the farmer’s
self-sufficiency in the labor market. Numerous USDA studies show that one of the main
attractions of the tractor was that it allowed farmers to do work in a timely fashion
without relying on hired help, thus saving the transactions costs and uncertainty
associated with the highly imperfect rural labor market.
The impact of the tractor was not limited to the farm. The new machine also
revitalized and transformed the agricultural equipment industry. Economic historians
have long recognized the importance of the agricultural implement industry in the
nineteenth century, not only for supplying the tools that increased farm productivity, but
also for its backward linkages to the machine-tool industry and other modern sectors.
Clearly, as the nation’s industrial base broadened, the relative importance of the
agricultural implement industry declined.

Nevertheless, it remained a world leader

through the twentieth century.
What is not generally recognized is the extent to which the tractor came to
dominate this sector. By 1939 the tractor industry employed more wage-earners and
produced greater value added than the remainder of the agricultural equipment industry.11
Even in the latter sector, much of the output was “tractor-driven” as implement
manufacturers produced larger, more durable equipment better suited to the machine.
Given the tractor’s characteristics, one might surmise that motor vehicle firms would
capture the industry.

However with the exception of Ford, the successful tractor

manufacturers had their origins in the agricultural equipment industries. This simple
observation offers a valuable clue to understanding the sources of comparative advantage
10

USDA, Farmers’ Expenditures, pp. 1, 6. The above estimates overstate the actual loss in self-sufficiency
because many farmers who used horses spent considerable sums buying animals and supplies. Animals,
feed, harnesses, and stud and veterinary services for the most part were endogenous to the farm sector, but
not necessarily to individual farmers.
11
US Bureau of the Census. Sixteenth Census, Manufactures, pp. 415-22.

6

in the equipment industry. Evidently it was easier for agricultural equipment firms to
learn to make engines than it was for auto firms to learn to serve the farm. Marketing
networks and the two-way flow of ideas linking equipment producers with farmers, which
was so important for secondary innovations, provided key advantages to the equipment
companies. Understanding the role of secondary innovations and the resulting evolution
of tractor productivity is crucial for understanding the machine’s acceptance.
The Evolution and Spread of the Tractor
The early gasoline tractors of the 1900s were behemoths, patterned after the giant
steam plows that preceded them. They were useful for plowing, harrowing, and belt work
but not for cultivating in fields of growing crops nor powering farm equipment in tow.
Innovative efforts between 1910 and 1940 vastly improved the machine's versatility and
reduced its size, making it suited to a wider range of farms and tasks. At the same time,
largely as a result of progress in the mass-production industries, the tractor's operating
performance greatly increased while its price fell.
Several key advances marked the otherwise gradual improvement in tractor
design. The Bull (1913) was the first truly small and agile tractor, Henry Ford's popular
Fordson (1917) was the first mass-produced entry, and the revolutionary McCormickDeering Farmall (1924) was the first general-purpose tractor capable of cultivating
amongst growing row crops. The latter machine was also among the first to incorporate a
power-takeoff, enabling it to transfer power directly to implements under tow. A host of
allied innovations such as improved air and oil filters, stronger implements, pneumatic
tires, and the Ferguson three-point hitch and hydraulic system greatly increased the
tractor's life span and usefulness. Seemingly small changes often yielded enormous
returns in terms of cost, durability, and performance. As an example, rubber tires reduced
vibrations thereby extending machine life, enhanced the tractor’s usefulness in hauling (a
task previously done by horses) and increased drawbar efficiency in some applications by
as much as 50 percent. The greater mobility afforded by rubber tires also allowed farmers

7

to use a tractor on widely separated fields. Developments since WWII were largely
limited to refining existing designs, increasing tractor size, and adding driver amenities.12
We know of no attempt to formally measure the actual productivity effects of
these improvements in tractor design but knowledgeable observers placed great stock in
their importance. As an example, Roy Bainer, who as a young man was an early tractor
adopter and later became one of the deans of the agricultural engineering profession,
noted that without improved air filters his machines lost power and need a valve job
within a year of entering service.

He also maintained that the Ferguson hitch

revolutionized the tractor’s capabilities. The extraordinarily rapid diffusion of some of
the changes lends credence to Bainer’s informed view. The standard wheeled models
went from about 92 percent of all tractors sold for domestic use in 1925 to about 4
percent in 1940. Conversely, general-purpose tractors, which were first introduced in
1924, comprised 38 percent of sales in 1935 and 85 percent by 1940. In a similar fashion,
within six years after Allis-Chalmers first introduced pneumatic tires on its new models
in 1932, 95 percent of the new tractors produced in the United States were “on rubber.”
By 1945 about 72 percent of the stock of all wheeled farm tractors had rubber tires.13
A summary picture of the replacement of the animal mode by the mechanical
mode is offered in Figure 1. It charts the number of tractors and draft animals in the
United States between 1910 and 1960. The total number of farm horses and mules
reached its maximum of 26.7 million head in 1918. Workstock (animals aged 3 and over)
peaked in 1923 at 20.7 million head; this was roughly the level that would have been
required over the 1920-60 period to maintain the 1910 ratio of workstock-to-cropland-

12

Fox, Demand, p. 33; USDA, Agricultural Resources, p. 1. For the general evolution of the tractor, see
Gray, Development, and Williams, Fordson.
Our view of the economic significance of the refinements in tractor technology is consistent with
Rosenberg’s general position and in stark contrast with David’s assertion that “by 1920 there has emerged
the basic form of tractor design which was to remain essentially unaltered for the next two decades.” David,
“Reaper,” p. 283. David’s view rests in part on Devendra Sahal, but Sahal adds a detailed discussion of
numerous breakthroughs and milestones, “resulting from an accumulation of design and production
experience” that significantly enhanced the tractor’s capabilities. David’s assessment is correct in the same
sense that one can reasonably assert that all the essential elements of the airplane were in place by the
1930’s -- this does not imply that commercial transoceanic service only required tweaking a few prices at
the margin.
13
McKibben and Griffen, Changes, p.13; US Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture: 1945, pp. 71;
Interviews with Roy Bainer, Davis, CA, 1982-84.

8

harvested. After 1925, draft animal numbers steadily declined, falling below 3 million by
1960.14 The stock of tractors began to expand rapidly during WWI, rising to a plateau of
about one million machines in 1929. A second burst of growth began in the late 1930s,
leading the tractor stock to climb above 4.5 million units by 1960.
The diffusion of the tractor exhibited significant regional variation as indicated in
Table 1 showing the proportion of farms reporting tractors and draft animals. The Pacific
and West North Central regions led the way with roughly 8 percent of farms reporting
tractors in 1920. The development of the general-purpose tractor in the mid-1920s
quickened the pace of diffusion in the East North Central and, to a lesser extent, in the
three southern regions. All regions experienced a slowing of diffusion during the Great
Depression and an acceleration during and immediately after WWII. The post-war spread
of tractors was especially rapid in the South.15
The decline in the proportion of farms reporting draft animals shown in Table 1
was nearly the mirror image of the rise in the share reporting tractors.16 But it would be a
mistake to interpret one series as simply the reflection of the other. There was substantial
overlap between the two power sources as is demonstrated in the 1940-54 data displayed
in Table 2. As an example, 18.6 percent of farms in 1940 reported both draft animals and
tractors; this was roughly four-fifths of the farms reporting tractors and about one-quarter
of those reporting horses. Over this period, the fraction of farms reporting only animals

14

The population of horses and mules off farms began to decline well before the population on farms.
There were some 3.45 million horses off the farm in 1910. This number fell to an estimated 2.13 million
by 1920 and to 380,000 by 1925, according to C. L. Harlan of the USDA Bureau of Agricultural
Economics as cited in Dewhurst and Associates, America's Needs, pp. 1103, 1108. Of course, the
“horseless” age never truly arrived. A recent National Agricultural Statistics Service survey of the nation’s
equine inventory on January 1, 1999 stood at 5,317.4 thousand head, up by 1.3 percent from the 1998
levels. Of this number, over 3.2 million were on farms, a greater level than in 1960.
Almost all of
these animals, both on farm and off, were kept for recreation purposes. USDA, “Equine Inventory.”
15
Brodell and Ewing, Tractor Power, pp. 5-11; U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics, pp. 510,
519-20.
16
The comparison is made more difficult because the data for 1900, 1910, and 1920 treat farms reporting
horses and mules separately while those for 1925 and 1930 combine the two. Data for the period 1935 to
1950 confirm the suspicion that a substantial fraction of farms (approximately ten to fifteen percent of farms
reporting draft animals) possessed both mules and horses. If we are bold enough to extrapolate on the basis
of the 1935 data, then we find that approximately 93 percent of the nation's farms possessed draft animals in
1920. This would imply a 20 percentage point decline in the proportion of farms over the 1920 to 1935
period, closely in line with a reduction of the share of farms reporting horses. (There was little change in
the share of farms reporting mules over this period.)

9

decreased whereas the share reporting only tractors rose.17 The farmers in the Pacific
states led the way in converting to tractor only operations, but even there animals were
common place. In 1940 only about 14 percent of the farms sampled in that region
reported tractors and no draft animals.
Interestingly, the national data indicate that roughly one-quarter of sample farms
reported neither tractor nor draft animals. This represented a significant increase over the
levels prevailing in the 1920s, implying that the spread of the tractor was accompanied by
a rise in the fraction of farms without internal sources of draft power. In many areas the
increase in the proportion of “powerless” farms likely reflected an increase in
professional contractors who managed or at least supplied tractor services to neighboring
farms. The tractor’s speed and surplus power helped encourage this increase in the
division of labor.
Further evidence on the breakdown of farms by class of power is displayed in
Figure 2. Using 1940 data, the figure shows how the share of farms in each power class
varied with farm scale, as measured by the value of farm output. As the value of output
increased, the percentage of farms without power fell markedly, whereas the share of
farms with machines and the share with animals both increased. The proportion of farms
reporting tractors, which started low, rose rapidly and peaked above 76 percent in the
$6,000 to $9,999 revenue range. The fraction reporting animals rose over lower output
classes, peaking at around 88 percent in the $2,500 to $3,999 range, and then declined
slightly. The share with both power modes followed a similar pattern, but the decline was
slight and at a larger scale. This evidence suggests that the class of farms with both
power modes was an important, evolutionary stage between all-horse farms and all-tractor
farms.
Ultimately, the spread of the tractor represented far more than just the replacement
of the horse, rather it signaled a dramatic increase in total horsepower capacity available
on the farm. Between 1910 and 1960, national farm draft power soared over four-andone-half times while cropland harvested remained roughly constant. Our estimate of the
17

Totals derived from the statistics reported in Table 2 differ slightly for those appearing in Table 1 due to
sampling variations. In addition to the trends noted in the text, the percentage of farms with two or more
tractors climbed in the post-WWII period.

10

relative horsepower capacity (measured in terms of drawbar power) supplied by tractors
and workstock (Table 3) indicates that tractors accounted for about 11 percent of national
farm horsepower capacity in 1920, 64 percent in 1940, and 97 percent in 1960. Thus,
compared with the percentage of farms reporting tractors, the measure of diffusion using
power capacity started higher, and grew faster and more smoothly.18
Markets, Institutions, and Diffusion
The economics literature on the tractor’s diffusion has two distinct branches. The
first, exemplified by Griliches and Fox, empirically estimates the demand for tractors
using national time series. The second, employing the threshold model, analyzes cost and
engineering data to determine the break-even acreage at which farmers in different
regions should have been indifferent between the tractor and horse models. This latter
branch has been the dominant approach employed by economic historians with
contributions from Sargen, Ankli, Olmstead, Clarke, Lew, and Whatley.19
The threshold approach suffers from a number of serious conceptual problems.
To date, scholars have failed even to reach a consensus about whether the horse or tractor
was the fixed cost mode of production. A common argument is that although its initial
cost was higher than that of a comparable team of horses, the tractor actually saved fixed
costs because the horses must be fed whether or not they worked. This implied, contrary
to conventional wisdom and a large body of empirical observations, that small farms
should have adopted the machine and large farms should have stuck with animals.20
Most tractor studies find that the cost differentials were small.

This makes

threshold estimates highly sensitive to changes in factor prices, errors in measurement,
and seemingly arbitrary allocations between fixed and variable costs. These problems are
magnified because over most of the period in question, the choice was not simply

18

These trends are generally consistent with the finding that larger farms adopted tractors first. The
national numbers are also fairly close to Sargen's annual series of the share of tractor horsepower in national
horsepower capacity (pp. 32-41, esp. p. 38), adding to our confidence in their use.
19
David, “Mechanization,” pp. 3-39. For early econometric studies of tractor diffusion, see Griliches,
“Durable Input” and Fox, Demand.
20
Jasny, Research Methods and “Tractor Versus Horse,” pp. 708-23.

11

between machines or animals. Rather it was between tractors of varying sizes preferred
for one set of tasks, combined with horse teams of varying sizes used for another set of
tasks. Instead of a single break-even point, farmers (and later economic historians) were
confronted with myriad possible thresholds.
The existence of capacity constraints and the value of “timeliness” in farm work
further complicate the analysis. A 2-horse team might plow at a lower cost per acre than
a small tractor, but might not be able to complete as many acres during the plowing
season.

In many studies, capacity constraints, not cost conditions, were the crucial

determinants of the reported thresholds. The existence of capacity constraints implies
that other inputs could be more fully utilized if the binding constraint were loosened. To
make meaningful comparisons between techniques in this case, one needs information
about a farm’s entire range of production activities, not just those requiring power. 21
The insights of A. V. Chayanov are directly relevant here.22 In Chayanov’s view,
the Russian peasant farmer had difficulty hiring outside labor and faced capacity
constraints for specific tasks performed by family labor. Mechanization of the binding
constraint permitted farmers to increase the area planted in high-value crops, utilize their
family labor more intensely, and raise total net income. One key insight is that if the new
technology allows a farmer to increase acreage (as the tractor did), it can raise farm
income even if the new technology has higher per acre cost than the old technology. A
second key insight is that the profitability of mechanization depends crucially on the
nature and “quality” of rural markets and institutions, and in particular the workings of
the labor market.
The institutional conditions common in the American North, where non-family
laborers were scarce and family laborers had to be fed whether or not they worked,
suggest that the relevant “wage rate” jumped discontinuously when the labor requirement

21

Similar issues arise due to the interactions between the draft power mode and other farm technologies.
For example, Sargen found that the profitability of the tractor in the wheat-belt during the 1920s and 1930s
depended on whether the combined harvester, which employed tractors as their power source, was also
adopted. Whately and Musoke and Olmstead found similar interactions with other types of equipment that
effected the profitability of using a tractor. Under these conditions, the threshold approach loses some of its
simplicity and elegance.
22
Chayanov, Peasant Economy.

12

rose above the family's labor supply.23 This could explain why larger farms tended to
adopt the more timely, labor-saving, tractor whereas smaller farms used the horse.
Recognizing imperfections in the credit market could also help explain the stylized facts
that smaller farms were slower to adopt the more capital-intensive technology and that
cash flow considerations influenced the tractor purchase decision.24
An exhaustive reading of USDA and state experiment station power studies
reveals that during the crucial decades of diffusion, farming practices and institutions,
evolved in ways that promoted tractor adoption. For example, the studies show many
farmers significantly increased their acreage (through renting or purchasing land) and
changed their cropping patterns after acquiring a tractor. In Illinois (1916), about onethird of the tractor owners who stated that their tractors were profitable, increased the
acreage which they were farming, the increase averaging about 120 acres per farm.”25 In
North and South Dakota, 44 percent of the adopters added acreage with an “average
increase being 139 acres.”26

Numerous other studies tell a similar story of tractor

adopters increasing their farm size to facilitate mechanization. This implies that it is
inappropriate to treat acreage as an exogenous explanatory variable.
To help disentangle the interactions between farm scale and tractor adoption, we
will formally investigate their empirical relationship using a simultaneous-equations
regression framework. Our analysis required the construction of several new datasets,
assembled from a variety of USDA and Census of Agriculture sources. These state level
panel datasets include the proportion of farms reporting tractors, the acreage of cropland
harvested per farm, the share of cropland in field crops, farm wage rates, fuel prices, and
23

Fleisig, “Slavery,” pp. 572-97.
This is suggested in Clarke’s analysis. We would expect large-scale operators could most likely obtain
credit on better terms than smaller and more marginal producers. In addition, there were significant
differences in credit availability for different modes of production. Tractor manufacturers had access to
national credit markets and were known to carry paper on new purchases. Furthermore, horse advocates
complained that local banks readily accepted tractors as security, while refusing to accept horses. It is also
doubtful that the availability of information was scale neutral. Farmers with large operations and more
wealth likely had more education, more access to technical literature, and were more likely to associate with
peers who were also experimenting with new methods.
25
It is unclear whether this additional acreage resulted entirely from the purchase of nearby land or also
reflected rented land. For our purposes, this distinction does not matter. Yerkes and Church, Economic
Study. Other Illinois studies, including Yerkes and Church, Experience in Illinois, p. 7; Yerkes and Church,
Dakotas, p. 8; and Tolley and Reynoldson, Cost and Utilization, pp. 56-57, found similar results.
26
Yerkes and Church, Dakotas, pp. 7-8.
24

13

the rental costs of land and tractors, among other variables. The data cover the years
1920, 1925, 1930, 1940, 1945, 1950, 1954, and 1959. Unfortunately, the Census did not
inquire about tractor ownership in 1935. (See Data Appendix for details).
To measure diffusion, we employ a variant of the conventional measure of
diffusion, the percentage of farms reporting tractors. Specifically, we use log odds ratio,
i.e., the log of the number of tractor farms over the number of non-tractor farms. To
measure farm scale, we employ cropland harvested per farm rather than the more
conventional farm size because the numerator of the latter statistic includes non-arable
land, which is not directly relevant for tractor adoption. Using state-level data has both
obvious advantages and disadvantages for investigating the relationship between tractor
diffusion and farm scale. The chief advantages are the geographic and temporal scope of
coverage. The relevant data are available for every region in the country over almost the
entire period of the tractor’s spread. Although far superior to using national data, the
level of aggregation in state-level data does not provide a clear picture of the individual
farmer’s decision-making process. Unfortunately, a comprehensive micro-level dataset
showing the detailed characteristics of individual farmers does not exist to our
knowledge. With this important objection in mind, we now analyze the state-level data to
identify the major patterns of the diffusion of the tractor and the changes in farm scale.
Our model adopts a simple simultaneous-equations regression framework:

Scale =

αt Tractor

Tractor =

βsScale

+αx Xs
+βx Xt

+αz Z
+βz Z

where
Scale is the farm scale as measured by the log of cropland per farm;
Tractor is the extent of diffusion as measured by log of the odds ratio;
Xs is the vector of independent variables that affect farm scale directly;
Xt is the vector of independent variables that affect tractor adoption directly; and
Z is the vector of independent variables directly affecting both farm and tractor adoption.

14

Making the exclusion restrictions that define Xs and Xt is obviously a matter of
economic judgment. We include two variables in Xs: the rental rate on farmland relative
to the agricultural wage and the date of settlement of the state, which reflects the regime
in which the state’s farms were formed. In Xt we use measures of tractor rental rates and
farm gasoline prices relative to the agricultural wage.

These costs affect adoption

directly, and arguably influence farm scale solely or rather principally through tractor
adoption. Included in Z are the share of cropland in field crops (barley, buckwheat, oats,
rye, and wheat) and a set of year and regional dummies that help account for temporal
and geographical fixed effects in the panel dataset.27

Table 4 reports the summary

statistics of the data used in the analysis.
We estimate the relationships using weighted two-stage least squares regressions
run on the pooled time-series, cross-section sample.

Throughout the analysis, we

bootstrap the standard errors to correct for heteroscedasticity. Table 5 reports the results
of the reduced form and structural analysis.
A set of consistent and largely sensible findings emerge, findings which are in line
with the suppositions of most of the authors of USDA and experiment station power
studies and of other informed contemporary observers, yet contrary to much of the recent
work on tractor diffusion by economic historians. The coefficient on the fitted scale
variable reveals a positive and statistically significant effect (0.798) of farm size on
tractor adoption, specifically a 10 percent increase in cropland per farm would increase
the odds ratio by about 8 percent. To put this into context, this implies the increase over
the 1920-60 period in the log of national cropland per farm (which grew by 0.425 points)
would explain about 8 percent of the increase in the log odds ratio (which grew by 4.260
points). The combined effects of the fall in tractor rental rates and fuel prices relative to
the farm wage rates would account for another 22 percent of the increase in the log odds
ratio. Time effects, which capture among other variables the spread of information and
unmeasured quality improvements in the machine, account for the bulk of the increase.
The fixed effects allow for separate slope terms for the USDA’s ten main agricultural regions−Northeast,
Lake, Corn, Northern Plains, Southeast, Appalachia, Delta, Southern Plains, Mountain, and Pacific states.
In the regressions, the Pacific region is the excluded category. We use the USDA regions rather than the
nine Census regions because the former better reflects the relevant cropping systems and yields a slightly
better fit. We also include year dummies, using 1920 as the default.

27

15

These results are consistent with the emphasis that most contemporary observers placed
on the importance of the improvements in tractor design. What is more notable for our
current purposes is that in the farm scale regressions, tractor adoption had a positive,
statistically significant effect (0.242) on the log of cropland per farm. Thus, these
simultaneous-equations regressions reveal that greater scale induced greater tractor
adoption and, independently, greater tractor adoption led to greater scale. These findings
reinforce the conclusions that farm scale did matter (positively) for tractor adoption but
that treating it as an exogenous variable is inappropriate.
Besides assuming that farm scale is an exogenous explanatory variable, much of
the existing literature also assumes that custom tractor services were of negligible
importance, thereby dismissing another means that tractor owners had to spread their
fixed costs. This assumption is at sharp variance with actual practice during the initial
period of diffusion.28 Data for 1905-09 show that custom work accounted for about 44
percent of the plowing done by gasoline tractors and over 50 percent of the plowing
performed by steam tractors in the western United States and Canada.29 All of the power
studies pertaining to the 1915-22 period show that custom tractor work was common,
with 40 percent or more of the tractors engaged in some custom service. But such
aggregate figures mask the importance of custom work for marginal adopters, because
tractor owners with small farms were far more likely to offer custom services to spread
the fixed costs of the machine. 30
In addition to market adjustments, diffusion depended crucially on a stream of
secondary innovations that enhanced the versatility and reliability of tractors. In this
regard, the story of the tractor was like that of most inventions. In the first decades of
diffusion, animal and mechanical power modes were imperfect substitutes. The power
studies suggest that limitations in tractor versatility meant that horses were still required
(or in some cases preferred) for many tasks.31 This helps account for the long co-

28

As an example see Clarke, Regulation, p. 90 and Sargen, “Tractorization,” p. 100.
Ellis, Traction Plowing, pp. 22-23.
30
For example, “such outfits (large tractors) frequently are bought principally for custom work, in which
case the size of farm becomes less important.” Yerkes and Church, Economic Study, p. 7.
31
Handschin, et al., “Horse,” pp. 202-09. The problem that farmers faced with needing both horses and
tractors was similar to the tractor-labor trade-off in cotton production analyzed by Whatley. In this case,
29

16

existence of the two modes. Improvements in the tractor and its accoutrements step-bystep permitted farmers to replace draft animals in specific tasks. As examples, rubber
tires allowed tractors to perform hauling chores; the power take-off made the tractor more
competitive in towing harvesting equipment; and general purpose designs gradually
eliminated the need for horses in cultivating and other tasks. The culmination of these and
numerous other changes meant that by the early 1940s, horses were no longer required on
most farms.
Our reading of the contemporary power studies indicates that changes in
institutions and in the markets for custom services, land rental, etc. helped to adjust the
machine-to-land ratio for a large number of marginal adopters thereby playing an
important role in the early years of diffusion. At the same time, an ongoing process of
technological change transformed tractors, making them more versatile and efficient in an
ever-increasing set of tasks. The coexistence of both draft animals and tractors on the
same farm may, in some instances, have been due to inertia, but in most cases it reflected
the prevailing state of the technology that confined tractors to a limited number of tasks.32
Factor Markets, Coexistence and Diffusion
In addition to the tractor’s technical short-comings, the smooth working of factor
markets offers a second important reason for the long coexistence of the two modes of
production. Viewed from the perspective of the agricultural sector as a whole, many of
the key variables in the tractor adoption decision were endogenous. The old technique
was embodied in the horse, a durable capital good with an inelastic short-run supply and a
cotton farmers using a tractor and releasing labor in non-harvest operations might have jeopardized the
ability to obtain workers to pick the cotton.
32
In addition to pointing to the technical limitations of early tractors, the large equine stock remaining on
farms reflected the value that many humans placed on their bonds with horses. Such ties undoubtedly
affected the diffusion process. For example, many farmers retained their old stock even after adopting
machines and, at least up through the 1940s, relatively few of the displaced horses and mules were sent to
slaughter. A 1959 US Agricultural Research Service study indicates that only 19 thousand, or 6 percent, of
the 314 thousand horses and mules disappearing off farms in 1940 were slaughtered in federally inspected
meat plants. (A further irony is that the chief use of horsemeat was for dog and cat food.) The numbers
and share slaughtered rose over the late 1940s and early 1950s, but at the peak less than one-half of the
disappearing animals met their end in this way. That more farmers did not avail themselves of this option
must have slowed the replacement of animals by machines. Csorba, Use of Horses, pp. 8, 14.

17

price that could adjust to keep the animal mode competitive. Figure 3 graphs movements
in the real prices (discounted by the GNP deflator) of medium-size tractors, mature horses
(age 2 and older) and hay over the 1910-60. Real tractor prices fell dramatically over the
1910s and early 1920s, but what is notable is that the horse prices nearly kept pace. The
real value of mature horses in 1925 was less than one-half of their 1915 value. Besides
lowering horse prices through direct competition, advances in the mechanical technology
increased productivity and shifted out the supply of agricultural products. Given a
downward sloping demand function for agricultural products, this led to lower crop prices
and reduced the major expense of the animal mode: feed. Thus, via its effects on both
horse and feed prices, the tractor by its very nature made its major rival more competitive
in the short run.33
A common finding in the existing literature is that cost differentials between the
machine or animal modes were small. But rather than reflecting long-run conditions, this
merely represented a transitional phase in the adjustment process. As in the debate over
the profitability and viability of slavery, the real question answered by such static microeconomic comparisons is whether the market for durable capital goods (here, the horse)
was working properly. Apparently, it was.34

33

Given the diversity of crop requirements and the integration of the national markets of horses and feed,
crop-specific technological changes which increased tractor’s competitiveness in one region could reduce
horse and feed prices, thereby increasing the horse’s competitiveness in another region. In this way, the
rapid spread of the tractors in the Great Plains might have induced a lag in the South.
34
Tractor prices might also respond to changes in demand, creating further issues of endogenity. Any
deviation from a competitive cost-returns world (where the supply of tractors was perfectly elastic and the
machine’s price fell due to exogenous technical progress) would require changing the way diffusion is
normally modeled. We know that the structure of the tractor industry evolved substantially over time.
The industry began the twentieth century as one of the hot, new business opportunities, attracting a wave of
startups. The number of tractor manufacturers rose 6 firms in 1905 to 15 in 1910 and to 61 by 1915.
During the WWI boom, the number of firms making tractors exploded, skyrocketing to 186 by 1921. The
sector was poised for one of the classic shakeout episodes in American industrial history. Among the
causes were the collapse in machinery sales following the agricultural downturn of the early 1920s and,
specifically, the January 1922 decision by Henry Ford to slash prices on his best-selling Fordson machine
from $625 down to $395. Between 1921 and 1924, roughly two-thirds of the manufacturers exited from
the business. By mid-decade, the number of makers returned to the level prevailing before the outbreak of
World War One and even Ford had exited the industry. R. Gray, Development; R. Williams, Fordson, p.
53.
The 1920s saw the share of tractor market controlled by the eight full-line farm-implement
manufacturers rise dramatically and the industrial structure assume a more stable, oligopolistic form. In
1921, the full-line equipment firms accounted for only about 26 percent of the sales of wheeled tractors.
By 1929, their fraction increased to 96 percent, with International Harvester holding a 60 percent market

18

To address how viable the horse mode remained, we adopt a fresh approach by
viewing the diffusion process as a capital replacement problem. The key is to understand
how horse breeders responded to changing economic conditions. It is important to
recognize that there already existed a well-functioning and sophisticated market for the
provision of draft power before the tractor was introduced. Although horses and mules
were bred in every state, Missouri and neighboring areas emerged as the center of the
interregional horse market by the late nineteenth century. Centrally located and favored
by low feed prices and a pool of skilled breeders, this region shipped horses throughout
the United States. By 1910 breeding rates in the North and South Atlantic and Gulf Coast
states were well below the replacement rates needed to sustain the draft animal
population.
Breeding activity and parentage were not left to nature. There was an active
market for stallion services, which were often provided by stallioners with prized
animals. In 1920 only 1.5 percent of all U.S. farms reported having stallions compared to
74 percent reporting horses. Because stallions were hard to handle, most male horses
were gelded. Nationally there were over 8 million geldings and only 129 thousand
stallions. In all of New England there were well under 3,000 breeding males. The market
valued a horse’s breeding potential with the price of geldings averaging slightly less than
that of mares and only one-fifth that of stallions. Horse breeding also represented one of
the common, if lesser known, arenas for government intervention into agriculture in the
early twentieth century. After 1900, roughly one-half of the US states, including virtually
all of the midwestern states, enacted laws to register studs available for public service and
to regulate the operation of the market for breeding services.35 (Below we explore how
share and Deere a 21 percent share. And by 1937, the full-line firms made up almost 98.6 percent of the
market. The industry remained highly concentrated in the post-WWII period. In 1958, the four largest
tractor companies accounted for 72 percent of the value of shipments, the eight largest companies for all
but four percent. With these changes, it appears the tractor industry moved away from the sharper forms of
price competition. In contrast to the experience in the 1920-22 recession, nominal tractor prices changed
little during the more severe 1929-1933 contraction. Real tractor prices rose, slowing diffusion.
Temporary National Committee, Monograph No. 36, pp. 246-47; US Bureau of the Census, 1967 Census
of Manufacturing, SR2-66.
35
US Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census, pp. 534-38. The US state laws typically involved
licensing breeding horses for public service, instituting inspection procedures, and standardizing contract
forms, especially with regard to liens on the prospective colt. Government involvement in horse breeding
in America never reached the extent prevailing on the European continent, where, for example, the French,

19

the number of licensed studs changed over the 1910-40 period.) Note that well before the
arrival of tractors, horse breeders responded in a predictable fashion to market signals.
As an example a decline in horse prices in the mid-1890s resulted in a marked reduction
in breeding activity. There were substantial and persistent differences in the price of draft
animals across states with prices rising as one moved away from Missouri. Although
prices varied, they tended to move together reflecting the existence of a national market.
The draft animal mode of power was not technologically stagnant because over the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the average weight and pulling power of farm
horses increased as a result of selective breeding.
In 1912, the U.S. Bureau of Agricultural Economics collected detailed estimates
from its extensive network of crop reporters on the cost of raising horses from birth to age
three.36 The figures reveal that colt-rearing costs were closely related to the price of
mature horses and generally declined from east to west (with the exception of the Pacific
Coast).
The cross-sectional data on rearing costs combined with information on input
prices allow us to construct two sets of time-series estimates for the horse-rearing cost.
The first uses a cross-sectional regression of rearing costs on a set of input prices to
derive the horse-rearing cost function. The second is formed as a Lasperyes index from
the average weights of the key inputs (grain, hay, labor, land, and interest rates) in overall
costs and the relevant price changes over time.
The key variable of interest is the ratio of the price of mature horses to the cost of
rearing colts. Conceptually, this ratio is obviously related to “Tobin's q”−defined as the
ratio of the market price of an asset to its reproduction costs. (Indeed, we are tempted to
refer to our ratio as “Dobbin's q.”) As is well known in finance/investment literature, if
“Tobin's q” exceeds unity, then it is advantageous to invest in new capital equipment. A

Belgium, and Austrian states established national stud farms to improve their draft stock. USDA, Progress
pp. 19-22; Gay, Horse Husbandry, pp. 179-88.
36
USDA, “Cost of Raising Horses,” p. 28. The correspondents were instructed “[i]n estimating the
different items of cost, in terms of money, the amount should be such as you would charge a neighbor, or as
a neighbor would charge you for such service. Let the figures given represent your estimate of cost under
normal conditions of recent years.”

20

ratio of less than one discourages new investment because it is cheaper to acquire
additional capital through the purchase of existing assets.37
The trends in the price-reproduction cost ratio and the extent of horse and mule
breeding, as measured by the ratio of colts under age 1 to total animal stocks, are
displayed in Figure 4. Their correspondence is striking. The breeding rate and price-cost
ratios moved sharply down together over the early-1920s, recovered slightly in the mid1930s, and then fell again after the late-1930s. We can formalize the relationship by
regressing the log of the breeding rate of the log of the price-to-reproduction cost ratio.
Statistical analysis reveals that these series appear non-stationary. (Using augmented
Dickey-Fuller tests, we cannot reject at the 5 percent significance level the hypothesis that
each of the original series contains a unit root.38) The differenced series, however, meet
the standard criteria for being stationary. Table 6 displays the results of regressing the
change in (the log of) the breeding rate on contemporaneous and lagged changes in (the
logs of) the price-to-reproduction cost ratios (for index 1 and index 2, respectively) over
the 1914 to 1960 period. For each price-cost series, including three lags fits best. Given
the long period of production in horse rearing, such a lag structure appears well justified
on economic grounds. Taken together, these results suggest breeding activity was closely
related to the “Dobbin’s q” measures. A permanent 10 percent reduction in the price-toreproduction cost ratio led to a roughly 6.8 to 9.2 percent reduction in the colt-to-horse
ratio.

This analysis indicates that breeders swiftly responded to the new economic

conditions, sharply reducing the number of colts foaled in the late 1910s and early 1920s.
These individual investment decisions helped ensure the ultimate victory of the tractor
mode of production.
Another sign of the quick adjustment of horse breeders to the changing demand
for animal power was the rapid reduction in the number of licensed stallions and jacks.
Figure 5 graphs the number of registered studs in six important breeding states,
California, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, and Wisconsin, between the early 1910s and

37

For an entry point into the investment literature, see Abel, “Consumption and Investment,” pp. 763-67.
We can reject (at a 5 percent level) the hypotheses that the series contain more than one unit root or that
either of the price-cost series co-integrate with the breeding series.

38

21

the early 1940s.39 (Sporadic data available for Kentucky and Missouri paint a largely
similar picture.) As Figure 5 reveals, the licensing activity peaked around 1915 and by the
mid-1920s, the numbers of registered stallions and jacks were typically less than onethird of the levels of a decade before. Given that the registration fees were nominal in
most states, the rapid and steady decline in licensing after WWI undoubtedly reflects the
withdrawal of many breeders from the business. (The moderate upsurge in licensing in
the 1930s indicates that the trend was not inexorably downward.)
The decline in breeding was sufficiently rapid that it soon raised alarms. By the
mid-1920s, USDA authorities began to express concerns about impeding problems in
articles entitled “Horse Production Falling Fast in US” and “Shortage of Work Animals
in Sight.” The 1930 USDA Yearbook followed suit; under the headline “Horses and
Mules Now Raised Are Much Fewer than the Replacement Needs” it noted that breeders
were producing only one-half of the 1 million horse colts and 300,000 mule colts needed
annually to sustain the animal population.40 Clearly the people whose livelihood
depended on horse and mule breeding saw the handwriting on the wall − the horse age
was coming to an end.
As a result, the U.S. population of horses and mules aged significantly after the
early 1920s. Figure 6 displays estimates of the average age of the draft animal and
tractors on farms from the early 1920s to 1960. As the Figure shows, the average age of
horses and mules climbed dramatically over the 1920s and early 1930s, rising from about
9 years in 1923 to over 12.5 years by 1935. The average age declined briefly during the
late 1930s and early 1940s as a result of the depression era up-tick in breeding activity
and the passing of the bulge of animals born in the late 1910s. After 1943, the average
age of draft animals began to climb again. The average age of tractors on farms also
generally increased, rising from roughly 3 years in the early 1920s to about 8.5 years in
the mid-1930s. Comparing the series for draft animals and machines highlights an

39

California, Monthly Bulletin, pp. 725-27; Purdue, Indiana Stallion; Illinois, 17th Annual Report, p. 25;
29nd Annual Report p. 167; Iowa, 1941 Yearbook, p. 185; Kansas, Stallion Registry, p. 6; Wisconsin,
Biennial Report 1935-36, pp. 194-95; Biennial Report 1939-40, p. 93. USDA, Horses, Mules, and Motor
Vehicles, pp. 9-10.
40
USDA, Yearbook of Agriculture 1931, pp. 328-31; USDA, “Shortage,” pp. 108-09; USDA, Agriculture
Yearbook 1926, pp. 437-39.

22

important point about durable capital goods: as the new technology replaces the old, the
average age of both stocks may be expected to increase.41
Figure 7 provides another perspective on the diffusion process as a capital
replacement problem. It shows the horse’s share of gross investment in new horsepower
capacity (where tractor horsepower is measured in belt units) over the period 1910-60.
For comparison purposes, it also displays the horse’s share of existing capacity. By the
early 1920s, horses represented between 15 and 30 percent of new investments with the
exception of the lowest points of the Depression in 1932-33.42 In terms of the investment
in new power capacity, the shift from the animal to the mechanical mode was
substantially more rapid than the existing literature suggests.
Our findings provide insight into a number of important issues. As an example,
Whatley and others have noted a variety of reasons for the South’s lag in the adoption of
tractors. To this list one must add the workings of the asset market. Although only 1.3
percent of the farms in the East South Central reported tractors in 1925, the nominal
prices of horses had already fallen in half since 1920. Thus, the competitiveness of the
tractor mode in the South, at the very time when designs suitable for cotton cultivation
were just being introduced, was being undercut by the displacement of animals on
northern farms and cities. Tractor company policies may have contributed to the South’s
lag. Records found in the Higgins archives indicate that Caterpillar dealers in California
shipped the horses that it took in trade on tractor sales to the southern market to reduce
the local supply.43

41

We constructed the estimates of the average age of the horse and mule population from annual USDA
data on the numbers of horses and mules age under 1 year, 1-2 years, 2-3 years, and 3 and older, detailed
1925 figures on the animal population’s age distribution, and a life table for draft animals. USDA,
“Shortage,” pp. 108-09. The series match closely independently derived figures for the average ages in
1933 from Harlan, “Farm Power Problem,” pp. 5-9 and for 1943 from Brodell and Jennings, “Work
Performed,” p. 13. The estimates for the post-WW II could not be checked against other independent
sources, and should not be treated as secure. The tractor series are from Fox, Demand, p. 33.
42
Using drawbar horsepower instead of belt power would result in a lower initial share for tractor capacity
but more rapid growth; the relative movements of investment shares versus capacity shares would be
essentially unchanged. Focusing on net investment instead of gross investment would obviously be even
more skewed in favor of tractors, given that gross investment in animal stock were below replacement levels
by 1923.
43
Tractor Files in the F. Hal Higgins Collection on Agricultural Technology, Department of Special
Collections, Shields Library, UC Davis.

23

Conclusion
The tractor represented a grand Schumperterian innovation that sent shockwaves
throughout the economy changing established production relationships and in the process
creating new opportunities and destroying old ways of doing business. By focusing
almost exclusively on questions dealing with the timing of diffusion, much of the existing
economic history literature has ignored other, more fundamental questions.44 How did
the tractor affect farm scale, cropping patterns, the organization of farm work, and
internal and external labor markets? In particular, focusing on the horse-tractor trade-off
has given short shrift to the tractor’s impact on the most important phenomena in
twentieth-century American agriculture− the exodus of workers off the farm and the huge
reduction in the number of farms.

This paper has attempted to provide a broader

perspective. Table 7 offers a summary of the more important consequences of the spread
of the tractor.
Beyond helping to better explain the replacement of the horse by the tractor, this
paper analyzes the applicability of the threshold model to study the diffusion of the tractor
and by implication to the study of a wide array of other innovations. Specifically, we
have explored under what conditions the model makes “sense,” and in the process
explained why so many previous studies found little cost advantage for either the horse or
the tractor mode of production over the span of several decades. Our regression analysis
indicated that farm scale and tractor adoption were co-determined. Larger scale induced
greater adoption and greater adoption, larger scale. These findings compliment our
earlier work on the reaper and should encourage a re-evaluation of a larger literature
dealing with agricultural mechanization. Until our concerns are confronted head on,
future threshold estimates should display the warning, caveat emptor.
As an alternative to the past approach, we intertwine a story of technological
refinement with an analysis of institutional and market adjustments. There is a strong
44

The analyses of Whatley and Clarke stand apart in their success in integrating the tractor into a more
general discussion of regional development.

24

tradition for both prongs of our argument; the technological findings are in the spirit of
Nathan Rosenberg’s life work, and our institutional analysis builds on the growing
literature on Coasean transactions cost and contracting.
Before the coming of the tractor, horses and mules were the major source of power
in rural America. To date we know of no systematic analysis of how the market for draft
power functioned. Our analysis of horse breeding, which rests on a clearer understanding
of the functional relationships motivating tractor adoption, offers a new view of both the
coexistence problem and of the rapid adjustment of expectations to the new technology.
Once again, our argument, which is solidly based on historical data, demonstrates that
markets were flexible and that they worked as one would expect.

25

References
Abel, Andrew B. “Consumption and Investment.” In Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank
H. Hahn, ed. Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 2. New York (1990): 725-78.
Ankli, Robert H. “Horses vs. Tractors in the Corn Belt.” Agricultural History 54 (1980):
134-48.
Ankli, Robert H. and Alan L. Olmstead. “The Adoption of the Gasoline Tractor in
California.” Agricultural History 54 (1981): 213-30.
Balke, Nathan S. and Robert J. Gordon. “The Estimation of Prewar Gross National
Product: Methodology and New Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 97 (1989): 3892.
Baker, O. E. A Graphic Summary of Physical Features and Land Utilization in the
United States. USDA Miscellaneous Publication 260. Washington, DC: GPO, 1937.
Binswanger, Hans. “Predicting Institutional Change: What Building Blocks Does a
Theory Need?” In Bruce Koppel, ed., Induced Innovation Theory and International
Agricultural Development: A Reassessment. Baltimore, Maryland (1995): 102-35.
Bird, Ronald. Taxes Levied on Farm Real Property in the United States. Statistical
Bulletin 189. Washington, DC: GPO, 1956.
Brewster, John M. “The Machine Process in Agriculture and Industry.” Journal of Farm
Economics 32 (1950): 69-81.
Brodell, A. P. and M. R. Cooper. Fuel Consumed and Work Performed by Farm
Tractors. USDA Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Farm Management No. 32.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1942.
Brodell, A. P. and R. D. Jennings. Work Performed and Feed Utilized By Horses and
Mules. USDA Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Farm Management No. 44.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1944.
Brodell, A. P. and J. A. Ewing. Use of Tractor Power, Animal Power, and Hand
Methods in Crop Production. USDA Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Farm
Management No. 69. Washington, DC: GPO, 1948.
Brodell, A. P. and A. R. Kendall. Fuel and Motor Oil Consumption and Annual Use of

26

Farm Tractors. USDA Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Farm Management No. 72.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1950.
California Department of Agriculture. Monthly Bulletin. Sacramento: Department of
Agriculture (Dec. 1931).
Chayanov, A. V. Theory of the Peasant Economy. In D. Thorner et al., ed. Homewood,
II: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1966.
Clarke, Sally H. Regulation and the Revolution in United States Farm Productivity. New
York, 1994.
Cooper, Martin R., Glen T. Barton, and Albert P. Brodell. Progress of Farm
Mechanization. USDA Miscellaneous Publication 630 (Oct . 1947).
Csorba, J. J. The Use of Horses and Mules on Farms. ARS 43-94 (March 1959).
David, Paul A. “The Mechanization of Reaping in the Ante-Bellum Midwest.” In Henry
Rosovsky, ed., Industrialization in Two Systems: Essays in Honor of Alexander
Gerschenkron. New York (1966): 3-39.
. “The Reaper and the Robot: The Adoption of Labour-Saving Machinery
in the Past and Future.” In F. M. L. Thompson, ed. Landowners, Capitalists, and
Entrepreneurs: Essays for Sir John Habakkuk. Oxford: Clarendon (1994): 275-305.
Dewhurst and Associates. America's Needs and Resources: A New Survey. New York
(1955).
Ellis, L. W. Traction Plowing.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1910.

USDA Bureau of Plant Industry Bulletin 170.

Fleisig, Haywood. “Slavery, the Supply of Agricultural Labor, and the Industrialization of
the South.” Journal of Economic History 26 (1976): 572-97.
Fox, Austin. The Demand for Farm Tractors in The United States: A Regression
Analysis. USDA Agricultural Economic Report No. 103. Washington, DC: GPO, 1966.
Gay, Carl W. Productive Horse Husbandry. 3rd ed., Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1920.
Gilbert, C. W. “An Economic Study of Tractors on New York Farms.” Cornell
University Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 506. Ithaca, New York, 1930.
Gray, R. B. Development of the Agricultural Tractor in the United States. USDA
Information Series No. 107. Beltsville, MD, (June 1954).

27

Griliches, Zvi. “Demand for a Durable Input: Farm Tractors in the U.S., 1921-57.” In
Arnold C. Harberger, ed., Demand for Durable Goods. Chicago (1960): 181-207.
Handschin, W. F., et al. “The Horse and the Tractor: An Economic Study of Their Use
on Farms in Central Illinois.” Illinois Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 231.
Urbana, IL, 1921.
Hecht, Reuben W. Farm Labor Requirements in the United States, 1939 and 1944. US
Bureau of Agricultural Economics FM 59. Washington, DC (April 1947).
Horton, Donald. et al. Farm-Mortgage Credit Facilities in the United States. USDA
Miscellaneous Publication 478. Washington, DC: GPO, 1942.
Hurst, W. M. and L. M. Church. Power and Machinery in Agriculture. USDA
Miscellaneous Publication 157. Washington, DC: GPO, 1933.
Illinois Department of Agriculture. 17th Annual Report, July 1 1933 to June 30 1934
Springfield, IL: State Printing Office, 1934.
. 29nd Annual Report, July 1, 1945 to June 30, 1946. Springfield, IL: State
Printing Office, 1946.
Iowa Department of Agriculture. 1941 Iowa Yearbook of Agriculture. Des Moines, IA:
Department of Agriculture, 1941.
Kansas State Board of Agriculture. Stallion Registry 1939. Topeka, KS: State Printer,
(Feb. 1940).
Kislev, Yoav and Willis Peterson. “Prices, Technology and Farm Size.” Journal of
Political Economy 90 (June 1982): 578-95.
Jasny, Naum. “Tractor Versus Horse as a Source of Farm Power.” American Economic
Review 25 (1935): 708-23.
. Research Methods on Farm Use of Tractor. New York: Columbia Press,
1938.
Kinsman, C. D. An Appraisal of Power Used on Farms in the United States. USDA
Department Bulletin 1348. Washington DC: GPO, 1925.
Lew, Byron. “The Diffusion of Tractors on the Canadian Prairies: The Threshold Model
and the Problem of Uncertainty” Explorations in Economic History 37:2 (April 2000):
189-216.
Lindert, Peter H.

“Long-run Trends in American Farmland Values.”

28

Davis, CA:

University of California Agricultural History Center Working Paper Series No. 45 (Feb.
1988).
McElroy, Robert C., Reuben W. Hecht, and Earle E. Gavett, Labor Used to Produce
Field Crops, Estimates by States. USDA Statistical Bulletin 346. Washington, DC: GPO,
1964.
McKibben, Eugene G. and R. Austin Griffin. Changes in Farm Power and Equipment:
Tractors, Trucks, and Automobiles. WPA, National Research Project, Report No. A-9,
Philadelphia: 1938.
Miller, Ann and Carol Brainerd. “Labor Force Estimates.” In Everett Lee, et al., eds.
Population Redistribution and Economic Growth, United States 1970-1950, Vol. I,
Methodological Considerations and Reference Tables. Philadelphia:
American
Philosophical Society, 1957.
Musoke, Moses S. “Mechanizing Cotton Production in the American South: The Tractor,
1915-1960.” Explorations in Economic History 18 (1981): 347-75.
Myers, W. I. “An Economic Study of Farm Tractors in New York.” Cornell University
Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 405. Ithaca, New York, 1921.
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode. “The Agricultural Mechanization Controversy of
the Interwar Years.” Agricultural History 68: 35-53.
. “Beyond the Threshold: An Analysis of the Characteristics and Behavior
of Early Reaper Adopters.” Journal of Economic History 55:1 (1995): 27-57.
Parsons, Merton S., et al. Farm Machinery: Use, Depreciation, and Replacement. USDA
Statistical Bulletin 269. Washington, DC: GPO, 1960.
Parsons, Merton S. Farm Machinery: A Survey of Ownership and Custom Work. USDA
Statistical Bulletin 279. Washington, DC: GPO, 1961.
Purdue University Agriculture Experiment Station. Indiana Stallion Enrollment. Circular
No. 282. Lafayette, IN: 1942.
Reynoldson, L. A., et al. Utilization and Cost of Power on Corn Belt Farms. USDA
Technical Bulletin 384. Washington, DC: GPO, 1933.
Sargen, Nicholas P. “Tractorization” in the United States and Its Relevance for the
Developing Countries. New York, 1979.
Schwantes, A. J. and G. A. Pond. “The Farm Tractor in Minnesota.” Minnesota
Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 280. St. Paul, MN: 1931.

29

Stinson, Thomas F. Revised Estimates of Taxes Levied on Farm Real Property, 1950-67.
Statistical Bulletin 441. Washington, DC: GPO, 1969.
Temporary National Committee to Investigate the Concentration of Economic Power.
Monograph No. 36: Reports of the Federal Trade Commission on Natural Gas and
Natural Gas Pipe Lines in USA, Agricultural Implements and Machinery Inquiry, Motor
Vehicle Industry Inquiry. 76th Cong., 3d Sess. Washington, DC: GPO, 1940.
Tolley, H.R. and L. A. Reynoldson. The Cost and Utilization of Power on Farms Where
Tractors are Owned. USDA Bulletin 997. Washington, DC: GPO, 1921.
Tolley, H. R. and L. M. Church. Tractors on Southern Farms. USDA Farmers' Bulletin
1278. Washington, DC: GPO, 1922.
Tolley, H. R. and W. R. Humphries. Tractors and Horses in the Winter Wheat Belt,
Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska. USDA Department Bulletin 1202. Washington, DC: GPO,
1924.
USDA. Progress in Horse Breeding. Farmers’ Bulletin 419 (July 1910).
. “Cost of Raising Horses, 1912.” Monthly Crop Reporter (April 1913).
. Monthly Crop Reporter (March 1920).
. Agriculture Yearbook 1921. Washington, DC: GPO, 1922.
. Horses, Mules, and Motor Vehicles. Statistical Bulletin 5 (Jan. 1925).
. “Shortage of Work Animals in Sight.” Crops and Markets (April 1925):
108-09.
. Agriculture Yearbook 1926. Washington, DC: GPO, 1927.
. Yearbook of Agriculture 1931. Washington, DC: GPO, 1932.
. 1956 Agricultural Statistics. Washington, DC: GPO, 1957.
. Farmers’ Expenditures for Motor Vehicles and Machinery with Related
Data, 1955. Statistical Bulletin 243. Washington, DC: GPO, 1959.
. 1962 Agricultural Statistics. Washington, DC: GPO, 1963.
.Agricultural Resources:
Washington, DC: GPO, 1989.

Inputs:

30

Situation

and Outlook. AR-15.

. “U.S. Equine Inventory Up 1.3 Percent.” National Agricultural Statistics
Service Press Release. (March 2, 1999).
. Agricultural Prices. various years.
. Crops and Markets. various years.
U.S. Bureau of Agricultural Economics. Farm Labor. various years.
. “Prices Paid by Farmers for Household Articles, January 24-27, 1934.”
Mimeo. Washington, DC (Dec. 5, 1934).
. “Prices Paid by Farmers for Farm Machinery, January 24-27, 1934.”
Mimeo. Washington, DC (Dec. 27, 1934).
. Income Parity for Agriculture, Part III. Prices Paid by Farmers for
Commodities and Services, Section 4, Prices Paid by Farmers for Farm Machinery and
Motor Vehicles, 1910-38. Prel. Washington DC, (May 1939).
. Income Parity for Agriculture, Part II: Expenses for Agricultural
Production, Section 3: Purchases, Depreciation, and Value of Farm Automobiles,
Motortrucks, Tractors and Other Farm Machinery. Washington, DC: GPO, 1940.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Fourteenth Census of the United States: 1920, Vol. V,
Agriculture, General Report and Analytical Tables. Washington, DC: GPO, 1922.
. Sixteenth Census of the United States: 1940 Manufactures 1939 Vo. II,
Pt. 2, Reports by Industries Groups 11 to 20. Washington, DC: GPO, 1942.
. Census of Agriculture 1940, Analysis of Specified Farm Characteristics
for Farms Classified by Total Value of Products. Washington, DC: GPO, 1943.
. Sixteenth Census of the United States: 1940 Agriculture, Vol. III,
General Report, Statistics by Subjects. Washington, DC: GPO, 1943.
. Census of Agriculture: 1945, Special Report: Farms and Farm
Characteristics by Value of Products. Washington, DC: GPO, 1948.
. Census of Agriculture 1950, General Report, Vol. II. Washington, DC:
GPO, 1952.
. Census of Agriculture 1954, General Report, Vol. II. Washington, DC:
GPO, 1957.

31

. Census of Agriculture 1959, General Report, Vol. II, Statistics by
Subject. Washington, DC: GPO, 1962.
. Census of Population 1960, Vol. I, Characteristics of the Population.
Parts 2-52. Washington, DC: GPO, 1963.
. 1967 Census of Manufacturing, Special Report Concentration Ratios in
Manufacturing, Part 2: Product Class Concentration Ratios. (Feb. 1971) MC67 (S)-2.2.
. Census of Agriculture 1969, General Report, Vol. II. Washington, DC:
GPO, 1973.
. Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970, Part 1.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1975.
U.S. Economic Research Service. Farm Real Estate Historical Series, 1850-1970. ERS
520 Washington, DC. (June 1973).
Whatley, Warren C. “Institutional Change and Mechanization in the Cotton South: The
Tractorization of Cotton Farming.” Stanford University: Economics Ph.D. Dissertation,
1983.
Williams, Robert C. Fordson, Farmall, and Poppin' Johnny: A History of the Farm
Tractor and Its Impact on America. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1987.
Wisconsin Department of Agriculture and Markets. Biennial Report, 1935-36 Bulletin
178. Madison, WI: Department of Agriculture, (Oct. 1936).
. Biennial Report, 1939-40 Bulletin 219. Madison, WI: Department of
Agriculture, (Dec. 1940).
Yerkes, Arnold P. and H. H. Mowry. Farm Experience with the Tractor. USDA Bulletin
174. Washington, DC: GPO, 1915.
Yerkes, Arnold P. and L. M. Church. An Economic Study of the Farm Tractor in the Corn
Belt. USDA Farmers' Bulletin 719. Washington, DC: GPO, 1916.
. Tractor Experience in Illinois: A Study of the Farm Tractor Under CornBelt Conditions. USDA Farmers' Bulletin 963. Washington, DC: GPO, 1918.
. The Gas Tractor in Eastern Farming. USDA Farmers' Bulletin 1004.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1918.
. The Farm Tractor in the Dakotas. USDA Farmers' Bulletin 1035.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1919.
32

DATA APPENDIX
The sources underlying our regression variables in our state-level dataset are listed below. The construction
of the tractor rental and land rental series are discussed at the end of this appendix.
NUMBER OF FARMS AND LAND IN FARMS: Data by state from US Bureau of the Census, Historical
Statistics, Series K 17-81.
FARMS REPORTING TRACTORS: US Bureau of the Census. Census of Agriculture 1959, p. 214.
SETTLEMENT: The date of settlement is the decade that the state’s population density first exceeded two
persons per square mile, as indicated by Series A196 of US Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics.
States achieving this level by the first census were assigned 1790.
LABOR: As our labor quantity measure, we use the number of male agricultural laborers as reported in the
Census of Population and corrected in the 1910 to 1950 period by Miller and Brainerd, “Labor Force
Estimates”; the 1960 data are from the US Bureau of the Census, Census of Population: 1960.
CROPLAND AND FIELD CROP SHARE: The basic data on acreage of cropland harvested for 1920 to
1959 are from the US Bureau of the Census: Census of Agriculture: 1959, Table 21, pp. 53-64. The
census's definition of “cropland harvested” changed between 1920 and 1930 to include orchard and other
“minor” crops, which were important for selected states. We employed the following sources to construct
state-level estimates of acreage in these minor crops for the pre-1930 era: USDA Yearbook of Agriculture:
1921, p. 463; US Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census of the United States: 1920, Agriculture, Table
127, p. 852. The field crop share is the proportion of cropland devoted to barley, buckwheat, oats, rye, and
wheat.
FARM WAGES: For 1920-1945, we used daily farm wages without board from US Bureau of Agricultural
Economics, Farm Labor, Feb. 12, 1946, pp. 12-15. The 1950 are from Farm Labor, Jan. 14, 1952, p. 12;
for 1955, from Crops and Markets, Vol. 33 (1955) p. 127; and for 1960, from Farm Labor Jan. 1961, p. 15.
Daily wages in the Pacific States are not reported in this period; they were estimated based on hourly wages
in the Pacific States and the average of ratio of daily wages to hourly wages in the other 45 states.
LAND PRICES: Value of land per acre from Lindert, “Long-run Trends” with the 1925 and 1955 values
interpolated based on the annual data from US Economic Research Service, Farm Real Estate.
INTEREST RATES: For 1920-40, state data from Horton, Farm-Mortgage Credit; the 1945-60 rates based
on regional data from 1962 Agricultural Statistics, p. 590.
REAL ESTATE TAXES: Tax rates per $100 of value from Bird, Taxes Levied and Stinson, Revised
Estimates.
GASOLINE PRICES: The gasoline prices paid by farmers for 1919/20 are 1919 state prices from USDA,
Monthly Crop Reporter, March 1920, p. 26; those for 1924/25 are April 1924 state prices from USDA,
Crops and Markets, Vol. 1, Supp. 6, (June 1924), p. 170; those for 1929/30, 1939/40, and 1944/45 are
based the national prices for gasoline purchased by farmers from USDA, Agricultural Prices, Oct. 1959, p.
30 and 1934 state relatives reported in US Bureau of Agricultural Economics, “Prices Paid for...Household
Articles” p. 5; those for 1949/50 are March 1949 state prices reported in USDA, Agricultural Prices, 29
March 1950, p 26; for 1954/55 are 15 June 1954 state prices reported in USDA, Crops and Markets 1955,
Vol. 32, p. 105; and those for 1959/60 are 15 June 1959 state prices reported in USDA, Agricultural Prices,
Nov. 1961, p. 24. For consistency, the analysis uses gasoline prices throughout. This might raise some
concerns because tractors shifted between fuels over this period. Fortunately, the prices of the two main

33

fuels, gasoline and kerosene, were highly correlated across regions (the 1924 correlation coefficient was
0.73 across states).
TRACTOR PRICES: Prices of tractors up to 1935 are based on national USDA series for “medium
tractors” from US Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Income Parity, Prices Paid, p. 50, spliced from
1939/40 on to the USDA series for 20-29 belt hp tractors reported in Agricultural Prices, 29 March 1950,
p. 34; 1956 Agricultural Statistics, p. 468; and 1962 Agricultural Statistics, p. 563. State prices are
constructed based on 1934 price relatives for three tractors (John Deere 15-30 HP tractors, IHC Farmall,
and J. I. Case General Purpose Model CC) reported in US Bureau of Agricultural Economics, “Prices Paid
... for Farm Machinery,” p. 12 and 1954 price relatives from Crops and Markets 32 (1955) p. 106.
TRACTOR RENTAL RATES: The tractor prices series were converted into a rental series by multiplying
the tractor price by a cost of capital formed from the state’s mortgage interest rates, expected inflation, and
tractor depreciation. Based on a reading of USDA and state power studies, we model the depreciation rate
as follows: 15.8 % per annum in 1910, 14.3% 1920; 13.3% 1925; 12.1% 1930; 8.3% 1940; 7.1% 1945;
6.7% 1950; 6.1% 1955; 5.6% 1960. Hurst and Church, Power, p. 24; Parsons, Farm Machinery: Use pp.
27-28. Inflationary expectations were based on a centered three-year moving average of the official GNP
deflator (Series F5 in Historical Statistics) spliced to the Balke-Gordon series before 1929 from
“Estimation” pp. 84-85.
LAND RENTAL RATES: The land prices were converted into a rental series by multiplying the land price
by a cost of capital formed from the state’s mortgage interest rates, real estate tax rates, the expected
inflation rate as defined above, and four percent depreciation rate.

34

TABLE 1
Percent of Farms Reporting:
U.S. NENG
Tractors
1920
1925
1930
1935
1940
1945
1950
1954
1959
1964
1969

3.6
7.4
13.5
nd
23.1
34.2
46.9
60.1
72.3
76.6
80.8

1.4
4.6
10.5
nd
19.2
31.1
44.9
60.2
74.2
74.8
81.0

MALT

ENC

WNC

SALT

ESC

WSC

MTN

PAC

3.1
11.3
21.5
nd
33.0
49.7
63.6
77.4
86.4
88.1
89.4

5.1
13.5
24.7
nd
39.9
56.4
69.4
82.6
88.8
90.3
87.6

8.4
13.7
26.5
nd
44.7
61.2
71.8
83.3
88.0
90.4
88.0

0.9
2.6
4.2
nd
5.6
11.1
23.2
38.6
55.8
63.2
74.0

0.5
1.3
2.1
nd
3.6
7.7
18.8
31.8
47.2
56.3
70.7

1.8
2.9
5.7
nd
14.9
25.3
38.4
50.0
62.7
67.4
75.1

6.5
7.7
17.9
nd
28.3
44.3
64.8
74.6
82.1
83.4
82.6

7.5
13.4
20.8
nd
27.6
38.4
56.8
67.3
76.8
73.8
76.0

Horses or Mules
1925
84.2
1930
79.9
1935
73.4
1940
71.5
1945
63.8
1950
54.0
1954
37.6
1959
30.6
1964
nd
1969
20.0

74.0
66.3
54.3
46.6
37.2
35.4
26.0
22.2
nd
20.1

81.6
74.6
70.4
66.5
56.0
40.9
23.9
20.2
nd
20.4

87.8
84.3
77.9
74.4
61.8
39.6
20.9
16.4
nd
15.6

92.2
89.0
83.8
79.3
77.1
57.8
32.8
23.1
nd
18.6

79.9
77.7
68.0
71.6
65.3
62.8
49.3
40.6
nd
16.0

81.2
73.8
70.1
69.1
64.2
64.5
50.8
44.6
nd
19.8

85.9
83.5
76.1
74.8
63.5
57.5
42.9
37.6
nd
25.0

89.2
81.9
78.1
75.5
69.2
59.3
49.6
48.6
nd
40.8

65.5
55.4
48.9
43.5
35.5
27.4
21.8
22.7
nd
22.5

Horses
1900
1910
1920
1935
1940
1945
1950

79.0
73.8
73.0
51.9
51.6
48.3
39.4

84.8
79.3
81.4
54.0
46.4
37.4
35.1

88.6
85.3
87.1
67.6
63.4
53.6
39.4

91.6
90.7
91.2
74.8
71.3
60.9
38.1

93.1
93.0
93.6
79.6
75.4
74.5
55.8

55.5
48.2
46.1
23.2
24.7
25.3
26.4

62.6
52.8
53.6
25.6
29.8
31.4
31.6

78.7
72.8
69.1
46.6
50.0
49.0
45.5

91.8
87.2
90.8
76.9
74.6
69.5
58.7

87.3
84.2
78.2
45.5
40.6
33.2
26.5

Mules
1900
1910
1920
1935
1940
1945
1950

25.8
29.4
35.0
33.1
30.3
25.4
20.5

0.3
0.5
0.8
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.5

4.0
4.6
6.8
7.1
6.8
4.7
2.6

7.9
9.1
10.9
9.8
7.6
5.2
2.6

18.5
21.1
24.9
17.4
13.4
10.2
4.6

36.1
41.2
52.1
50.4
53.1
47.0
41.6

48.5
50.4
55.1
57.8
54.6
50.3
46.3

49.0
52.5
60.5
55.8
48.6
36.7
24.8

7.2
8.9
12.6
8.8
6.3
4.4
2.9

8.5
8.1
9.2
7.0
5.3
3.2
2.0

35

TABLE 2
Percent of Farms Reporting:
U.S.

NENG

MALT

ENC

WNC

SALT

ESC

WSC

MTN

PAC

53.0
38.8
30.5
17.4

34.9
22.5
21.2
11.8

41.5
24.3
15.8
6.6

40.3
22.9
13.4
4.7

40.4
24.1
15.5
5.3

66.9
56.3
47.8
29.5

65.8
57.5
51.5
34.1

65.3
47.9
38.9
23.8

53.6
34.9
20.3
11.5

29.5
18.9
11.1
6.3

18.6
25.0
23.7
20.4

11.7
14.7
14.7
13.9

24.9
31.7
25.3
17.2

34.1
38.9
26.2
16.2

38.9
52.7
42.7
27.7

4.7
9.0
15.3
19.7

3.3
6.7
13.2
17.3

9.5
15.6
18.9
19.3

21.9
34.3
39.1
38.1

14.0
16.6
16.6
15.5

4.5
9.5
23.2
37.6

7.5
16.9
30.2
39.6

8.1
18.4
38.3
55.8

5.8
17.4
43.2
63.8

5.8
9.0
29.2
54.7

0.9
2.2
7.9
16.6

0.3
0.9
5.6
13.5

5.4
10.0
19.4
29.4

6.4
11.1
25.7
34.5

13.6
22.6
40.2
44.8

23.9
26.8
22.6
24.7

45.8
45.8
33.9
34.7

25.4
25.6
20.6
20.4

19.8
20.8
17.2
15.2

14.9
14.2
12.6
12.4

27.5
32.5
28.9
34.2

30.6
34.9
29.7
35.2

19.8
26.5
22.7
27.6

18.1
19.7
14.9
15.9

42.9
41.8
32.1
33.5

Horses/Mules &
No Tractors
1940
1945
1950
1954
Horses/Mules &
Tractors
1940
1945
1950
1954
Tractors & No
Horses/Mules
1940
1945
1950
1954
No Tractors or
Horses/Mules
1940
1945
1950
1954

36

TABLE 3: Tractor, Draft Animal, and Total Horsepower, 1910-60
TOTAL
New England
Middle Atlantic
E. N. Central
W. N. Central
South Atlantic
E. S. Central
W. S. Central
Mountain
Pacific
United States

1910
353,934
1,153,129
4,101,843
6,398,505
1,416,321
1,436,523
2,536,437
1,152,587
969,208
19,518,486

1920
332,472
1,204,349
4,689,929
7,796,298
1,768,780
1,648,072
2,976,497
1,910,865
1,198,602
23,525,863

1930
330,033
1,575,492
5,625,324
9,492,163
1,783,219
1,622,070
3,556,166
2,041,315
1,447,010
27,472,790

1940
531,216
2,365,736
9,281,516
12,665,453
2,197,258
2,068,429
4,781,519
2,404,402
2,277,134
38,572,663

1950
809,953
4,091,126
14,034,349
18,914,699
4,999,308
4,350,231
7,975,266
4,069,596
3,401,699
62,646,227

1960
1,188,908
5,522,786
20,699,336
27,774,760
7,964,718
6,278,099
9,511,322
5,165,660
5,225,766
89,331,354

ANIMAL
New England
Middle Atlantic
E. N. Central
W. N. Central
South Atlantic
E. S. Central
W. S. Central
Mountain
Pacific
United States

353,934
1,153,129
4,101,843
6,398,505
1,416,321
1,436,523
2,536,437
1,152,587
969,208
19,518,486

309,604
1,105,066
4,168,478
6,656,491
1,665,793
1,586,567
2,760,631
1,735,691
995,910
20,984,231

188,943
695,238
2,901,720
5,402,036
1,300,127
1,370,818
2,607,480
1,363,345
642,753
16,472,459

149,584
668,385
2,581,751
3,831,723
1,337,670
1,430,652
2,051,264
1,040,929
489,452
13,581,410

85,309
319,959
976,824
1,862,265
1,093,216
1,222,510
1,140,384
730,988
299,257
7,730,711

34,168
128,505
353,717
559,493
422,250
451,422
444,482
426,522
183,306
3,003,865

22,867
99,283
521,451
1,139,807
102,987
61,506
215,866
175,174
202,692
2,541,632

141,090
880,254
2,723,604
4,090,127
483,092
251,252
948,686
677,970
804,258
11,000,331

381,632
1,697,351
6,699,765
8,833,730
859,588
637,777
2,730,255
1,363,473
1,787,683
24,991,253

724,644
3,771,167
13,057,526
17,052,434
3,906,092
3,127,721
6,834,882
3,338,609
3,102,442
54,915,516

1,154,740
5,394,281
20,345,619
27,215,267
7,542,468
5,826,676
9,066,839
4,739,138
5,042,460
86,327,489

6.9
8.2
11.1
14.6
5.8
3.7
7.3
9.2
16.9
10.8

42.8
55.9
48.4
43.1
27.1
15.5
26.7
33.2
55.6
40.0

71.8
71.7
72.2
69.7
39.1
30.8
57.1
56.7
78.5
64.8

89.5
92.2
93.0
90.2
78.1
71.9
85.7
82.0
91.2
87.7

97.1
97.7
98.3
98.0
94.7
92.8
95.3
91.7
96.5
96.6

TRACTOR
New England
Middle Atlantic
E. N. Central
W. N. Central
South Atlantic
E. S. Central
W. S. Central
Mountain
Pacific
United States
TRACTOR’S SHARE OF
TOTAL (in percent)
New England
Middle Atlantic
E. N. Central
W. N. Central
South Atlantic
E. S. Central
W. S. Central
Mountain
Pacific
United States

37

TABLE 4:
Descriptive Statistics of Regression Variables

Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

LODDS

384

-1.072

1.908

-6.118

2.876

LCRFM

384

10.845

0.723

9.493

12.771

LPGWG

384

-2.757

0.517

-3.658

-1.320

LTRWG

384

2.824

0.671

1.364

4.440

LLRWG

384

4.445

0.870

1.560

6.623

SETTLE

384

1840.63

47.56

1790

1960

FIELD

384

0.268

0.207

0

0.778

NEAST

384

0.229

0.421

0

1

LAKE

384

0.063

0.242

0

1

CORN

384

0.104

0.306

0

1

NPLAIN

384

0.083

0.277

0

1

SEAST

384

0.083

0.277

0

1

APPAL

384

0.104

0.306

0

1

DELTA

384

0.063

0.242

0

1

SPLAIN

384

0.042

0.200

0

1

MOUNT

384

0.167

0.373

0

1

PACIFIC

384

0.063

0.242

0

1

38

TABLE 5:
Simultaneous-Equation Model of the Scale-Adoption Relationship
Reduced Forms
Dependent
Variable:

LODDS

Structural Equations
LCRFM

LODDS

LCRFM

SCALE

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.7962
(0.3121)

TRACTOR

Coeff.
St. Err.

LPGWG

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.1666
(0.3711)

0.5017
(0.1553)

-0.4937
(0.3641)

LTRWG

Coeff.
St. Err.

-1.7748
(0.5031)

-0.8359
(0.1698)

-0.7694
(0.5398)

LLRWG

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.3273
(0.0813)

0.0843
(0.0408)

-0.0089
(0.0424)

SETTLE

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.0036
(0.0017)

0.0068
(0.0011)

0.0061
(0.0012)

FIELD

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.3689
(0.2044)

0.3443
(0.1251)

0.0005
(0.2156)

0.2449
(0.1187)

NEAST

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.5539
(0.1977)

0.2981
(0.1218)

0.3582
(0.1708)

0.2086
(0.1418)

LAKE

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.8902
(0.1252)

0.3880
(0.0879)

0.5406
(0.1422)

0.2092
(0.1133)

CORN

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.6314
(0.1663)

0.6015
(0.0758)

0.2711
(0.1505)

0.4956
(0.0940)

NPLAIN

Coeff.
St. Err.

1.1757
(0.1355)

1.1755
(0.0615)

0.0555
(0.3636)

0.9056
(0.1009)

SEAST

Coeff.
St. Err.

-0.0881
(0.2411)

0.2235
(0.1159)

-0.2736
(0.2297)

0.3488
(0.1129)

APPAL

Coeff.
St. Err.

-0.3209
(0.1981)

-0.1135
(0.1137)

-0.1402
(0.2411)

0.0765
(0.1106)

DELTA

Coeff.
St. Err.

-0.5294
(0.2151)

-0.0753
(0.0991)

-0.4697
(0.2160)

0.1401
(0.1064)

0.2416
(0.0637)

39

SPLAIN

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.2952
(0.1634)

0.5749
(0.0669)

-0.3373
(0.2172)

0.4990
(0.0591)

MOUNT

Coeff.
St. Err.

0.5898
(0.1788)

0.3702
(0.0936)

-0.0911
(0.1924)

0.2646
(0.0780)

D1925

Coeff.
St. Err.

1.1831
(0.1626)

0.0765
(0.0575)

1.1509
(0.1663)

-0.2464
(0.0623)

D1930

Coeff.
St. Err.

2.2174
(0.2273)

0.2442
(0.0906)

2.0627
(0.2533)

-0.3756
(0.0979)

D1940

Coeff.
St. Err.

2.3486
(0.1380)

-0.1720
(0.0676)

2.4866
(0.1478)

-0.5919
(0.1579)

D1945

Coeff.
St. Err.

1.1452
(0.4051)

-0.6509
(0.1598)

1.5734
(0.5041)

-0.6828
(0.2203)

D1950

Coeff.
St. Err.

2.5988
(0.1911)

-0.2169
(0.0797)

2.6842
(0.2262)

-0.7906
(0.2436)

D1954

Coeff.
St. Err.

2.8927
(0.2273)

-0.2648
(0.0882)

3.0997
(0.2641)

-0.8852
(0.2799)

D1959

Coeff.
St. Err.

3.6608
(0.1767)

0.0663
(0.0738)

3.6052
(0.1777)

-0.8363
(0.3090)

CONSTANT

Coeff.
St. Err.

-6.0663
(4.4306)

1.4462
(2.3739)

-10.9339
(5.0519)

0.0539
(2.5164)

384

384

384

384

0.940

0.902

0.936

0.899

T(F-T)/F

F

T(F-T)/F

F

No. of Obs.
R2
Weights
.

where F is the
number of farms
and T is the
number of tractor
farms.

40

TABLE 6
Regression Analysis of the Relationship Between Breeding Activity
and the Price-to-Reproduction Cost Ratio, 1914-1960

Dependent Variable: DLBREED

Constant

DLPC(0)

DLPC(-1)

DLPC(-2)

DLPC(-3)

N

Index 1

Index 2

-0.00227

-0.00179

(0.00378)

(0.00466)

0.2584

0.2248

(0.0744)

(0.0833)

0.1819

0.1079

(0.0749)

(0.0823)

0.2740

0.1310

(0.0758)

(0.0830)

0.1906

0.2177

(0.0764)

(0.0846)

0.620

0.437

47

47

Standard errors in parenthesis.
DLBREED is the difference in the log of the ratio of colts under age 1 to the total horse population.
DLPC is the difference in the log of the price-to-reproduction cost ratios.

41

TABLE 7
The Impact of the Tractor
•

Replaced about 23 million draft animals

•

Increased the effective cropland base by 79 million acres. This represented an increase of
about 30 percent and was equal to two-thirds of the total cropland harvested in 1920 in the
territory of the area of the Louisiana Purchase.

•

Increased the effective area of pastureland by about 80 million acres. This land was largely
converted from feeding horses and mules to providing food and fiber for human
consumption.

•

Expanded the draft-power on farms over four-fold.

•

Enhanced the timeliness and quality of farm work. Increased crop yields.

•

Was one of the great labor-saving innovations of the twentieth century. Relative to the horse
technology that it replaced, in 1960 the tractor reduced labor requirements by about 1.7
million workers. This represented 25 percent of farm employment in 1960 and 28 percent of
the decline in farm employment between 1910 and 1960.

•

Accounted for about 37 percent of the growth in farm size between 1910 and 1960. The
average American farm in 1960 was 58 acres larger than it would have been without the
diffusion of tractors.

•

Accounted for the disappearance of at least 967 thousand farms by 1960.

•

Increased labor productivity and allowed farmers more self-sufficiency in the labor market.

•

Led to a wholesale restructuring of the agricultural equipment industry. By 1939 the tractor
industry accounted for over 50 percent of the employment and value added of the agricultural
equipment industry.

42

FIGURE 1: Number of Draft Animals and Tractors in the US, 1910-60
30000

5000

4000
3500

20000

3000
15000

2500
2000

10000

1500

Number of Tractors
(In Thousands)

Numbers of Horses and Mules
(In Thousands)

4500
25000

1000

5000

500
0

0
1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

All Horses and Mules

1940
Work Stock

1945

1950

1955

1960

Tractors

FIGURE 2: Farm Scale and Power, 1940
100%
Percent of Farms Reporting

90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
$0

$1-99 $100- $250- $400- $600- $750- $1000- $1500- $2000- $2500- $4000- $6000- $10000
249
399
599
749
999 1499 1999 2499 3999 5999 9999 and
over
Animals, No Tractor

Animals and Tractor

43

Tractors, No Animals

No Animals or Tractor

FIGURE 3: Real Prices of Hay, Horses, and Tractors
125

Hay
Horses
Tractors

1910=100

100

75

50

25

0
1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

FIGURE 4: Dobbin's Q and Breeding Rates
0.2

1.4

0.16
Price/Cost Ratio

1

0.14
0.12

0.8

0.1
0.6

0.08
0.06

0.4

0.04
0.2

0.02

0
0
1910 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960
Price/Cost 1

Price/Cost 2

Breeding Rate

44

Colts/Total Draft Animals

0.18

1.2

1955

1960

FIGURE 5: Stallion and Jack Registration in Selected States

10000

9000

California

Number of Licensed Studs

8000

Illinois
Indiana

7000

Iowa
Kansas

6000

Wisconsin
5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0
1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

45

1935

1940

1945

FIGURE 6: Average Age of US Draft Animals and Tractors
16
Draft Animals

14

Tractors on Farms

12

Years

10
8
6
4
2
0
1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

FIGURE 7: Draft Animal Power as a Share of New and Existing Capacity

100
90
Draft Animal Shares
(in percentage)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

Existing Capacity

46

1940

1945

New Capacity

1950

1955

1960

References for Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Brodell and Jennings, Work Performed, p. 10; USDA, 1962 Agricultural Statistics, p. 432; U.S.
Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics, p. 469.
Figure 2: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture 1940, pp. 82-4, 91.
Figure 3: The prices for horses two years and over are from USDA, Crops and Markets, 12:2 (Feb. 1935).
p. 34, up to 1935, and spliced to Series K 571 from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics,
thereafter. The hay prices are from Historical Statistics Series K 552. The tractor price series is based on
“medium tractors” from US Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Income Parity, Prices Paid, p. 50, up to
1939, spliced to the USDA series for 20-29 belt hp tractors reported in Agricultural Prices, 29 March 1950,
p. 34; 1956 Agricultural Statistics, p. 468; and 1962 Agricultural Statistics, p. 563. All of the prices are
deflated by a GNP deflator derived from the Balke-Gordon series, “Estimation,” pp. 84-85, before 1929 and
the official series (F5 in Historical Statistics) thereafter.
Figure 4: The underlying cost data are from USDA, “Cost of Raising Horses,” p. 28; prices for horses two
years and over (up to 1935) from USDA, Crops and Markets, p. 34; land values, farm wages, interest rates,
and prices for oats, hay, and horses (after 1935) from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics,
Series K 15, 179, 371, 513, 552, and 571 respectively. Breeding rates from data in Brodell and Jennings,
Work Performed, p. 10; USDA, 1962 Agricultural Statistics, pp. 432.
Figure 5: California, Monthly Bulletin, pp. 725-27; Purdue, Indiana Stallion; Illinois, 17th Annual Report,
p. 25; 29nd Annual Report p. 167; Iowa, 1941 Yearbook, p. 185; Kansas, Stallion Registry, p. 6; Wisconsin,
Biennial Report 1935-36, pp. 194-95; Biennial Report 1939-40, p. 93.
Figure 6: The equine series estimate from annual data on the numbers of horses and mules age under 1 year,
1-2 years, 2-3 years, and 3 and older, reported in USDA, 1962 Agricultural Statistics, pp. 432, detailed
1925 figures on the animal population’s age distribution in USDA, “Shortage,” pp. 108-09 and a life table
for draft animals constructed from Brodell and Jennings, “Work Performed.” The tractor series are from
Fox, Demand, p. 33.
Figure 7: Brodell and Jennings, Work Performed, p. 10; USDA, 1962 Agricultural Statistics, pp. 432; Fox,
Demand, p. 33; USDA, Income Parity, Expenses p. 56. For the 1910-1920 period, the average belt power
for tractors is estimated to be 20 horsepower.
Table 1: .S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture 1950, pp. 382-91; U.S. Bureau of the Census,
Census of Agriculture 1959, pp. 214-17, 506-09; U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture 1969,
Ch. 2, p. 23; Ch. 4, p. 14; Ch. 5, p. 32.

47

Table 2: .S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture 1954, pp. 220-21; U.S. Bureau of the Census,
Census of Agriculture 1940, pp. 30-5, 82-93.
Table 3: .S. Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census, pp. 540-41; U.S. Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth
Census, pp. 589-93; U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture 1959, pp. 214-15, 508-09.
Horsepower per tractor and animal by regions was estimated based on Kinsman, Appraisal of Power; Hurst
and Church, Power and Machinery, pp. 16-17; Brodell and Cooper, Fuel Consumed; Brodell and Jennings,
Work Performed, p. 18-19; and Brodell and Kendall, Fuel and Motor Oil.
Table 4-7: See text.

48

