                                                  




                                 
                                


                                           
                                           ! "#


                                          $%!& "$'()*
                                 "+,,---!.$ $&,""$#,-'()*


                             /
                               0121##3## !3
                                 4.$5&6 170*8
                                      .$7111




                   
              
        !    "#   
   #$   $ !     #%& "
        #      '   (# )    )   * 
+ "  &,-    .# -             "/  
              "

01222#/!"  '   """ "!    3 
3   #4    3          0
       "
"4! !!"93"9:53!
  5  !
"#$  "'()*
  ."7111
 7)6/22607
                                            


!  "3! "! !!"53!"93"9""4
.:!!$/5"4359;/<#554!"""5!6-:5
3"9"$!=335"  3+>=3"":"! 5!
"21?!#!"$35"!.9!3" "$"465>::#!"$
:"5>$.:! 4$!$.:".:!6"! 5!-!3.!=39""5"9
     "=3!4"9!-":5:""4""4.:!6.3.$"3 !
-" " 5 ." 535  ! - " :5 :" 5!.9 .:!  @ -
!$ 4 :3"$654$6"93"9.:!
    :>945:""4." "5!!45 "4"!3!5!43::!
:3$"93"9.:!""4 -9!:53$"9
3"9.:!-35.! "..9:"4""4.9-!43!-35
    "..9:5!.9""4


  
*)A0 3!#6*1A 
"6"!9: !9
 5  0(01A>)708
+702,8(8>1A7A+702,8(8>1*01
4B-"3 53

  !
  63"9 54!"
2116(:"
!$7172A
C  !B!!$
                                                                                                     1




                                Retirement Responses
                      to Early Social Security Benefit Reductions



       It has been suggested that cutting early Social Security benefits might alleviate the

solvency problems facing our national old-age retirement system, since most American workers

retire early by filing for Social Security benefits at age 62 (USGA0, 1999: 18). While an early

retirement benefit cut could save the system money, it might also impose hardship on some who

cannot continue to work. Alternatively, reducing early retirement benefits might induce changes

in retirement behavior, inducing some workers to stay on the job to the normal retirement age,

while perhaps prompting others to seek Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) benefits. This

paper seeks to identify who would be affected by reducing early Social Security benefits, and

what potential retirement responses might be anticipated from such a policy change.

       Many policymakers appear to believe that retirement patterns would change if early

Social Security retirement benefits were reduced. Thus the US General Accounting Office

(1999: 2) recently observed that if the early retirement age were raised, “[m]ore older workers

would be likely to apply for disability benefits because benefits for retired workers would fall

relative to these programs’ benefits for the disabled.” Similarly, the Social Security Trustees

stated that more workers would file for DI in the future, in response to the raising of the normal

retirement age under Social Security beyond age 65 (Board of Trustees, 2000). Despite the

apparent consensus among policymakers, there is very little evidence on the size and direction of

potential worker responsiveness. One study using HRS data concluded that increasing the early

retirement age would not impose undue burdens on the majority of age-62 retirees (Burkhauser
                                                                                                     2



et al., 1996).1 However that analysis excluded those receiving disability benefits so it is not

informative about the possibility of people switching from an early to a DI retirement pathway.

Below, we provide new evidence on the characteristics of people taking alternative paths into

retirement and the likelihood of their responsiveness to this policy change.

          In what follows, we first review prior literature and next examine the sociodemographic

and economic characteristics of older workers on the verge of retirement. We evaluate how

future income and leisure opportunities vary as a function of the retirement pathways open to

them, focusing both on eligibility patterns for social insurance programs as well as peoples’

levels of other wealth from private sources, namely pensions and financial assets. Next we

measure how reducing early Social Security benefits might alter workers’ expected retirement

wealth and indicate which kinds of older people would be most affected by this change. Then

we estimate a behavioral model of how retirement outcomes respond to differences in older

workers’ wealth, job, demographic characteristics, and health conditions. Finally these estimates

are used to simulate how peoples’ behavior might change if early Social Security benefits were

to be eliminated.



Previous Research

          There are several threads in the economics literature relevant to the topic of older workers

and Social Security benefits. One debate, launched by Parsons (1980), attributed most of the

post-WWII decline in men’s labor-force participation to the Social Security DI program. His

conclusion was controversial because several other changes in public and private pensions

occurred around the same time, thus confounding the results (Bound, 1979; Haveman and Wolfe


1
    Similar findings appear in Uccello (1998), CBO (1999), and USGAO (1999).
                                                                                                      3



1984). Subsequent research queried whether DI enrolment patterns might be due to deteriorating

health of older workers. While the research found that health problems do influence older

workers’ retirement, a time series analysis concluded that older workers are healthier now than in

previous decades, and few early retirees are currently in very poor health.2 A second literature

relevant to this topic has explored econometric issues surrounding applications to the DI program

but does not typically control for the influence of employer-provided benefits on retirement

choices.3 Yet a third strand of labor economics research focuses on how privately-provided

pension and retiree health insurance influence retirement choices, but these studies do not

generally account for Social Security DI benefits influencing workers’ retirement behavior.4

       In our assessment, prior studies offer only a partial picture of the economic opportunities

available to older workers as they contemplate alternative paths into retirement. This is mainly

because they tend to cast the labor supply behavior of interest – movement out of the labor force

– as a one-period outcome, though in principle the retirement decision should be seen as a life

cycle decision. Accordingly, they relate one-period labor supply measures to one-period

measures of benefits. As an example, Gruber (1996) analyzed how Canadian men’s labor force

participation rates changed when one province raised DI benefits by 32 percent. His model

relates benefits in a given year to men’s labor force participation rates in that same year, and he

concludes that the benefit change cut participation by 3 percentage points, from 80 to 77 percent.

More generally, one should test whether lifetime benefit streams associated with different

pathways into retirement influence retirement outcomes.



2
  See Dwyer and Mitchell (1999), Manton et al (1997), Crimmins et al. (1997), Burkhauser, Couch and
Phillips (1996), and Smith (1999).
3
  For a review see Bound and Burkhauser (1999); see also Benitez-Silva et al. (2000).
4
  For a recent review of the retirement literature, see Lumsdaine and Mitchell (1999).
                                                                                                           4



        A life cycle perspective would therefore pose the decision to seek DI benefits as

responsive not to the benefit amount payable in any single year, but rather to the stream of future

expected benefits from taking the DI path versus other available retirement options. Thus a more

general approach would allow workers’ retirement choices to depend on a comparison of

expected wealth available from a range of retirement pathways or options (Fields and Mitchell,

1984; Mitchell and Fields, 1987).5 One recent study that did adopt a life-cycle perspective in the

DI context assessed how West German early retirement incentives interacted with that nation’s

disability program (Borsch-Supan, 1999). This study used a discrete choice model of retirement

among men age 55-70, and it linked retirement choices to a comparison of the wealth value of

disability and nondisability pensions. The formulation was similar in spirit to what we do below,

with a key difference being that the older workers’ budget constraint is collapsed into a single

variable. By contrast, here we model separately the value of alternative retirement pathways.

Hence, that study overlooks the possibility that a worker might go on to file for normal

retirement at some later date, instead of taking either early or disability retirement. Our approach

is more general, allowing for people to move across various retirement pathways.



Retirement Incentives in the US Social Security and Disability Insurance System

        In order to evaluate how retirement and disability benefits influence retirement decisions

in the U.S., it is essential to understand how workers become insured and what benefits can be

received under the US Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance system (OASDI). As we

5
  To illustrate this point in more detail, Gruber’s (1996) single-period perspective assumes that retirement
responses to the DI change was not influenced by another concurrent change in the benefit structure,
namely a lowering of the early retirement age to 60. A more general model would include not only
current DI benefits but also the enhancement of the early retirement option if retirement were delayed. A
similar approach is followed by Friedberg (1999) who examines the effect of a precursor program to
Social Security, the means-tested U.S. Old Age Assistance program.
                                                                                                             5



shall show, the eligibility and benefit rules are relatively complex, and they interact in

complicated ways with workers’ earnings and employment histories.6

The Rules

        Most older American workers are insured for both old-age and DI benefits, but coverage

is by no means uniform across people at different ages. Program rules specify that Social

Security retirement benefits are payable only to workers who have contributed long enough to be

“fully insured” and who have attained at least age 62, when early retirement is current

permitted.7 Alternatively, Social Security disability benefits are payable only to those “fully

insured for disability purposes”; this requires that the worker must have earned 20 QC’s during

the last 40 calendar quarters ending in disability.8 In other words, any given worker might be

both fully nor disability insured, he could be fully but not disability insured, or he could be

neither.9 As we shall show, variations in eligibility over the lifetime are quite interesting in our

data.

        Benefit computations use yet a different set of rules. Computing Social Security ER and

NR benefits for a fully insured worker requires determining the Average Indexed Monthly




6
  For sophisticated descriptions of SSDI program rules see Hu et. al (1997), Hoynes and Moffitt (1997),
and Gruber and Kubik (1997), particularly with regard to how SSDI might affect younger recipients’
incentives to return to work. In this paper we do not incorporate this possibility since older recipients
rarely return to work after becoming DI beneficiaries.
7
  To be fully insured for retirement benefits at age 62 or older, the worker must have 40 QC’s (quarters of
coverage). QC’s are awarded based on having had covered earnings of at least a threshold amount each
year. Spouses of fully insured workers are eligible for a spousal benefit regardless of their own work
history. Coverage, eligibility, and benefit rules relevant to the HRS cohorts in question appear on the
Social Security Administration’s web page (www.ssa.gov) or in SSA (1992).
8
  Also to be “disability insured” the worker must (1) have at least 6 QC’s and (2) have 1 QC for each year
from age 22 to the age of disability (assuming he or she is age 31 or older; special rules apply to younger
workers).
9
  A worker could be fully but not DI insured if he had at least ten years of work (so he is fully insured) but
lost his disability insurance status due to periods of illness or unemployment.
                                                                                                          6



Earnings (AIME) and his Primary Insurance Amount (PIA).10 The monthly benefit amount

depends on the worker’s retirement age; if he has attained normal retirement age (NR), defined

as age 65 for our respondents, his benefit equals his PIA. If retirement occurs before NR, the

benefit is reduced by 5/9 of a percent per month below that age. Hence, someone taking benefits

at the early entitlement age of 62 (ER) would receive 80 percent of the full PIA for the remainder

of his life. The DI benefit equals the eligible worker’s PIA; that is, the annual DI and the NR

benefits are the same though the DI benefit is payable at a younger age.11 Hence retiring at age

62 on DI would provide a Social Security benefit 20 percent larger than the ER benefit.12

However applying for DI takes time and effort, and benefits are not always granted. This

probabilistic benefit award must therefore be taken into account in assessing one’s expected

value of retiring on disability.13

Retirement Pathways in the HRS

        An understanding of the economic opportunities associated with alternative paths to

retirement requires us to model individual workers’ budget constraints while taking into account

actual program rules. To better understand the actual impact of these rules for real workers, we


10
   The AIME involves indexing a worker’s earnings between 22 and 62 after dropping the 5 lowest years.
Indexation links actual covered earnings in a given year to average covered earnings in the same year, and
these are then brought forward to the point when the worker is age 60 (earnings after age 60 are entered in
nominal rather than indexed form). The PIA formula then applies a 3-tier replacement rate formula to the
indexed earnings; the first replacement rate is 90%, the second 32% and the third, 15%. Cost-of-living
adjustments are applied from the PIA calculation year to the retirement year.
11
   Legally, the OASDI system defines disability as “the inability to engage in any substantial gainful
activity by reason of medically determinable physical or mental impairment, which can be expected to
result in death or which has lasted and can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than
twelve months” (SSA 1992). There is also a five-month waiting period after the onset of disability until
the person can apply for benefits.
12
   DI beneficiaries can also receive Medicare 24 months after receiving benefits; accordingly an age-62
DI beneficiary may get Medicare about a year earlier than could an early retiree.
13
   In this study we assume that the probability of receiving DI benefits conditional on application is
around 49%, consistent with the average benefit receipt rate reported over the 1990’s (Social Security,
1999).
                                                                                                       7



derived an extract from the nationally representative Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a

panel survey of older American households initially interviewed as they were on the verge of

retirement (the full sample was age 51-61 in 1992, along with their spouses of any age). This

survey is invaluable for our purposes, inasmuch as it contains extensive and detailed information

on demographic, health, wealth, income, and employment data for respondents and their spouses.

The HRS is especially appropriate for this purpose because respondent records may be linked to

administrative data on Social Security earnings and pension plan provisions.14 This linkage

allows us to compute respondents’ eligibility status for benefits as well as the likely benefit

amounts that a worker might receive for selecting the early, normal, or disability benefit path.

        The period we study spans the eight years between 1992 and 1998.15 In order to observe

completed retirement transitions for our sample, the analysis examines those persons age 57-61

at baseline in 1992 who have a match to Social Security earnings and benefits data and were not

receiving a benefit from Social Security (1,843); by the 1998 wave, this older half of the HRS

age-eligible sample attained age 64-67. This enables us to determine, for each respondent, which

of three possible retirement paths was taken. These are defined as:

Dtook disability retirement (DR) prior to age 65;

14
  Because of the confidential nature of the administrative data, researchers may access them only under
restricted conditions; see www.umich.edu/~hrswww for details. These files were obtained for a majority
of HRS respondents, namely those providing permission to link their survey data with administrative
records supplied by the Social Security Administration and also with pension plan descriptions provided
by respondents’ employers. In a few cases Social Security benefits could not be calculated so the
respondent had to be omitted from the analysis. One reason for missing Social Security benefits was that
respondents gave permission for the University of Michigan to request their Social Security records, but
no match was obtained because their records did not match SSA identification information. Also some
age-eligible respondents declined to sign the release form permitting their Social Security data to be
matched with the HRS (a handful of the very wealthy, some Blacks, and some Hispanics did not provide
consent). Omission of nonmatch cases might bias results if those who had a matched file differ from
those lacking a match; however our own exploratory analysis as well as analysis by Haider and Solon
(2000) finds little evidence that results are biased.
                                                                                                         8




Dtook early retirement (ER) at or between ages 62 and 64; or

Dtook normal retirement (NR) at or after 65.

Though many sample respondents are eligible for Social Security benefits, some are not for a

variety of reasons. Because this analysis focuses on changes in benefit-taking behavior, we

accordingly delete from the analysis sample those 299 respondents who were never insured for

DI and either ER or NR over the relevant period.16

        Table 1 summarizes baseline sociodemographic characteristics for the sample in the first

column. We also provide summary measures according to the retirement path subsequently

chosen (drawn from Waves 2 through 4 of the panel). One interesting fact is that respondents

who later became DR recipients were less well educated (52 percent had less than high school

versus 24 percent overall), more heavily black (16 percent versus 7 percent overall) and

nonmarried (33 percent versus 23 percent), and had more baseline health problems than for the

group as a whole (51 percent claim health is fair or poor, versus 13 percent overall). Put

differently, those who eventually selected early or normal retirement were both healthier and

better educated than those who ended up on DR. Furthermore, those who eventually took early

retirement had sociodemographic characteristics quite similar to those who took normal

retirement.

Table 1 here

Retirement Pathways and Retirement Wealth




15
   In this study we use all four waves of the HRS currently available in public or preliminary release
status; special permission to link retirement outcomes with restricted data were obtained as required.
16
   The Appendix indicates characteristics of both the full and the subsamples in question.
                                                                                                         9



        Next we examine the budget constraint facing each respondent in the sample. Ex-ante or

anticipated wealth values associated with each of the three retirement paths appear in Table 2.17

Since the analysis contains only respondents insured for at least two Social Security benefits, it is

interesting that, at baseline, 15 percent of the entire sample was not DI-insured.18 This fraction

varies by eventual retirement path: almost all of those later electing disability retirement were

DI-insured at baseline, but 18 percent (12 percent) of the ER (NR) group was not DI insured at

baseline.

Table 2 here

        Peoples’ lack of insured status results from erratic work histories, and peoples’ insured

status can change over time, as is shown in Figure 1. Not surprisingly, men in the HRS sample

are much more likely to be insured for both OA and DI purposes from the age of about 30, with

little change after that; old-age insured rates for men stand at around 95 percent from age 40 on.

Women are far less likely to be covered for own old-age benefits throughout their careers, with

old-age coverage status never exceeding 80 percent. Nevertheless, additional years of work into

the 50’s and 60’s continue to enhance women’s insured status at the margin. Turning to insured

status for DI, it reaches a maximum during men’s prime-age working years but then falls to

around 80 percent from age 50 on. By contrast, women’s DI coverage status continues to rise


17
   This analysis postulates that if the individual continued to work until the Social Security early or
normal retirement age, he could have continued earning on the same pay trajectory that he was on over
the five years ending in 1991. After projecting this trajectory we ascertain whether the worker would be
eligible for benefits at 62 and 65, and then we compute what income streams he could have anticipated
according to the relevant ER and NR benefit formulas. Each of these streams is converted to a present
value stream using the survival tables and interest rates consistent with the intermediate assumptions of
the Social Security Administration. For married respondents, the retirement benefit stream also
incorporates the expected present value of spouse and survivor benefits, as relevant. A more detailed
explanation of the data creation effort for Social Security benefit amounts appears in Mitchell, Olson and
Steinmeier (2000).
18
   For more information regarding patterns in eligibility for Social Security benefits, see Levine et al.
(2000).
                                                                                                      10



over their worklives but never rises above 60 percent, a full 20 percentage points below men’s

insured status rates.

Figure 1 here

        More detail on insured status patterns appears in Figure 2, where we relate insured status

for OA and DI benefits to early retirement wealth. The results suggest that those in the lowest

wealth decile also have the lowest incidence of OASDI insured status: about half of those in the

lowest decile are DI-insured, and about two-thirds are OA-insured.19 Those in the next-highest

wealth decile are much more likely to be insured for both OA and DI benefits (about 70 and 86

percent respectively). It is perhaps not surprising that the group least likely to be eligibile for

Social Security benefits is also the one with lowest retirement wealth.

Figure 2 here

        Three implications follow from these findings. First, older workers are far from

universally eligible for Social Security old-age benefits, and those with little retirement wealth

are the least likely to be insured. The fact that many older people are ineligible will influence

how responsive one might expect the older population to be, to cuts in early Social Security

benefits. Second, some who are eligible for old-age retirement benefits will never be eligible for

Social Security DI benefits, and hence would not be expected to respond to early benefit cuts by

filing for DI. Third, peoples’ insured status for both old-age and DI benefits changes over time,

so any given change in benefit availability could have little effect in a given year, but it might

have a larger effect in some later year when they become eligible.

        For each of the three retirement paths considered here, we have computed the present

value of wealth anticipated from Social Security as well as total wealth, including financial
                                                                                                                     11



assets, housing assets and pensions. Table 2 shows that anticipated Social Security wealth is

quite similar for those who subsequently choose early and normal retirement, but it is far lower

for those who later become DR retirees. For ER and NR the present value of Social Security

benefits is on the order of $162-$174,000 (for the median 10 percent). But having lower

eligibility levels and a reduced chance of obtaining DI even if eligible (assumed here to be 49

percent, the population average) reduces expected wealth under the DI alternative to about

$90,000 over the entire sample.20

         Table 2 also highlights the powerful role of employee benefits in workers’ budget

constraints, a factor overlooked in previous DI studies. That is, at baseline almost half of the

HRS respondents had employer-provided health insurance coverage; 44 percent had access to

disability benefits through their employers; over two-fifths had company-provided retiree health

insurance and long-term disability coverage; and 68 percent had a company pension (including

those from prior jobs). This is important since prior research shows that defined benefit pension

plans impose quite nonlinear benefit accrual paths (Gustman et al., 1999), and provide greater

rewards for retiring at one age than some other age. In the case of defined contribution pension

plans, benefit accrual patterns are much smoother, changing relatively less as the worker delays

retirement. Because company pension accrual paths differ so widely, it is invaluable to have

HRS-linked information on the pension algorithms specific to the particular firms employing the




19
  These findings are consistent with Leonesio et al. (2000), who evaluate respondents in the Survey of Income and
Program Participation. They find that many early retirees are ineligible for DI benefits, and further that this segment
of the population is more likely to be living alone and more likely to be poor,
20
   We apply a constant rather than a state-specific probability of eligibility for DI since HRS respondents’
state residence codes are not provided in the dataset, unlike Gruber and Kubik (1997) who use state
variation in SSDI denial rates. On the other hand, they lack administrative records to determine whether
individual respondents are eligible for benefits, and how much actual benefits are at the micro level. Hu
et al (1997) have a detailed description of the DI determination process.
                                                                                                       12



surveyed respondents.21 Accordingly we characterize covered workers’ budget constraints for

early, normal, and disability retirement by computing the expected present value of lifetime

private pension and disability benefits if the employee worked to age 62 and retired, or if he

worked to age 65 and then retired, or if he took the company disability benefit.22 Table 2 shows

that the median 10 percent of pension wealth appears relatively low for the entire sample

($55,000-57,000), but this obscures the fact that many people lacked pension coverage or had

low benefits.23

        Summing all the relevant elements of the budget constraint, we find that the total

expected retirement wealth for persons in this sample ranges from $450,000 to $610,000,

depending on the retirement pathway chosen. Specifically, a HRS respondent in the median 10

percent could anticipate a present value of DR wealth of $451,000; the ER path by contrast is

worth about $522,000; and the NR path around $611,000.24 There is much heterogeneity across

subgroups in the sample, of course. For instance, DR wealth for those who eventually take DR is

about 35 percent less than the full sample value ($334,000 versus $451,000). DR retirees also

have less housing wealth and fewer other financial assets at baseline. Those who eventually

elect early benefits (normal benefits) have about 35 percent (50 percent) more total wealth. We

also compute the present value of anticipated earnings if these respondents were to remain


21
   For detail on the construction of the pension benefit stream data, see Gustman et al. (2000).
22
   In many corporate pension plans there are special provisions entitling a disabled worker to more
generous payments, or benefits payable earlier than otherwise would be the case. To examine this pattern
in more detail, we use the pension plan algorithms available from HRS to construct present values of
income streams for workers judged to be entitled to disability benefits from their firms. Many employer
disability plans grant company-based disability pensions to any worker deemed eligible for SSDI, so in
constructing the budget constraint we assume that the eligibility probability is the same for SSDI as for
company disability pensions. SSDI is not means tested, so a worker judged disabled could receive both
corporate and government benefits.
23
   Moore and Mitchell (2000) find that pension wealth is on the order of $150,000-200,000 for those in
the HRS sample with pensions.
24
   Entries in Table 2 are computed for the median 10% so components will not sum to the totals.
                                                                                                        13



employed. Projected earnings are highest for those who end up working the longest. A lesson

from Table 2 is the fact that Social Security benefits are only one of several sources of old-age

support. That is, retiring early without Social Security ER benefits would be feasible for people

having substantial non-Social Security assets such as company-provided pensions and own

financial wealth.25

How Would Cutting Early Social Security Benefits Alter Retirement Wealth?

        If Social Security early retirement benefits were to be cut, a question arises as to how

such a policy change might affect the wealth value of alternative paths to retirement. An initial

answer to this question appears in Figure 2, where we compare the current distribution of total

early retirement wealth with one that might result from ER benefit cuts. This “thought

experiment” is one where retirement wealth is recomputed for sample HRS respondents on the

assumption that the present value of ER benefits was reduced by $25,000 while other sources of

wealth remain the same.26

        It is of interest to note that this experiment has the largest absolute dollar impact on

people at the top of the wealth distribution: that is, the wealth value of retiring at 62 would fall

by approximately $25,000 for someone in the top wealth decile, and it would fall by less for

someone in a lower wealth decile, since the benefit is less. But as Figure 3 indicates, the

percentage change is largest (20 percent) among the least wealthy and smallest (less than 1

percent) for the wealthiest sample members. This is consistent with previous evidence that

Social Security benefits comprise a larger component of retirement wealth among the least well-


25
   This analysis does not consider the possibility of people applying for Supplemental Security Insurance
benefits when early retirement benefits are cut though there might be some program substitution in this
direction. We suggest that this is not likely to be a large group inasmuch as many (over half) of those
currently eligible for SSI do not seek out the benefits they are currently entitled to.
26
   If benefit present values were too small, benefits were set to zero in the relevant experiments.
                                                                                                      14



to-do (Moore and Mitchell 1999), and so a benefit cut would have the largest impact on the less

wealthy in percentage terms.

Figure 3 here

       A descriptive regression in Table 3 indicates how this wealth change due to a reduction in

early Social Security benefits would vary with respondent characteristics. The table reports

correlates of the ratio of post- to pre-cut wealth and indicates that those experiencing relatively

large reductions in ER wealth would be blacks, the less educated, and those in poor health. By

contrast, married people would face a smaller wealth reduction, along with those having

company-provided pensions. Those fully insured for SSDI purposes would experience a smaller

dollar losses from the hypothetical benefit cut.27

Table 3 here



Estimation Methodology and Results

       We turn next to the estimation of empirical parameters for a behavioral retirement model,

as a function of the economic values of the alternative retirement pathways that people face near

retirement.

The Estimation Model

       Our model posits that each retirement path j (j=DR, ER, NR) has associated with it an

expected present value (YRETj), and leisure associated with that choice (Lj).28 For a single

individual deciding which of several retirement paths to take, the wealth associated with a given

27
   As noted above, the dollar gap does not always correlate with percentage changes in wealth. For
instance, though blacks and those in poor health would experience smaller dollar changes, they are more
likely to have low post- relative to pre-experiment ER wealth (results not provided in detail here).
28
   Modeling the budget constraint so as to include both public and private disability insurance benefits
therefore extends the “peak value” concept popularized by Coile and Gruber (1999) in the Social Security
context.
                                                                                                     15



path is the sum of his nonlabor wealth (Wa), potential earnings (E) up to age R, and retirement

benefits from company pensions and Social Security from age R on (P and SS):

                                                    t                                           t
(1) YRETij (R) =Wia + åE(t, ij) ⋅ s(t) ⋅ é 1      ù + [SS (R, ij) + P (R, ij)]⋅ s(t) ⋅ é 1      ù,
                      a, R
                                         ê
                                         ë  (1+ r)ú
                                                  û
                                                     å
                                                     R, D
                                                          t          t
                                                                                       ê
                                                                                       ë  (1+ r)úû

where r is a discount factor and s(t) is the probability of surviving an additional year. Benefits

are subscripted i for each individual and j by path choice; income values depend on whether the

individual contemplates taking the DR, the ER, or the NR path.29

        Assuming a general utility function with arguments retirement wealth and leisure

(retirement years remaining), and a person-specific disturbance term distributed extreme value,

the empirical equation for estimation takes the form:

                                 exp[αLij + βYRETij ]
        (2)    P(Yi = j ) =                                   .
                               å j =1 exp[αLij + βYRETij ]
                                  J




        To predict the probability that choice j=1 would be selected, estimated coefficients may

be used to calculate the baseline probabilities for any given model:

                               exp[αˆLi1 + βˆYRETi1 ]
        (3)   P(Yi = 1) =
                              å j =1 exp[αˆLij + βˆYRETij ]
                               3




Calculating the change in probability of the first path associated with a “policy” that changes the

value of one of the RHS variables, such as a $25,000 reduction in the present value of early

retirement wealth, requires computing a variable POLICY equal to YRET when j=1 or 3 and

equals max(YRET-25,000, 0) if j=2. Then we replace YRET in (3) with POLICY and calculate:

                                exp[αˆLi1 + βˆPOLICYi1 ]
        (4)    P ′(Yi = 1) =                                   .
                               å j =1 exp[αˆLij + βˆPOLICYij ]
                                3
                                                                                                      16



The effect of the policy on the probability of accepting path 1 is (4) minus (3):

        (5) dP POLICY = P ′(Yi = 1) − P (Yi = 1) .



Estimated Parameters

       Estimated conditional Logit coefficients for the main and three alternative models of the

determinants of retirement pathway choice appear in Table 4. Column 1 controls only on path-

specific retirement wealth and leisure, consistent with a utility-based formulation. The second

column adds an interaction term between leisure and poor health, in this case measured by self-

reported health being “fair” or “poor”.30 The third column uses an alternative definition of poor

health, namely whether the respondent has any impairment limiting his activities in daily living

(AnyADL). Finally, the fourth column indicates whether the employee had three job-related

benefits: on-the job health insurance, retiree health insurance, and disability insurance.

Table 4 here

       The results for Model (1) confirm, consistent with expectations, that wealth has a positive

and statistically significant effect. This implies that that those with more wealth tend to retire

earlier, rather than working later. This pattern is repeated in Models (2) and (3), with coefficient

estimates being quite stable in magnitude. Model (4) interacts wealth with job benefits, and the

statistically significant wealth terms are all positive. Across all four models, the effect of leisure

is also positive, but is statistically insignificant. These findings – that wealth and leisure have

positive utility weights – are consistent with evidence from prior studies using similar models but


29
   For married couples the formulation of the budget constraint is somewhat more complex since spouses
are entitled to social security and pension benefits, and survivor benefits. The empirical work
incorporates these as well.
30
   This health measure has been found to be useful in retirement modeling; see Dwyer and Mitchell
(1999).
                                                                                                              17



relying on older data (Fields and Mitchell, 1984; Mitchell and Fields 1987). The more flexible

specification in columns 2-4 suggest that people reporting themselves to be in poor health value

leisure differently than those in better health but the estimated effect is statistically insignificant

(Model 2). The response is similar when other health measures are used instead.

        Turning to the controls on job-based benefits, the results prove interesting (Model 4). In

principle, one could associate these benefits with additional wealth particular to each retirement

pathway and worker. Since the HRS dataset does not indicate a worker’s health or disability

plan generosity, this option is not available. On the other hand, omitting these plans could bias

coefficients on included variables. To check on this possibility, we interact wealth with

employer-provided benefits, and it does appear that the wealth effect is more positive for those

with job-based health and disability insurance. Having retiree health insurance has no additional

impact.31

Assessing Estimated Response Parameters

        Because one cannot easily interpret Logit coefficients, estimated response parameters for

various changes in explanatory variables are depicted in Table 5.32 To obtain these we predict

changes in probabilities of selecting each of the retirement paths for each person in the sample

and average over relevant categories. The results imply that an across-the-board wealth increase

of $25,000 would induce more people to select both the DR and ER paths, and fewer people

would work on to the normal retirement age. The estimated size of the responses is small

however, with the probabilities changing by less than 0.01. A one-year increase in leisure could

also be seen as an upward shift in the budget constraint, and here too the effect would be to retire

31
  Likelihood ratio tests indicate that the addition of health and job variables significantly increases the
explanatory power of Models 4 relative to Models 1 and 2; see Table 4.
                                                                                                      18



earlier; again the estimated responses are small. If people were to be in poor instead of good

health, they are more likely to be on the DR path, with the likelihood rising by 0.022 or twice as

much as moved into ER. Finally, having job-linked benefits such as health and disability

insurance tends to encourage longer worklives, reducing the probability of DR by 0.057 to 0.065,

and cutting the ER probability by around 0.02. The net effect of having more prevalent job-

based benefits is to increase the likelihood of people staying on to normal retirement age, and the

magnitudes are larger than other terms. This finding underscores the importance of integrating

both government-provided and company-supplied benefits in models of retirement pathways.

Table 5 here



Simulating Responses to Cutting Early Retirement Benefits

        To further assess how peoples’ retirement patterns might change in response to cuts in

early retirement Social Security benefits, we next combine estimated parameters with computed

wealth changes to conduct specific simulations.

Impact of Early Retirement Benefit Cuts

        Responses to Social Security benefit cuts are derived by simulating how retirement

probabilities might change if the present value of only the early retirement Social Security

benefit were cut by $25,000. An early benefit cut of this magnitude for the median HRS

respondent would represent about a 15 percent lower monthly payment over the retiree’s

remaining lifetime. Since this experiment only alters the early retirement benefit, it represents a




32
  We show results from Model 4 only because the likelihood ratio tests suggest that Model 4 has the most
explanatory power. Nevertheless Table 5 results are consistent with those obtained using other models in
Table 4.
                                                                                                     19



kinking of the lifetime budget constraint, leaving unchanged the DR and NR wealth while

lowering ER wealth.

          The results in Table 6 indicate how our empirical model would predict that workers

would respond. Fewer people would elect early retirement, and the response is on the order of a

0.025 reduction of the likelihood of taking ER. Conversely, more people would be predicted to

opt for both NR and DR. The movement to DR is in all cases smaller than the move to NR, with

less than half as many moving to disability retirement as compared to normal retirement (0.006

versus 0.018). In general, however, it is interesting to note that the magnitudes of the simulated

response magnitudes are quite small, particularly given the relatively large size of the simulated

benefit cut.

Table 6 here

What if Early Benefits Were Disallowed Altogether?

          As an alternative to the benefit reductions described above, one could alternatively ask

how retirement patterns might change if Social Security early retirement benefits were

eliminated altogether. Of course, people with adequate other income could still exit the labor

force at a young age, but under this scenario, they could not receive Social Security early

benefits. To simulate how people might respond to such a change, we use the estimated

coefficients described above, eliminate the choice of interest (the ER path), and then evaluate

equation (5) above for DR and NR.33 The results appear in the second row of Table 6 which

33
     Specifically we have:
                                                      exp[αˆLi1 + βˆYRETi1 ]
(6) P ′(Yi = 1 | Yi = 1 or 3) =
                                         exp[αˆLi1 + βˆYRETi1 ] + exp[αˆLi 3 + βˆYRETi 3 ]
and
                                                     exp[αˆLi 3 + βˆYRETi 3 ]
(7 )     P ′′′(Yi = 3 | Yi = 1 or 3) =                                                     .
                                         exp[αˆLi1 + βˆYRETi1 ] + exp[αˆLi 3 + βˆYRETi 3 ]
                                                                                                          20



reports predicted changes in the probability of the DR and the NR paths if ER were to be

eliminated. The anticipated flow from early retirement to the disability retirement path (0.108) is

less than half the size of the flow to normal retirement (0.228). The simulated patterns are

virtually identical across models, consistent with results reported above.34

Who Moves Where

        The simulation results agree closely across models yet their effects may differ across

people of different characteristics. Table 7 explores this possibility by examining changes in the

predicted probabilities of selecting the DR pathway under the simulation experiment, relating it

to some of the sociodemographic characteristics of most interest for policy purposes.

Table 7 here

        The estimation shows that several factors are associated with the probability of moving

away from an ER retirement pathway toward DR. For instance, people who report themselves to

be in poor health are more likely to move to DR, reflecting their higher probability of medical

eligibility. Employer benefits also play an important role: those with company-sponsored health

and disability insurance have lower probabilities of moving to DR. However, those with retiree

health coverage and pensions are more likely to move to DR. Apparently, workers with

employer benefits are more likely candidates for DR than those without.




Given this outcome, the effect of eliminating the option on the probability of choosing DR or NR is
computed as:
(8) dP NOER = P ′(Yi = 1) − P(Yi = 1)
(9) dP NOER = P ′′′(Yi = 3) − P(Yi = 3)
for DR and NR, respectively. See Allison (1999) for a similar application of this approach.
34
  The results are virtually identical if we limit analysis to those who are eligible for DR, ER, and NR
benefits at the outset of the panel data period.
                                                                                                      21



Conclusions

       In this study we ask how reducing early retirement benefits under Social Security might

change older workers’ life cycle wealth and retirement pathways. The model is a life-cycle one,

modeling the choice of retirement options as a function of the expected present value of wealth

and leisure associated with each pathway. We use the HRS linked with invaluable

administrative records to account for the various income sources available to older workers,

including Social Security benefits and employer-sponsored pensions as well as job-based health

insurance and disability benefits.

       We find that respondents who retire early are quite similar at baseline to those who

subsequently elect the NR path, in terms of their health, education, and wealth. Both groups are,

however, healthier and better educated than those who later end up on disability retirement.

Analysis of the life-cycle budget constraint shows that cutting early Social Security benefits has

an uneven effect on the distribution of beneficiaries. Respondents who are black, have low

educational attainment, and are in poor health, suffer relatively large losses. Our policy

experiment also indicates that early Social Security benefit cuts would have relatively small

effects on the probability of early retirement. If early retirement benefits were to be eliminated,

more than twice as many HRS respondents would be predicted to work to normal retirement as

opposed to taking disability benefits.

       In future work we plan to extend the analysis in several directions. We will evaluate the

DI application and acceptance process in more detail, and will extend the model allow for

additional retirement states. We can also relax the conditional Logit framework to allow more

general preference structures though our prior research (Fields and Mitchell 1984) using older

datasets found that this did not materially change conclusions. At present, we conclude that
                                                                                           22



Social Security early retirement benefit cuts would induce more workers to delay benefit

acceptance as opposed to taking disability benefits.
                                                                                                 23



References:

Allison, Paul D. Logistic Regression Using the SAS System: Theory and Application. Cary, NC:
       SAS Institute Inc., 1999: 175-178.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo, Moshe Buchinsky, Hiu Man Chan, Sofia Cheidvasser, and John Rust.
       “How Large is the Bias in Self-Reported Disability?” NBER Working Paper No. W7526.
       February 2000.
Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance
       Trust Funds (Board of Trustees), 2000 Annual Report, Social Security Administration,
       Washington, D.C.: 2000.
Borsch-Supan, Axel. “Incentive Effects of Social Security Under an Uncertain Disability
       Option”. NBER WP 7339. September 1999.
Bound, John and Richard Burkhauser. “Economic Analysis of Transfer Programs Targeted on
      People with Disabilities”. Handbook of Labor Economics. Eds. Orley Ashenfelter and
      David Card. New York: Elsevier, 1999: 2417-2528.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and John W. Phillips. “Who Takes Early Social
      Security Benefits: The Economic and Health Characteristics of Early Beneficiaries,” The
      Gerontologist, 36(6). 1996: 789-799.
Coile, Courtney and Jonathan Gruber. “Social Security and Retirement”. NBER Summer
       Institute Working Paper, July 1999.
Crimmins, Eileen, Y. Saito and D. Ingegneri, “Trends in Disability-Free Life Expectancy in the
      US, 1970-1990: Population and Development Review 23(3) 1997: 555-72.
Dwyer, Debra and Olivia S. Mitchell. “Health Problems as Determinants of Retirement: Are
      Self-Rated Measures Endogenous?” Journal of Health Economics (18) 1999:173-193.
Fields, Gary S. and Olivia S. Mitchell. Retirement, Pensions, and Social Security. Cambridge,
        Mass.: MIT Press, 1984.
Friedberg, Leora. “The Effect of Old-Age Assistance on Retirement”. Journal of Public
       Economics. 71. 1999: 213-232.
Gruber, Jonathan. “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply”. NBER WP 5866.
       December 1996.
Gruber, Jonathan and Jeffrey Kubik. “Disability Insurance Rejection Rates and the Labor
       Supply of Older Workers”. Journal of Public Economics. 64, 1997:1-23.
Gustman, Alan S., Olivia S. Mitchell and Thomas Steinmeier. “The Role of Pensions in the
      Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47 (3) 1994: 417-438.
Haider, Steven and Gary Solon. “Nonrandom Selection in the HRS Social Security Earnings
       Sample”. RAND Working Paper Series 00-01, February 2000.
Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. “The Decline of Male Labor Force Participation:
     Comment.” JPE 92(3): 1984: 532-541.
                                                                                               24



Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe. “Disability Transfers and Early Retirement: A Causal
     Relationship?” Journal of Public Economics 21, 1984: 47-66.
Hoynes, Hilary W. and Robert Moffitt. “Tax Rates and Work Incentives in the SSDI Program:
      Current Law and Alternative Reforms”. NBER WP 6058. June 1997.
Hu, Jianting, Kajal Lahiri, Denton Vaughan, and Bernard Wixon. “A Structural Model of Social
       Security’s Disability Determination Process”. ORES Working Paper 72, Social Security
       Administration, August 1997.
Leonesio, Michael V., Denton R. Vaughan, and Bernard Wixom. “Early Retirees Under Social
       Security: Health Status and Economic Resources”. Social Security Administration, ORES
       Working Paper 86, August 2000.
Levine, Phillip B., Olivia S. Mitchell, John W. Phillips. “A Benefit of One’s Own: Older
       Women’s Retirement Entitlements Under Social Security”. Paper presented at the
       January 2000 meetings of the American Economic Society, New York.
Lumsdaine, Robin and Olivia S. Mitchell. “New Developments in the Economics of
      Retirement”. In Handbook of Labor Economics. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds.
      Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999: 3261-3308.
Manton, Ken, L. Corder and E. Stallard. “Chronic Disability Trends in Elderly US Populations:
      1982-1994”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 9, March 1997: 2593-98.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Gary Fields. “Restructuring Social Security: How Will Retirement Ages
       Respond?” In The Problem Isn't Age: Work and Older Americans. Editor Steve Sandell.
       New York: Praeger, 1987.
Mitchell, Olivia S, Jan Olson, and Thomas Steinmeier. “Earnings and Projected Benefits”. In
       Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth. Eds. O.S. Mitchell, B.
       Hammond, and A. Rappaport. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University
       of Pennsylvania Press, 2000: 68-94.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and John Phillips. “Disability, Early, and Normal Retirement”. Paper
       presented at the Second Annual Joint Conference for the Retirement Research
       Consortium, The Outlook for Retirement Income, Washington, D.C. May 17-18, 2000.
Parsons, Donald. “The Decline of Male Labor Force Participation.” JPE 88(1): 1980: 117-134.
Smith, Ralph. “Raising the Earliest Eligibility Age for Social Security Benefits”. Congressional
       Budget Office, Washington, D.C. January 1999.
Social Security Administration (SSA). Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security
       Bulletin. US Department of Health and Human Services. Washington, DC: US GPO,
       1992.
Uccello, Cori. “Factors Influencing Retirement: Their Implications for Raising Retirement
       Age”. AARP Public Policy Institute Working Paper #9810, Washington, DC, October
       1998.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO). Raising the Earliest Eligibility Age for Social
       Security Benefits. Congressional Budget Office, Washington, DC, January 1999.
                                                                                            25



U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO). Social Security Reform: Implications of Raising the
       Retirement Age. GAO/HEHS-99-112.Washington, DC: USGAO, August 1999.
                                                                                        26




Table 1: Background Characteristics of HRS Estimation Sample, Overall
and by Retirement Pathway ($1992)

                                                               Retirement Pathway
              Variable                    Total         DR             ER         NR
Demographic
 Age (years)                              59.4          59.0          59.5       59.3
 Female (%)                                48            55            50         43
 Currently Married (%)                     77            67            78         75
 Partner (not married) (%)                  2             3             1          2
 Ever Divorced (%)                         28            38            26         29
 Ever Widowed (%)                          10            18            10          9
 Never Married (%)                          4             4             4          4
 Black (%)                                  7            16             6          7
Education
 LT HS (%)                                 24            52            25        17
 High School (%)                           36            31            37        34
 GT HS (%)                                 40            17            37        49
Health Status
  Work Limiting Disability (%)             13            42            14        10
  Self Report of Health:
     Excellent (%)                         25             5            24        28
     Very Good (%)                         33            14            34        35
     Good (%)                              28            30            28        29
     Fair (%)                              10            32            11         7
     Poor (%)                               3            19             3         1
  Difficulty with ADL (%)                  12            28            12         9
  Doctor-diagnosed Conditions:
     Arthritis (%)                          40           58            40         39
     Cancer (%)                              7            7             7          6
     Diabetes (%)                           10           31            10          9
     Heart Problems (%)                     14           29            15         10
     High Blood Pressure (%)                41           54            40         42
     Lung Disease (%)                        6           12             7          5
     Mental Problems (%)                     8           13             8          7
     Stroke (%)                              2            6             2          3
  CES Depression Score                    21.2          25.3          21.2       20.7
  Poor Vision (%)                            1            3             1          1
  Poor Hearing (%)                           2            0             3          2
N of Observations                         1,544          63           951        530
%                                          100            4            62         34

Source: Authors’ computations using weighted HRS data; see text for sample and
Appendix for variable definitions.
                                                                                           27




Table 2: Median 10% of Wealth by Source and Retirement
Pathway ($1992)
                                                            Retirement Pathway
              Variable                     Total         DR            ER        NR
Social Security:
 DI Insured, Wave 1 (%)                     85            97            82       88
 PV SSDR Wealth                           $89,992      $76,786       $89,843 $91,379
 PV SSER Wealth                          $162,133 $117,855 $164,972 $161,709
 PV SSNR Wealth                          $174,353 $128,067 $176,910 $172,999
Job-based Wealth:*
 Employed, Wave 1 (%)                       77            72            70       90
 Job Health Ins. (%)                        50            51            47       53
 Job Disability Ins. (%)                    44            44            39       51
 Retiree Health Ins. (%)                    44            40            47       39
 PV Earnings to 62                        $29,645      $27,708       $23,437 $41,677
 PV Earnings to 65                        $73,956      $62,791       $58,975 $98,957
 Live Pension (%)                           40            42            35       50
 Pension (%)                                68            66            67       70
 PV DI Pension                           $54,970       $68,702       $48,827 $62,559
 PV ER Pension                           $53,265       $68,173       $48,627 $60,524
 PV NR Pension                           $57,663       $70,054       $50,684 $79,191
Other Wealth:
 Housing Wealth                           $50,388      $31,540       $54,366 $48,584
 Other Financial Wealth                   $58,865      $14,704       $63,492 $59,579
 Spouse Wealth                            $17,775       $1,894       $16,510 $23,967
Total Retirement Wealth:
 PV Total DR Wealth                      $451,111 $333,868 $437,945 $483,899
 PV Total ER Wealth                      $522,365 $396,282 $518,592 $543,902
 PV Total NR Wealth                      $611,191 $470,029 $603,664 $644,902
Notes: See Table 1.
* Job based health, retiree health, and disability insurance statistics from Wave 1 job.
                                                            28




Table 3: Wealth Impact of Social Security
Early Retirement Benefit Reductions

      Variables                    OLS Coefficient
                                   (|Standard Error|)
Sociodemographic
Female                                     -0.01
                                          (0.01)
Black                                    -0.05**
                                          (0.01)
Married                                   0.08**
                                          (0.01)
LT HS                                    -0.03**
                                          (0.01)
Health Bad                               -0.08**
                                          (0.01)
Work-Related
Work in 1992                               -0.01
                                          (0.01)
Retire HI                                  0.01
                                          (0.01)
Job HI                                     0.00
                                          (0.01)
Job DI                                     -0.01
                                          (0.01)
Pension                                   0.03**
                                          (0.01)
DI Insured                                0.03**
                                          (0.01)
N of Observations                          1,544
R-squared                                   0.32
Notes: See Table 1.
 ** t>=1.96, * t>= 1.65.
The dependent variable is the change in the level of
retirement wealth after the early retirement benefit cut.
Equations include a constant term.
                                                                                                                  29




Table 4: Factors Influencing Choice of Retirement Pathway:
Estimated Logit Coefficients (|SE|)

                                  Model       Model        Model        Model
          Variable                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
Wealth                            1.69**      1.75**       1.75**        0.59*
                                   [.21]      [0.21]       [0.21]       [0.25]
Leisure                            0.12        0.04         0.09         0.16
                                  [0.14]      [0.14]       [0.14]       [0.14]
Leisure*PoorHealth                             1.09         1.06         0.96
                                              [0.71]       [0.84]       [0.67]
Wealth*Job Health Ins                                                   1.94**
                                                                        [0.50]
Wealth*Job Disab Ins                                                    1.68**
                                                                        [0.54]
Wealth*Retiree Health Ins                                                -0.18
                                                                        [0.56]
Likelihood Ratio Tests
(chi2):
  vs Model 1                         --         3.42        1.88   49.26**
  vs Model 2                         --          --           --   52.69**
Outcomes                           4,447       4,447        4,447    4,447
Observations                       1,544       1,544        1,544    1,544
LL                               -1582.20    -1580.49     -1581.26 -1555.86
Chi-square                       78.09**     81.52**      79.97** 130.78**
Notes: See Table 1.
** t>= 1.96; * t>= 1.65
Poor health: Self-report fair/poor in Eqs (2) and (4) and Any ADL in Eq. (3)


Table 5. Impact of Changes in Explanatory Variables on Retirement Pathways

     Change in Explanatory                   ∆ Predicted Probability from ∆ Explanatory Variable
           Variable
                                                  ∆ P(DR)                      ∆ P(ER)              ∆ P(NR)
$25K Increase in Wealth                             0.003                       0.002                -0.005
+1 year Increase in Leisure                         0.000                       -0.004                0.004
Poor Health vs Not                                  0.022                       0.011                -0.033
Job Health Ins. vs None                            -0.065                       -0.024               0.089
Job Disability Ins. vs None                        -0.057                       -0.020               0.077
Retiree Health Ins. vs None                         0.006                       0.002                -0.008
Notes: See Table 1. Estimates calculated using Model 4 from Table 3. Impact computed by setting categorical
variables to 0 versus 1 for all respondents. Impacts for continuous variables estimated at $25,000 increase for
wealth and 1-year increase for leisure.
                                                                                                                     30




Table 6. Predicted Changes in the Probability of DR and NR given Cuts in Early
Retirement Benefits

                  Policy                             ∆ Predicted Probability from ∆ SSER Policy
                Simulation                          ∆ P(DR)           ∆ P(ER)          ∆ P(NR)

Early Retirement Penalty                              0.006                   -0.025                  0.018


Elimination of Early Retirement                       0.108                     --                    0.228
Benefits

Notes: See Table 1. Calculations use estimates from Model 4 from Table 3. Impacts for ER benefit reduction
computed by reducing estimated SSER wealth by $25,000. If respondent has less than $25,000 in SSER wealth,
then their SSER wealth is set to zero. Impacts for the elimination of SSER calculated by eliminating the ER option
and recalculating predicted probabilities (see text for more details).

Table 7. Factors Associated with Changes in
Probability of DR If Early Retirement Benefit Cut

         Variable                  OLS Coefficient
                                        (|SE|)
Female                                  0.000
                                      (0.002)
Black                                  -0.005
                                      (0.003)
Married                               0.006**
                                      (0.003)
LT HS                                  -0.004
                                      (0.002)
Employed in 1992                        0.000
                                      (0.002)
Job Health Ins                       -0.044**
                                      (0.003)
Job Disab Ins                        -0.050**
                                      (0.002)
Retiree Health Ins                    0.009**
                                      (0.002)
Poor Health                           0.013**
                                      (0.004)
Any Pension                           0.007**
                                      (0.002)
N of observations                        817
R-squared                               0.72
Note: Dependent variable is ∆P(DR) given elimination of the ER option; estimates of ∆P(DR) from Model 4, Table
3. Recalculated predicted probabilities derived as in text.
                                                                                                                                                     31




                                   Figure 1: OASDI Insured Status for HRS Respondents by Age and Sex


            120




            100




             80




             60




             40




             20




              0
                  22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64
                                                                                Age


                                               Women (DI)             Women (OASI)              Men (DI)            Men (OASI)


Source: Authors’ computations, weighted HRS; see text and Appendix.
                                                                                                                                      32

                                            Figure 2: OASD I Insure d Status by Early R e tire me nt We alth D e cile


                       100

                             D I Insured         O A SI Insured

                        90




                        80




                        70




                        60
             Percent




                        50




                        40




                        30




                        20




                        10




                         0
                             1st           2nd          3rd       4t h          5th          6t h          7th   8th    9th   10t h
                                                                         Early Retirement W ealth Decile

Source: Authors’ computations, weighted HRS; see text and Appendix.
                                                                                                                                                                                    33


                                     F i g u r e 3 : W e a l t h I m p a c t o f C u t t i n g E a r l y S o c i a l S e c u r i t y B e n e f i t s b y $ 2 5 ,0 0 0



               1 .2 0




               1 .0 0




               0 .8 0

                               P o s t/P re E x p e rim e n t W e a lth




               0 .6 0




               0 .4 0



                               G a p /P re E x p e rim e n t W e a lth


               0 .2 0




               0 .0 0
                        1 st        2nd                   3 rd            4 th              5 th                 6 th               7 th          8 th              9 th   1 0 th

                                                                                 E a r ly R e t ir e m e n t W e a lt h D e c ile




Source: Authors’ computations, weighted HRS; see text and Appendix.
                                                                                                     34



Appendix: Variable Definitions and Sample Means
Note: All RHS variables measured as of Wave 1

AnyADL: =1 if respondent finds it “difficult” to complete any ADL, 0 else.
Age: Respondent’s age in years.
Black: =1 if respondent black, 0 else.
CES Depression: respondent’s CESD score.
Live Pension: =1 if has a pension on current job, 0 else.
DI Insured, Wave 1: =1 if respondent DI insured based on administrative data, 0 else.
Doctor Diagnosed Condition: =1 if respondent reported a condition diagnosed by an MD, 0 else.
Female: =1 if respondent female, 0 else.
Housing Wealth: $ value of home net equity
Job Health Ins: =1 if respondent had employer-provided health insurance, 0 else.
Job Disab Ins: =1 if respondent had employer-provided long-term disability insurance, 0 else
Leisure ij: Years of leisure remaining to person i conditional on selecting retirement path j.
LT HS: =1 of respondent had less than a high school education, 0 else.
Married: =1 if respondent married currently, 0 else.
OA Insured: =1 if respondent OA insured based on administrative data, 0 else.
Other Financial Wealth: $ value of other financial wealth
Pension: =1 if has a pension on current or from past job, 0 else.
Poor Vision: =1 if respondent reported having poor vision, 0 else.
Poor Hearing: =1 if respondent reported having poor hearing, 0 else.
Poor Health: =1 if respondent self-reported fair or poor health, 0 else.
PV DR Wealth: $ value of expected total wealth if respondent elected DR.
PV ER Wealth: $ value of expected total wealth if respondent elected ER.
PV NR Wealth: $ value of expected total wealth if respondent elected NR.
PV Earnings to 62: PV of expected earnings if work to 62
PV Earnings to 65: PV of expected earnings if work to 65
PV DR Pension: $ value of wealth from employer-provided disability pension
PV ER Pension: $ value of wealth from employer-provided early retirement pension
PV NR Pension: $ value of wealth from employer-provided normal retirement pension
PV SSDR: $ value of expected Social Security wealth if respondent elected DR.
PV SSER: $ value of expected Social Security wealth if respondent elected ER.
PV SSNR: $ value of expected Social Security wealth if respondent elected NR.
Retiree Health Ins: =1 if respondent had employer-provided retiree health insurance, 0 else
Spouse Wealth: $ expected value of spouse pension (if any)
Wealth ij: PV of expected wealth available to person i conditional on selecting retirement path j.
Work in 1992: =1 if respondent has a job in 1992, 0 else.
Work Limiting Disability: =1 if respondent reported some work limiting disability, 0 else.
                                                                                        35




Appendix Table: Background Characteristics of Full EBS/HRS Estimation
Sample, Overall and by Retirement Pathway ($1992)
                                                           Retirement Pathway
                Variable                 Total          DR        ER          NR
Demographic
 Age (years)                               59.4          59.0       59.5       59.2
 Female (%)                                 53            58         56         49
 Currently Married (%)                      77            60         79         76
 Partner (not married) (%)                   1             2          1          2
 Ever Divorced (%)                          26            42         25         27
 Ever Widowed (%)                           10            18         10          9
 Never Married (%)                           4             5          4          4
 Black (%)                                   7            15          6          7
Education
 LT HS (%)                                  24            53        26         18
 High School (%)                            37            34        39         33
 GT HS (%)                                  39            13        35         49
Health Status
  Work Limiting Disability (%)              16            51        15         12
  Self Report of Health:
     Excellent (%)                          24             3        23         27
     Very Good (%)                          32            15        34         34
     Good (%)                               28            27        28         28
     Fair (%)                               12            30        12          9
     Poor (%)                               4             25        4           2
  Difficulty with ADL (%)                   14            36        13         11
  Doctor-diagnosed Conditions:
     Arthritis (%)                          42            64         42        41
     Cancer (%)                              6             6          7         6
     Diabetes (%)                           11            28         10        10
     Heart Problems (%)                     14            26         15        11
     High Blood Pressure (%)                41            54         40        42
     Lung Disease (%)                        7            16          7         6
     Mental Problems (%)                     9            13          9         9
     Stroke (%)                              2             6          2         3
  CES Depression Score                    21.5           25.8       21.4       21
  Poor Vision (%)                           2              9          2         1
  Poor Hearing (%)                           2             0          3         2
Total PDV of Wealth by Benefit Type
 DI Insured, Wave 1 (%)                     74            66          72        71
 OA Insured, Wave 1 (%)                     83            87          87        79
 PV Total DR Wealth                     $423,525       $201,745   $409,022   $477,340
 PV Total ER Wealth                     $507,660       $262,987   $504,758   $541,819
 PV Total NR Wealth                     $586,040       $315,080   $582,628   $626,536
N of Observations                         1,843           92        1,092      659
%                                          100             5          59        36
Source: Authors’ computations, weighted HRS; see text.
