                                  # !!  




                          
                            
                             


                                              


                                         !"$%&'
                                ())"*++,,,-.- +""/+,$%&'


                            
                              0121//3(4/))/54
                                .6 71809:
                                    3).8111




                   
   ! " #  $  % &     '  ( %  
   '  ()*     +   (    (       
!$  ,-       "         
  , .  //             (,"  
 (,-   0               (   
)   *  ,

12333(*  ,$      ,    0    0   (
4    0            1        ,
/3) /6 3( 3( ); ))
5 3563;4;3)4
 
   !"-$%&'
3).8111
<-<97&170'797'
                                      


3) ./6)3( 33( "/65 )"643)5)= ,)(3//34)/,)(
6;;)4)/;/63")",- /)))(>));;3)./,)(64/)/
634)/4/ 0% 34)=";4;3)4 6)35 )(0%:1/-/))/4/
.)("643);43)/6));3)"643)5)=;43)//(,)())3( 33( /
/) =./6 /)// /6,/6),6.)(/6,/63")-64/)=
34)=,)(),3)(3")6/"// /6,?=/0-'@ 0-:@;/)))
;3)"643)5)= ,)(4=64))(;;3)/;;3) ./- (//4)/3//))
,)( )( "3 ))4  / ./6 )3( 3 3( - (= = , >" ,(=
A36)35 3B;"3")33//34)////,-


 
"));33/
  /)5/)=
8$1 =)) 6-
  /)718802
6 
C.4-64
())"*DD3-.4-64D
&0$ 929 &98'
                                        1. INTRODUCTION
        Why do some countries remain so much poorer than others? The two basic approaches to
income convergence yield quite hopeful conclusions. The factor accumulation approach [Solow
1956] explains that low productivity is the result of low ratios of skill and capital to labor. In the
presence of diminishing returns, countries with low skill and capital intensity have highly
productive skill and capital. That implies relatively rapid accumulation of capital and skill per
worker in poor countries, eventual convergence in factor intensities and thus convergence in labor
productivity. A second approach argues that low labor productivity is the result of using inferior
technologies.1 Replicating technology must be less costly than inventing new technologies, so
technology use should converge, leading to eventual convergence of total factor productivity.
        The evidence, on the other hand, is not hopeful at all. Growth rates of GDP/capita are not
generally higher in countries with low GDP/capita (at least since the early 1960s) [Barro 1991].
Most studies find convergence only after conditioning on available measures of international
differences in institutions and preferences that explain the slow accumulation of skill and capital in
poorer countries [Barro and Sala-I-Martin 1995, Mankiw, Romer and Weil1992]. Even then, this
“conditional convergence” is quite slow.
        This paper suggests an alternative explanation for slow productivity convergence: Factor-
biased technological change. That mechanism has been quite successful in explaining increased
returns to schooling in the U.S. and the shift in labor demand away from less educated workers
and toward the more educated in the OECD. Substantial evidence now exists demonstrating that
technological change has favored skilled (more educated) workers over less skilled (less educated)


        1
           Solow [1957] measures the extent of total factor productivity growth in the U.S. Eaton and
Kortum [1996,1999] offer evidence of international technology transfer using R&D and patent statistics.
Technology transfer models fall into two broad categories. The “appropriate” technology model
(Schumacher [1973]; Basu & Weil [1998] ) posits that new technologies are not absorbed immediately in
developing countries because of a lack of human or physical capital, differences in production technologies
in use, or differences in factor prices. In contrast, the conventional assumption in growth theory is of
pervasive technology in use everywhere. A weaker assumption is that technologies differ, but recent
innovations are so efficient that they are adopted across a wide range of industries, factor price
combinations and local technological capabilities. That concept is related to recent work on “General
Purpose Technologies” [Bresnahan and Trajchtenberg, 1995; Helpman 1998], such as electrification and
information technology which increase productivity in a wide range of industries.

                                                     1
workers at least for the past few decades in many other parts of the world.2 Table 1 provides a
sampling of that evidence, showing the declining wagebill shares of production workers in the
manufacturing industries of both high and middle income countries.
        The connection between factor bias and slow productivity growth is intuitive. If
technology favors the skilled over the unskilled, then we would expect industries with more
skilled workers to have faster total factor productivity (TFP) growth rates [Klenow 1998; Kahn
and Lim 1998]. Similarly, it would not be surprising if countries with a high proportion of less-
skilled workers had slower growth rates of income per capita. That basic insight is not new. It
formed the motivation for previous work investigating skill-bias in developing countries [Berman
and Machin 2000] and is developed quite fully in the induced technological change model of
Acemoglu and Zilibotti [2000] to explain productivity differences across countries.3 The
contribution of this paper is in developing that argument in a very general setting and in estimating
the extent to which factor bias can slow productivity convergence.
        This paper estimates the factor bias of technological change and applies the estimates to
the puzzle of slow productivity convergence. The data are a three dimensional panel of industries
over time for nineteen countries in the 1980s. Factor-bias parameters are estimated twice: in both
a production function and a TFP function. Both approaches yield consistent, strong evidence that
technological change favored both skilled labor and capital over unskilled labor. That conclusion
is robust to a number of alternative approaches and specifications. Factor bias estimates indicate


        2
          For evidence of recent skill-biased technological change in the U.S. see: Bound and Johnson,
[1992]; Katz and Murphy, [1992]; Lawrence and Slaughter, [1993]; Berman, Bound, and Griliches,
[1994]. Historical evidence is offered by Goldin and Katz [1996, 1998], as far back as the beginning of the
century. Evidence from other OECD countries is available in Freeman [1988], Freeman and Katz [1994],
Katz and Revenga [1989], Katz, Loveman and Blanchflower [1995], Davis [1992], Berman, Bound and
Machin [1998]. Several studies have found increased relative wages of skilled labor in several developing
countries despite widespread trade liberalization in the 1980s which would predict the opposite through the
Stolper-Samuelson mechanism [Feliciano, 1995; Hanson and Harrison, 1995; Robbins, 1995; Berman,
Bound and Machin, 1998; Berman and Machin, 2000.].
        3
          That paper develops a theory of endogenous skill-bias in technological change. Their
assumptions imply that the difference in measured TFP levels between developed and developing countries
will be greater for unskill-intensive industries than for the skill-intensive. Their estimates, which draw on
the same dataset as this paper does, find that pattern, but data limitations cannot allow them to tell if that is
evidence of skill-bias or of some change in preferences.

                                                       2
that an industry or a country with twice the ratio of skills and capital to less-skilled labor enjoys a
1.4%-1.8% faster annual rate of TFP growth.
        The next section of this paper provides background about the lack of productivity
convergence in the world, in the sampled countries and in their manufacturing industries. Section
3 develops a production function framework for estimation. Section 4 describes the data, deals
with potential estimation problems, presents estimates and discusses their plausibility in the
context of a world with accelerated technology-transfer. The fifth section examines the
implications of estimated factor-bias for productivity convergence. Section 6 concludes.




     2. TFP GROWTH AND FACTOR ACCUMULATION IN MANUFACTURING
        Figure 1 looks at the manufacturing sample in the context of global nonconvergence, to
check the representativeness of the data. The top panel, 1A, reproduces the standard finding that
income per capita growth rates between 1960 and 1990 are uncorrelated with income levels
[Barro 1991]. (Data are drawn from the Penn World Tables, version 5.6). The developing world
shows higher variance in growth rates, but the same mean.
        That international pattern of nonconvergence is quite stable. Figure 1B plots the same
relationship for 1980-90, revealing that the 1980s show the same pattern of nonconvergence, - a
triangle pointing right.
        The sample of manufacturing data used in this paper is drawn from the nineteen countries
labeled in Figure 1B. They are a subsample of middle and high income countries used in previous
work, further selected on having usable measures of capital at the beginning and end of the 1980s.
Selection on data quality results in a disproportionate number of high income countries.
Nevertheless, the relationship in the sample between growth and levels of GDP/capita roughly
mimics the pattern in the larger sample: the cross-country variance of growth rates declines with
income and the average growth rate shows a slight reduction as income increases. National
growth rates are quite persistent. The correlation between the 1960-90 growth rate and the 1980-
90 growth rate is 0.88 (=0.00) for these nineteen countries.


                                                   3
       Figure 1C plots growth rates in manufacturing value added/worker against levels of
GDP/capita for the nineteen country sample. This relationship shows the same triangle. Growth
rates do not decline with income and have higher variance at lower income levels. Countries with
high growth rates in GDP/capita generally have high growth rates in manufacturing value added
per worker, though Portugal and Chile are exceptions. The correlation between the thirty year
GDP/capita growth rate and the value added per worker rate in the 1980s is 0.22 ( =0.38), but
rises to 0.42 (=0.08) without Chile. Overall manufacturing value added per worker in this
sample mimics the pattern of nonconvergence in international GDP/capita. This is consistent with
the conventional view that successful NICS, such as Korea, have grown by rapidly expanding
manufacturing.
        Is it factor accumulation or TFP that is not converging in manufacturing? Within the
nineteen countries a careful decomposition of growth rates is possible into TFP growth on the one
hand and factor accumulation (skill and capital intensity) on the other. Assume a production
function Y = AF(L,S,K) using unskilled labor, skilled labor and capital respectively. Assume
constant returns and competitive markets to develop a standard definition of TFP growth:
           TFP =    y - ( 5l   l +   5s   s + (1- 5l - 5s )   k ),
where lowercase letters are logarithms and 5’s are factor shares. Now let E (= L + S ) denote
employment and develop the decomposition for the growth rate of value added per worker,
         y- e = 5l ( l- e) + 5s ( s - e) + (1- 5l -5s )( k - e) +       TFP
                   = “factor accumulation”+      TFP .


       Figure 2 illustrates that decomposition, with the left figure plotting factor accumulation
against GDP/capita, and the right panel plotting TFP growth against GDP/capita. The left panel
makes it clear that little Solow convergence occurred in the form of capital or skill accumulation.
That pattern is analogous to the results of Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992), who found
convergence only once they conditioned on accumulation rates.
       The right panel clearly illustrates that most of the variance in the growth of manufacturing
value added per worker (86%) is in TFP growth. It is worth stressing that since TFP growth
rates are calculated as a residual, improved measurement might reallocate growth from TFP to


                                                  4
factor accumulation. That was the case in the study by Griliches and Jorgenson [1967] of U.S.
TFP growth, and in Young’s [1995] study of TFP growth Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea
and Taiwan.4 On the other hand, these measured TFP growth rates for manufacturing are not
simply measurement error. The correlation between the 1960-1990 GDP/capita growth rate and
the manufacturing TFP growth rate in the 1980s is 0.17 (=0.50), but rises to 0.42 (=0.095)
without Chile. That correlation is remarkably tight, considering the difference in data sources and
fact that the two growth rates have only ten of thirty years in common. It is safe to conclude that
a large component of growth in manufacturing output per worker is TFP growth. Furthermore,
factor accumulation would have to be understated by an order of magnitude, and
disproportionately so in the low income economies, for the basic picture in Figures 2A and 2B to
be reversed.
        Manufacturing TFP growth is not contributing to convergence either: it shows the same
triangular pattern that observed in Figure 1 for manufacturing value added per worker and for
GDP per capita.
        To sum up, the manufacturing data reproduce the pattern of nonconvergence evident in
GDP per capita. They reveal that most of the nonconvergence is in TFP growth rates. So if
replication is less costly than invention, why is TFP growth not contributing to convergence in
value added per worker? We need a theory of TFP divergence.




        4
           Young [1995] addresses a debate as to whether the rapid growth of several East Asian economies
is due to TFP growth or to factor accumulation. One of the messages of this paper is that the dichotomy is
false, since factor bias translates current factor accumulation into future TFP growth.

                                                    5
         3. FACTOR-BIASED TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN PRODUCTION:
                               A FRAMEWORK FOR ESTIMATION
        This section develops a framework to explain how factor-biased technological change can
yield divergent TFP growth rates. That framework also generates estimating equations, allowing
the data to report the magnitude of TFP divergence due to factor bias.
        A Cobb-Douglas production function with exponents that change over time allows the
possibility of factor-biased technological change,

                                                .

Here Y is product, K capital, S skilled labor and L unskilled labor. Time is indexed by t.
        The logarithmic form is convenient for discussing factor bias. Rewritten using lowercase
letters to indicate logarithms, the production function is
                                                                .

        Output elasticities of factors are given by

                                                     .


        The rate at which f (t) changes bias of technological change towards factor f ,

                                          .


Constant returns to scale require that the exponents sum to one. A weaker assumption that proves
to be useful is that returns to scale (constant or otherwise) remain unchanged by technological
progress, or that the three Uf terms sum to zero. Call that assumption “unchanging returns to
scale” (URS). I will discuss its implications below.5
        A working definition of relative factor-bias helps to link this framework to the literature.

(3)     Technological change is relatively skill biased if                         .



        5
          If inputs are to be forever useful in production and subject to diminishing marginal returns, then
the standard restriction 0< f(t) < 1 must also be imposed for all factors f and time t.

                                                         6
In words, relative skill bias exists if the output elasticity of skilled labor increases at a faster rate
than that of unskilled labor. To justify that usage, consider the implications of relative skill-bias.
Assuming perfectly competitive labor markets, (3) implies that, holding relative wages constant,
the relative demand for skilled workers increases with time, since
        ,
                                              ,   so that


Conversely, holding the ratio of inputs fixed inputs fixed, relative skill-bias implies that the relative
wage of skilled workers increases. For this production function, it also implies that the wagebill
share of skilled workers increases. These three implications have been treated as alternative
symptoms of skill-biased technological change in the literature.6
        This framework allows estimation of the absolute (as opposed to the relative) bias of
technological change.
        Define technological change as
        absolutely f - biased     if   Uf   > 0 , and
(4)     absolutely f - saving     if   Uf   < 0,
        for f  ( l, s, k ).
That is, technological change is absolutely f-biased if the marginal product of factor f increases
(beyond the neutral increase, '), holding inputs constant.
        In the two factor model with unchanging returns to scale        Us = -Ul , so absolute and
relative skill bias are equivalent, and skill-biased technological change is equivalent to labor-saving
technological change.
        The three factor model, even with unchanging returns to scale, is more flexible. For
instance, technology could be absolutely biased against both s and l, but relatively biased toward
s. Assuming unchanging returns, absolute skill-bias and absolute capital-bias imply absolute
labor-saving technological change, since Ul = - Uk - Us .




        6
            For example, Bound and Johnson [1992] or Katz and Murphy [1992].

                                                      7
Factor Bias and Productivity Growth
          To study the effect of factor bias on productivity change, note that the U terms also
reflect the effect of factor quantities on changes in total factor productivity. To see this, note that




Here the partial derivative of y with respect to time is a change in total factor productivity, since
inputs are held constant. The cross partial of product with respect to time and input f is the factor-
bias term. For example, if technological change is absolutely skill biased, then TFP growth must
be faster, the greater the level of skilled labor in production. That property is not particular to the
Cobb-Douglas form. It follows from the symmetry of cross-partial derivatives in any production
function. Equation (5) indicates one way of estimating factor bias terms, by regressing the TFP
growth rate on the levels of inputs.
          Figure 3 illustrates a relatively skill-biased technological change as the shift of an isoquant
in S, L space, holding K constant. For a country or an industry at point B, with the S/L ratio given
by the slope of the vector OB, the productivity gain is given by length of the segment BC --the
decrease in inputs required to produce a unit of output. That technological change is relatively
skill-biased since, at the relative wage illustrated by the slope of the line tangent to the isoquant at
B, the new isoquant requires a higher S/L ratio (at point D). In contrast, a country or industry
with the lower S/L ratio given by the vector OA experiences no productivity gain. The size of the
differential productivity gain between A and B is given by the factor bias coefficients (the U),
which are estimated below.
          Assuming unchanging returns to scale, Ul has the following convenient interpretation: If
one industry has twice the K/L ratio and twice the S/L ratio as another, the TFP growth rate of
the former will be -Ul faster. Anticipating the results, Ul will be negative, so the former will grow
faster.
          The unchanging returns assumption is not critical for what follows. It is convenient
though, and allows for more precise estimates. Is it a reasonable assumption? The data will insist
that the factor bias terms (the Uf) sum to a negative number, implying that returns to scale decline
over time. Yet there is a replication argument that returns to scale should remain unchanging.

                                                     8
Without URS, scale would affect the TFP growth rate of an industry (see equation (5)). If
declining returns were true at the firm level, large firms could split into smaller pieces to increase
productivity. If declining returns were true at the industry level, large industries could send
production abroad to increase productivity. Either way, in equilibrium we should not observe
declining returns to scale. The plausibility of URS will come up again in interpreting estimates,
though the thrust of the evidence for factor bias will not require this assumption.


Measurement Issues and Estimating Equations
        Estimation requires a functional form for (t). Impose the restriction7
                                 f(t)   = f +   f   t , so that   Uf =   f   .
Substituting that restriction into (2) yields one way of estimating factor-bias terms. Equation (5)
provides a second method. The data available to estimate the parameters of the production
function (equation (1)) are a three-dimensional panel of manufacturing industries within countries
observed twice, at the beginning and end of the 1980s.
        Measurement issues complicate estimation for two reasons. First, inputs are measured
inconsistently. The definitions of skilled and unskilled labor are likely to differ conceptually across
countries. For instance, middle income countries are more likely to undersample small firms,
which tend to have lower proportions of skilled workers, leading them to overestimate the
proportion of skilled workers.8 The quality of all three inputs may also differ across industries.
More generally, we know from the work of Griliches and Jorgenson [1967], that mismeasurement
of input quality can lead to substantial mistakes in TFP accounting. Assume that capital, skilled
labor and unskilled labor are measured with a country-specific error of proportionality. In
logarithms, the measured quantity is then the sum of the true quantity and a country-factor
specific error,



        7
          This restriction should be thought of as a short term approximation. The linear functional form
implies that if f is nonzero, factor f will eventually have an output elasticity outside the [0,1] interval.
        8
          For example, the measured proportion of skilled workers in Japanese manufacturing jumped from
46 to 53 percent between the 1975 and 1978 surveys when the minimum firm size which got the “long
form” with the skilled worker question changed.

                                                        9
(6)                 fmict = fict + ufc   for f  ( k, s, l) .
         Besides inconsistent measurement of factor qualities, a second source of likely
measurement error is in price comparisons across countries and industries. National price indexes
(from the Penn World Tables) are not completely corrected for quality, which is likely to differ
disproportionately across industries because of market power, particularly for nontraded goods.
These fixed industry-country specific price differences are absorbed by an industry-country
specific level effect,     ic , which also absorbs fixed productivity differences,      measurement error in
output and any industry-country specific measurement error in quantities. These measurement
errors may be substantial considering that the data are collected from disparate sources without
the intention of making them comparable. I also include a country-period specific productivity
level   ct   , and an industry specific productivity trend in output growth 'i . With these additions,
substituting (6) into (2) yields




         Differencing (7) over time removes the time-invariant measurement error from              
coefficients but not from           coefficients. Labeling the periods t=0 and t=1 and defining
  xict = xic1 - xic0, (for a generic variable x)




Under these assumptions the elasticity coefficients  and the factor-bias coefficients             are
identified despite the measurement error. The estimated country effect includes all the bracketed
terms: the country-specific change in productivity              c   and terms involving country-specific
measurement error in factors. There is a symmetric argument for industry-factor specific
measurement error, ui f , which can be accommodated in the same way, compromising


                                                           10
identification of industry specific changes in productivity, 'i , but not affecting identification of the
elasticities and factor bias terms.
         One final measurement problem is that physical units of value added are not actually
observed. I can measure PY (sales net of intermediate inputs), or p + y in logarithms. This is a
familiar problem in production function estimation whenever the price deflator is suspect, but the
ability to estimate industry effects adds a novel element to the solution. Consider the reduced
form regression of p on y (which cannot be run for lack of data),
(9)                               pic = ai + bc + m       yic + vic .


Here ai and bc are industry and country fixed effects in price changes. The coefficient m cannot
be signed. Using a textbook simultaneity bias calculation, it is an average of the (inverse) demand
and supply elasticities of industry output, weighted by the variances of demand and supply shifts.
Since those variances are conditional on common industry effects across countries, they can be
interpreted as local supply and demand shifts. For instance, m will be positive if the variance of
local demand shifts exceeds that of local supply shifts and the price elasticity of demand exceeds
that of supply (in absolute value). Conditional on industry effects, m would be quite small if trade
makes product demand quite elastic. In the estimates reported below, m will in fact be quite small.
         Adding   p to both sides of (8) and substituting for           p on the right hand side from (9)
yields




Thus, unmeasured price changes introduces an ambiguity. The coefficients of (8) are identified
only up to a proportion (1+m): (1+m) f , (1+m)       f   for factors f  (l,s,k). The extent of that
distortion (1+ m) can be estimated if constant returns are assumed. Then the sum of estimated 

                                                   11
coefficients is,                             . Note that industry and country effects in price changes


from (9) will also be loaded onto the estimated industry and country effects.


TFP Specification
        An alternative approach to estimating the factor-bias terms is to use the relationship in (5),
regressing dTFP on input levels.9 This approach requires making standard assumptions in order to
calculate factor weights in TFP - constant returns and competitive markets. On the other hand, it
allows much more flexibility in the production function. The time invariant part is not restricted to
have a Cobb-Douglas form, to have a constant elasticity of substitution between factors or to
have common parameters in different industries and countries.
        Assuming constant returns to scale and competitive markets, the value-added shares of
each factor, 5, provide factor weights in calculating the rate of TFP change,




The factor-bias portion of the remainder of the equation is specified as in (8), allowing separate
trends of biased technological change for each factor. Factor bias coefficients are identified up to
a multiplicative constant (1+m), as in (10). Similarly, estimated country and industry effects in
productivity change capture country and industry-specific price changes as well as country and
industry-specific measurement error in factors (though the equation only illustrates this point for
the country effect).
        The following section estimates factor bias terms using both Cobb-Douglas and TFP
specifications.




        9
          This approach is similar to that taken by Kahn and Lim [1998] in their study of skill-augmenting
technological change in the U.S. In their estimating equation the shares appear as covariates and they are
forced to impose an adding up constraint on these, similar to URS.

                                                    12
                                              4. RESULTS
        A rich three-dimensional panel of industries across countries over time is available to
estimate the factor bias terms. Since it covers countries with industries at different levels of
development, it contains unusually rich variation over time, industries and countries. This section
describes the data, discusses potential biases in estimation and presents results.


Data
        To investigate factor bias this paper uses the United Nations General Industrial Statistics
Database [United Nations 1992] (later administered by UNIDO). It includes manufacturing
employment, wagebill, investment and output data for many countries. This rich data set reflects
the unique capability of the United Nations to compile data by soliciting contributions from the
statistical agencies of member countries.10 It covers 28 manufacturing industries at (broadly) the
two to three-digit level, consistently defined across countries and years using the ISIC
classification. Countries were selected that provide data of consistent quality over time.
        Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the nineteen countries used. They are ranked by
income, (all figures reported in constant 1985 dollars, using the GDP deflators and 1985 exchange
rates from the Penn World Tables [Summers and Heston, 1991]. Following a classification used in
previous work [Berman and Machin, 2000], countries are arranged into two income groups: a
high income group with GDP per capita exceeding $10,000 (1985 US$) in 1980; and a middle
income group with GDP per capita between $2,000 and $10,000 in 1980.
        The ten middle income countries are from Asia, Europe and South America. This group
includes several countries with large manufacturing sectors: (the former) Czechoslovakia, Korea,
and Spain. The high income group includes nine countries ranging in income from Japan to the
U.S. The choice of 1985 exchange rates favors the U.S., but note that U.S. value added per


        10
            The main purpose of these data is to facilitate international comparisons relating to the
manufacturing sector. Concepts and definitions are drawn from the International Recommendations for
Industrial Statistics [Statistical Papers, Series M, No 48/Rev 1, United Nations Publication] and the
classification by industry is taken from the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) of All
Economic Activities [Statistical Papers, Series M, No 4/Rev 2, United Nations]. For details see the Data
Appendix in Berman, Bound and Machin [1998].

                                                     13
worker is twice as high in 1980 as that of West Germany, the second-ranked country in this
group. The U.S. is also the largest manufacturing employer, with 19m workers, followed by Japan
with 10.5m, the UK with 6.5m and West Germany with 6.3m.
        Our measure of skill in these data is the classification into nonproduction and production
workers (operatives and nonoperatives in UN terminology). The term production worker usually
refers to employees directly engaged in production or related activities of the establishment. That
includes clerks or working supervisors whose function is to record or expedite any step in the
production process. Employees of a similar type engaged in activities ancillary to the main activity
of the establishment and those engaged in truck driving, repair and maintenance and so on, are
also considered to be production workers.
        This is far from the ideal measure of “skill,” which would include elements of education
and training.11 Clearly the educational level of each of these categories of worker differs across
countries. Two sources of evidence indicate that nonproduction workers have higher educational
attainment than production workers: 1) cross-tabulations of matched worker and employer
surveys at the plant in the U.S. in 1990 reveal a fairly tight relationship between years of
schooling, occupation and nonproduction categories 12 [Berman, Bound and Machin, 1997]. An
analogous effort at the industry level in the UK reveals a similar mapping [Machin, Ryan and Van
Reenen, 1996]. Harris [1999] reports the results of a similar exercise at the plant level, which also
reveal that nonproduction workers have a higher educational level;
2) Nonproduction workers are uniformly better paid. Quality indices based on a comparison of
CPS and ASM data in the U.S. suggest that about ½ of skill upgrading in U.S. manufacturing
took place within nonproduction and production categories over the 1980s [Berman, Bound and
Griliches, 1994]. We conclude that while the aggregation problems are worse than usual for these
categories, within country comparisons are probably reasonable measures over periods as long as



        11
           The term “skill” in skill-bias is an unfortunately vague expression we inherit from the literature.
In our discussion “skill”can be interpreted as education.
        12
           75 percent of nonproduction workers are in white collar occupations, while 81 percent of
production workers are in blue collar occupations. 76 percent of nonproduction workers have at least some
college education, while 61% of production workers have a high school education or less.

                                                      14
a decade, while between country comparisons, especially across income ranges, should be viewed
with caution.
       Capital stock is calculated by summing and discounting lagged investment. These are
discounted using the Penn World Tables investment price index. Discount factors and coefficients
on lagged investment are fitted from the Gray-Bartelsman [1995] data on U.S. manufacturing,
which reports both investment and capital stock. For details see Berman and Machin [2000].
       Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for estimating equations. Total factor productivity
growth is only slightly higher in our sample among middle income countries than among the
developed countries. (The calculation of TFP growth is described in the next subsection.) The
standard deviation is almost three times as high among middle income countries, reproducing the
pattern in Figure 2 of selective convergence. Note also that manufacturing industries in high
income countries have a much faster absolute decline in production worker employment.


Potential Pitfalls in Estimation
       Estimation of (10) and (11) is complicated by several potential sources of bias familiar
from the literature on the estimation of production functions [Griliches and Mairesse, 1995].
Before we get distracted by the estimates and the economics, let’s turn to the dirty work of
discussing potential biases and how they are treated.
       First, measurement error is likely in the levels of factors, which is both transitory and
industry-country specific, so that industry and country effects will not absorb it. This could be
anything from fluctuations in unmeasured quality, to price changes in capital to coding error.
       One implication of transitory measurement error is that it appears on both sides of
equation (11), creating the potential for spurious correlation between factor levels and       TFP. To
illustrate, let ft be a vector of measured factors in period t. Now
       ft = ft* + ut ,
where ft* is the true level and ut is classical measurement error, uncorrelated with f or y. The
change in TFP would then be calculated as
         TFP =      y - 5`   f =     y - 5`   f* - 5`(ut - ut-1) =    TFP* - 5`(ut - ut-1) .




                                                  15
That measurement error would create a spurious negative correlation with ft and a spurious
positive correlation with ft-1 .
        A convenient solution is to use the average level of factors over time as a regressor
(consistent with the approximation of the derivative with respect to time in equation (11)).
Let f = (ft + ft-1) /2 = f* + (ut + ut-1) /2 . Let *t denote the variance of ut . The spurious covariance
5`Cov(ut - ut-1, ut - ut-1)5/2     =   5`( *t - *t-1)5/2 , which will be zero if the variance of the
measurement error is unchanged over time.
        A related problem arises with the shares 5f = wfF/Y (where wfF is the wagebill of factor f,
and capital’s share is calculated as a residual). These include the level of factor F on the left-hand
side of (11). So transitory measurement error appears in levels on the left-hand side and in
logarithm on the right-hand side, inducing a spurious correlation. That spurious correlation is
prevented by predicting 5ic using a regression of shares on industry and country indicators and
using the predicted values to calculate TFP. These predicted values are then purged of industry-
country specific measurement error.
        A second, more standard, implication of measurement error in factors of production is that
bias due to measurement error is exacerbated by differencing, because of the reduction in the
signal to noise ratio (the ratio of the true variance to the variance of the measurement error). So
we expect the estimated elasticities (the ’s) in equation (10) to be biased downward. This is a
common problem in estimating production functions in differences. The estimated capital
coefficient in firm data is often near zero [Griliches and Mairesse 1995].
        The potentially biased  estimates are for the most part incidental, but they could transmit
bias to the estimated     terms through the covariance of estimated coefficients. To see this,
consider the least squares regression estimating vectors  and , where X1 =             f, and X2 = f,
assuming that     f is correlated with the error term, but f is not. The least squares estimator is then




                                                       16
        Aggregation to the industry level helps in this respect, as measurement error between
firms tends to cancel, raising the ratio of signal to noise. The developing country data also seem to
be rich in signal, as we shall see below. Defining f as an average over time also helps. It reduces
the spurious negative covariance of f with f due to measurement error, thus reducing the
spurious covariance between estimated  and            coefficients. A third treatment is to use prior
beliefs about the values of ’s to bound the possible bias on . This last idea can be best
explained by demonstration.
        A third potential source of bias is an endogenous response of factor use             f, to an
industry-country specific change in productivity or prices. That would induce a positive
covariance with the error term, Cov( f ,   ) > 0 , and a generally upward bias in the estimated 
in equation (10). As before, experimenting with restrictions on the estimated  can help gauge
how much bias is transmitted to the estimated          .
        A related concern is that endogenous response will induce a positive correlation between
the measured level of f and the error term, Cov(f ,          ) > 0,   since ft appears in f. That problem
can be treated in the production function specification by using lagged inputs ft-1 as instruments,
since they are determined before        t is observed.13 Thus, identification of the       terms in equation
(10) comes from cross-industry variation in the lagged levels of inputs (s, l, k) which could arise
from any number of historical, industry-country specific, demand or supply conditions in labor,
capital, or product markets.
        This endogeneity bias is more serious in the TFP specification, since lagged values of
inputs are not valid instruments. There, in the presence of transitory measurement error, the error
term will include - 5`(ut - ut-1). Thus, instrumenting with the variable ft-1, which includes the
lagged measurement error ut-1, will tend to bias the estimated           away from zero (in addition to
any bias due to classical measurement error, probably toward zero.)


        13
            Strictly speaking, that instrument will be invalid in the production function specification, since
Cov(ut-1, [ut + ut-1] /2) > 0, where ut is the measurement error in measuring the factors ft . Nevertheless, the
induced bias is probably no worse than the standard least squares attenuation bias (which involves the
covariance of (ut + ut-1) /2 with itself, but also a larger denominator) and would likely tend only to bias
estimates towards zero.

                                                      17
          In summary, identifying the factor-bias terms in the production function specification
appears to be feasible, as the major sources of potential bias can be controlled. However, in the
TFP specification, there is a potential endogeneity bias. In practice, comparing the results of the
two approaches will turn out to be informative.


Results
          Table 4 reports the result of estimating the translog specification in equation (10). The
first three rows report the factor bias coefficients ( ) on log levels of inputs, while the next three
report the elasticities () on changes in logarithms. As noted in the last section, bias in the
estimated  might be transmitted to the estimated . Looking first at the  coefficients in the
leftmost row, note that they are large, with an estimated k of .774 and returns to scale of 1.39.
This is not an unusual result in cross-country regressions with developing countries. It may be due
to endogenous adjustment of inputs, especially capital, to price and productivity shocks. It may
also be due to a positive correlation of prices and quantities of product, reflected in a positive m
coefficient in (9). Those excessive returns to scale recede when we include country effects. The
estimated k declines to a more reasonable 0.448. That change indicates that the high coefficient
on   k in the leftmost column of results may have been due to country-specific, cyclical increases
in measured productivity. The ’s sum to 1.09. Thus, if constant returns hold, the bias due to not
measuring prices (m in equation (10)) is rather small - estimated coefficients are about 9% too
high in absolute value. The reasonable size of the estimated ’s from the “country effects” column
on also provides some reassurance about bias in the estimated  that may be transmitted to the
estimated      coefficients.
          The third column adds industry effects in productivity growth, as specified in equation
(10). That does not much change the estimated ’s. Under constant returns, m is estimated at 8%.
The addition of industry effects corrects a positive omitted variable bias on the estimate of      l   in
the previous column, changing it from -1.24% to -2.15%. Conditional on country effects,
industries with high production worker employment tended to have high measured TFP growth,




                                                   18
implying a sector bias [Haskell and Slaughter 1998] toward unskilled workers14 (or at least
industry-specific time-invariant measurement error in inputs).
       Before turning to robustness checks, consider the economic interpretation of the factor-
bias coefficients. The estimated coefficient on production workers,               l   , is -2.15%. Subtracting
0.16 due to m , this implies that annual productivity growth is almost 2% slower in industries with
twice as many production workers. The estimated standard error is (0.51), indicating strong
evidence of absolute labor saving technological change.
       The estimated coefficient on skilled labor,              , is positive, at 0.69, but not statistically
                                                                s

significant, providing weak evidence of absolute skill bias. Evidence for relative skill-bias is
strong, as the estimated value of       s   -   l   is 2.41% (s.e.=1.05%) (not shown in the Table). The
estimated coefficient on capital,      k    is 0.87% (0.41%), providing strong evidence of absolute
capital bias in technological change.
       The second to last row reports the change in returns to scale                  s   +   k   +   l   , which would be
zero under unchanging returns to scale (URS). The estimated sum is -0.59%, indicating that
increased productivity of skilled labor and capital does not fully compensate for declining
productivity of unskilled labor. (This does not imply a productivity decline, since the equation
allows Hicks-neutral productivity change.) Changing returns to scale are an uncomfortable
finding. They conflict with the replication argument offered in the previous section, since they
imply that industries of different sizes have systematically different TFP growth rates. (In this case
smaller industries have higher growth rates.) Those objections, and the clear interpretation that
URS allows, argue for exploring what happens if URS is imposed. I will return to discuss the cost
of the URS assumption in the next section.
       To put these results in context (ignore the data’s objections and) impose URS. That raises
the estimated skill and capital bias coefficients, yielding an implied            l   estimate of -1.80% (which
is less negative than the unrestricted estimate), or -1.67% corrected for m. In other words,
conditional on industry and country effects, an industry with twice the capital/unskilled labor ratio
and twice the skilled/unskilled labor ratio has an annual TFP growth advantage of 1.67% !



       14
            In the analysis that follows that sector bias will be allowed to differ by income group.

                                                           19
        Are these results driven by some outlier, rogue industry or misbehaving country? Figure 4
illustrates a leverage plot of the estimated   l   . It graphs the growth rate of value added against the
log of production employment, once both have been conditioned on all the other covariates (in the
linear regression sense). The Frisch-Waugh theorem implies that this slope is the same as that in
the weighted, multivariate regression. The upper left panel is a simple scatterplot. The upper right
panel is drawn with circles proportional to the weights used in the regression (value-added shares
within country). The lower two panels are labeled by country and industry. Combined, the four
panels make it clear that estimated labor-saving technological change is not driven by outliers. As
a separate robustness check the regression was run dropping a single country each time. That had
no substantial effect on the factor bias coefficients.
        What about other potential pitfalls? Table 5 examines these. One potential source of bias is
the endogenous reaction of factors (l, s, k) to industry-country specific productivity or price
changes, which would appear in the residual,         . Since factors are measured at their average
level between the beginning and end of the period, this may bias estimated coefficients, probably
towards one. Using lagged levels (lt-1 , st-1 , kt-1 ) as instrumental variables can treat that problem,
since these are determined before a productivity or price shock. The column labeled “lagged levels
as instruments” reports those instrumental variable estimates. These are essentially identical to the
least squares estimates in the previous table. A Hausman test reveals that we cannot reject the
hypothesis of identical coefficients: endogenous reaction of factors to productivity or price shocks
is not a source of discernible bias.
        Another potential source of bias discussed above is a bias transmitted from the 
coefficients to the   coefficients. (The  coefficients are estimated without an instrument in all
specifications so they are vulnerable to bias due to endogenous response to productivity or price
shocks, for instance.) Regardless of the source of potential bias, the most suspicious estimated 
coefficient is that on log change in nonproduction workers. At 0.49, it is much higher than the
nonproduction wagebill share in value added. One way to approach the potential transmitted bias
is to force that coefficient to take a lower value and observe the change in       estimates, (as
suggested by the bias formula in the subsection above). A possible restriction would be constant
returns to scale, which are imposed in the next column to the right. That exercise has little effect


                                                      20
on the ’s so it is not surprising that the ’s are not much changed. A more drastic step is to
force the estimated s coefficient to be zero, in order to provide an upper bound on the possible
transmitted bias. That reduces the estimated       s   coefficient from 0.69 to 0.47 but has little effect
on the other factor-bias coefficients. The URS-restricted          l   estimate rises from -1.80 to -1.64,
which can be thought of as an upper bound for the rate of labor saving technological change.
        The main conclusions of Table 4 are robust to corrections for endogeneity and
measurement error biases: very strong evidence that technological change had an absolute labor
saving bias, weaker but statistically significant evidence of an absolute capital-bias, and evidence
of absolute skill-bias on the borderline of statistical significance. Evidence of relative skill-bias is
quite strong, which is consistent with the literature discussed in the introduction.


TFP Function Estimates
        The total factor productivity specification is more flexible in many ways than the
production function. It requires no functional form assumptions except on the factor bias terms. In
particular, it does not impose unitary elasticity of substitution between factors. It does require the
(standard) assumptions of constant returns to scale and competitive markets to define TFP. (Note
that constant returns were not rejected in the specifications estimated in Table 3, except in the
first, -which did not include country effects).
        Table 6 reports estimated factor-bias terms as specified in equation (11) of section II.
Despite the difference in specification, the      estimates are quite similar to those obtained from a
production function, though smaller in absolute value. Begin with the preferred specification (in
the middle row), which includes country and industry effects. The estimated coefficient on
production workers is large and negative at -1.83% (s.e.=0.49%), showing absolute labor saving
technological change. The coefficients on nonproduction workers and capital are positive at
0.53% and 0.71% but not significantly different from zero, providing weak evidence of absolute
skill-bias and absolute capital bias.
        The sum of factor bias terms is -0.59% (0.33), indicating weak evidence for a decline in
returns to scale. If we assume unchanging returns, the implied estimate of            l   from the restricted
regression is -1.49% (0.43). That estimate is only slightly smaller in absolute value than the


                                                       21
restricted estimate of   l   (-1.80%) in the production function specification. Like the production
function estimates, these estimates imply substantially faster TFP growth for skill and capital
intensive industries.
        Omitting industry effects changes the estimated           l   coefficient to -0.98. That change
indicates TFP growth disproportionately concentrated in industries with high levels of production
employment, conditional on country (as in the production function specification). Omitting
country effects as well tends to lower the estimated        l   and     s   coefficients in absolute value, while
raising the coefficients on capital. I.e., countries with high levels of capital and low levels of
employment tended to have faster measured TFP growth.
        Recalling the discussion of potential biases above, the TFP specification is vulnerable to
endogeneity bias. Country-industry specific productivity or price shocks could cause an
endogenous adjustment of factor levels (l, s, and k), which are measured by averaging the first and
last measurements of the decade. In the production function estimates endogeneity bias was not a
discernible problem, as shown by the similarity of instrumental variable and least squares
estimates. So it’s hard to see how they would be a major problem in this specification. If the
major form of adjustment is through unskilled labor (which has the lowest adjustment costs), then
endogeneity bias could explain why the TFP estimates have a less negative                  l   estimate.
Unfortunately, the instrument available in the production function specification, the lagged factor
levels, ft-1, are not valid here, - they are spuriously correlated with any measurement error in f,
which appear in the calculation of TFP on the left-hand side of (11). (Those would tend to bias
estimated coefficients upwards as they induce a positive spurious correlation with the error term.
Thus, they do not help establish a lower bound for a bias that is probably upwards.) A
conservative approach would be to borrow the estimated m ( 8%) from the production function
specification and deflate the URS-restricted estimate of          l   from -1.49 to -1.37.
        Summarizing the three tables, both approaches show the same pattern: statistically
significant evidence of absolute labor-saving technological change, weaker evidence of absolute
skill-biased technological change and evidence of capital-biased technological change that is
statistically insignificant in the TFP specification but significant in the production function
specification. The restricted     l   estimate summarizes the results neatly (though the sum of factor


                                                      22
bias terms rejects that restriction, the unrestricted estimates would make the following a slight
understatement): conditional on industry and country effects, and allowing for fixed country and
industry specific measurement error, a manufacturing industry in the 1980s with double the K/L
ratio and double the S/L ratio is predicted to have an annual TFP growth rate 1.4 to 1.8 percent
higher. That is a remarkable level of labor saving technological change, compared with the sample
average TFP growth rate of 1.6 percent




                                                 23
Middle Income Countries and The Technology Transfer Hypothesis
           Tables 4-6 all report extremely high rates of labor saving technological change. Are these
estimates too large to be believed? In the Cobb-Douglas specification the             l   coefficient represents
the shift in value-added share of production workers. Using that approach, the shifts reported in
Table 1 suggest values of      l   between -0.2% and -0.5%, which are only a fraction of the estimates
in Tables 4-6 (-1.4% to -1.8% ).15 Estimated labor saving technological change is also high in
another sense. If l is about 0.3 and       l   is about -.015, then in 20 years production workers will be
quite useless in production!
           A possible explanation for such strong evidence of factor-bias comes from the hypothesis
of skill-biased technology transfer. Previous research suggested that during the 1980s middle
income countries absorbed several vintages of technology from high income countries [Berman
and Machin, 2000]. Perhaps this accelerated technological catchup induced factor bias in the
1980s for middle income countries at a rate much faster than that experienced at the technological
frontier. (E.g., if technological convergence is 4 times as fast in middle income countries as the
rate of advance at the frontier, then the labor-saving rate would be 4        l   in middle income
countries.)
           Accelerated factor-biased technology transfer in middle income countries implies that
evidence of factor-bias be stronger in the middle income countries than in the high income
countries in the1980s. Table 7 provides a test of that implication, reporting separate regression
estimates for the nine high income countries and the ten middle income countries. Dividing the
sample reduces precision. To make the interpretation easier I report only the URS-restricted
results.
           The high income countries provide a surprise. While the estimates without industry effects
are similar to those reported for the sample as a whole, the preferred specification (with country

           15
             Part of the difference may be due to reallocation of production between industries. Table 7
below suggests that these reallocations favor production workers in middle income countries but work
against them in high income countries. Yet reallocation between industries is too small to provide most of
the answer. A more likely explanation is that the assumptions about supply and demand in labor market,
which underly that calculation, are too restrictive. In particular, the Cobb-Douglas implies a unitary
elasticity of factor demand. If manufacturing demand for unskilled labor is elastic, then a decline in demand
for less skilled workers could result in a very small decline in their wagebill share.

                                                        24
and industry effects) reports labor-biased technological change which is capital-saving! These
coefficients are statistically insignificant, so they should not be interpreted as overturning the large
body of evidence in the literature suggesting skill-bias in the U.S. and other high income
countries. It is more likely that at the level of resolution this method has, we cannot find skill-bias
in these countries.
        More interesting is the contrast between the estimated factor-bias coefficients in middle
and high income countries. Unlike the high income countries, the 10 middle income countries
show strong evidence of capital-bias and of labor savings in technological change (in the preferred
specification, including country and industry effects). The coefficient indicating skill-bias is
positive but imprecisely estimated. The implied       l   estimate is -2.71% (0.84), indicating very
strong evidence of substantial labor-saving technological change in middle income countries.
These results reinforce the view that middle income countries absorbed several vintages of factor-
biased manufacturing technology in the 1980s, so that a           l   estimate of -1.5% (or even -2.5%)
overestimates the trend rate of labor-saving technological change at the frontier.
        The contrast between estimates with and without industry effects in high and middle
income countries sheds light on the sector-bias hypothesis of Haskell and Slaughter [1998].
Apparently, industry-specific measured productivity growth worked against production workers
in the high income countries.16 In the middle income countries the contrast between the results
with and without industry effects indicates that industry effects in measured productivity favored
production workers. Overall the pattern in both subsamples of countries is consistent with the
prediction of Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory in a period of declining trade restrictions: price
changes favored capital and skill intensive industries in countries with high skill and high capital
intensity, while price changes favored industries intensive in unskilled labor in countries with low




        16
            These results suggest that the ambiguity expressed by Kahn and Lim [1998] about the
interpretation of their estimates as evidence of skill augmenting technological change was well founded.
They could not include industry effects in the same way as they had only one country to work with.

                                                    25
skill and low capital intensity.17 Once these industry effects in productivity growth are accounted
for, the full extent of labor saving technological change in middle income countries is evident.



                                         5. IMPLICATIONS
        The estimates assuming unchanging returns lend themselves to straightforward
interpretation. The U.S. has about twice the measured K/L and S/L ratios as Cyprus and Portugal.
The estimated rates of labor-saving bias, between 1.4% and 1.8% annually, imply TFP growth
rates 1.4 to 1.8 percent higher in U.S. manufacturing than in the manufacturing sectors of those
countries. Thus, all other things equal, manufacturing value added per worker will diverge quite
quickly, with the labor productivity gap doubling every 39-50 years.
        So why don’t we observe divergence? Capital intensity in middle income countries is
about half that of high income countries, and skill intensity is about 2/3 (though correcting for
measurement error would lower that figure). For lower income countries the factor intensity gap
is even larger.
        One possible explanation for lack of TFP divergence is that suggested at the outset:
replication is faster than invention, so that technological catch up compensates for factor bias.
Another possibility is that URS does not hold in the 1980s, despite the replication argument
offered: smaller industries had higher TFP growth rates, a force which favored convergence and
partially compensated for the factor bias effect. This is the pattern suggested by the data when the
sum of estimated     coefficients is negative. Note that those estimates cannot be interpreted as
evidence for technological catch up across countries (or industries), as they are present in
specifications that already include country effects.
        The extent of compensation for factor bias (through these or some other mechanisms) can
be roughly estimated by seeing how much of the cross-country variance in TFP growth rates is
explained by country effects in a (URS restricted) regression which allows factor-bias. This
calculation is not completely accurate: estimated country effects include not only the true country


        17
           The pattern of these price effects is inconsistent with the argument that demand for skills
increased in middle income countries because of foreign outsourcing to low income countries [Feenstra and
Hanson 1996], as that would predict industry effects in the opposite direction.

                                                   26
effect in TFP growth but also an estimation bias due to measurement error in factor levels (as
shown in equation (10)). For instance, if a country miscodes less-skilled labor as skilled, and        s   +

 l   is negative, the estimated country effect will be biased downwards.
         Figure 5 reports the result of that exercise in a plot of TFP growth rates against
GDP/capita. Points labeled are the country effects in the industry and country effects specification
for the pooled sample, reported in the rightmost column of Table 4.18 Squares represent TFP
growth rates for these countries, as in the right panel of Figure 2. Estimated country effects
exceed TFP growth in all but one middle income country (Columbia) and are lower than the TFP
growth rate in all high income countries. Thus, the country effects show a negative correlation
(illustrated by the regression line), indicating that once we account for factor-bias, there is
evidence of TFP convergence. That negative correlation should not be overemphasized, as t=-0.9
in that regression. On the other hand, if middle income countries did not tend to overstate
measured skill intensity the slope would be even more negative. Similarly, if we used the middle-
income factor-bias coefficients from Table 7, the slope would also be more negative. For these
two reasons, TFP convergence conditional on factor-bias is stronger than indicated by the figure.
         A final implication of labor saving technological change is this: If ratios of capital and
skilled labor to unskilled labor are increasing (as would be efficient), TFP must accelerate under
the simplifying assumption that Uf =     f   . This is apparent from equation (5), which implies

that                           under the assumption. That implication is difficult to test because


TFP fluctuates considerably over time. Nevertheless, two things are worth noting: First, in the
very long run measured labor productivity has accelerated [Kremer 1993], and second, that this
TFP acceleration is a fairly direct implication of the considerable evidence of skill-bias in the labor
economics literature (cited above).




         18
          A constant has been added to estimated country effects so that their mean is the same as that of
the TFP growth rate. Otherwise they would reflect the conditional mean TFP growth rate with S/L and
K/L set equal to unity, which would be an unusual country indeed.

                                                     27
                                          6. CONCLUSIONS
       Factor-biased technological change provides a plausible explanation for the lack of cross-
country convergence in total factor productivity. Factor bias is now a familiar finding for
developed countries in the labor economics literature. In the countries sampled, most of the cross-
national variation in growth rates of manufacturing value added per worker is TFP growth. Thus
a factor-bias explanation for lack of convergence in TFP growth rates provides most of the
explanation for lack of convergence in value added per worker in manufacturing. These, in turn,
are highly correlated with (nonconvergent) growth rates in GDP/capita.
       Most of the evidence on reasons for slow international convergence in income levels is
due to cross-country variation and to studies of market failures within individual countries.19
Within-country variance from the manufacturing industries of a large number of countries provide
a fresh, orthogonal, source of information. These data yield strong evidence that technological
change is absolutely labor-saving, absolutely capital-biased and relatively skill-biased. Estimates
are large, suggesting that a country or industry with twice the capital and skill intensity will have a
total factor productivity growth rate 1.4% - 1.8% higher annually. The data are unusually rich,
allowing estimation of factor-bias coefficients which allow for country and industry effects in TFP
growth. Estimated factor bias coefficients are driven for the most part by the ten middle income
countries, suggesting that accelerated technology transfer to these countries in the 1980s caused
unusually rapid, factor-biased technological change.
       These results are based on manufacturing data from a single decade, so extrapolation to
entire economies over longer periods should be done with caution. On the other hand, these data
show considerable similarity to the Baumol-Barro-style 1960-90 nonconvergence diagram (the
triangles and correlations of Section 2). So let’s hazard the extrapolation anyway.
       The good news inherent in these results is that a country accumulating skill and capital
intensity has a twofold benefit: there is both an immediate increase in labor productivity and a
repositioning which increases the benefit from future (absolute) skill and (absolute) capital bias in
technological change. In this second sense current savings increase future growth.


       19
            For a survey see Barro and Sala-I-Martin [1995], Ray [1998] or Weil [2000].

                                                    28
        Yet, Solow convergence through factor accumulation is quite slow in the 1960-90
period20 (in these data or in Mankiw, Romer and Weil 1992, for example). Whatever economic
mechanisms slowed factor accumulation in poorer countries over recent decades positioned them
badly for factor-biased TFP growth.
        Does factor-bias forever stifle convergence? Return to the two-factor illustration in Figure
3 and imagine a (closed economy) Solow or Ramsey growth model augmented with labor saving
technological change. Designate B as the Ramsey steady state in which the marginal product of
skill (human capital) is equal to the rate of time preference. Cross country convergence would be
the motion from A to B, as skill-scarce (but otherwise identical) countries increase skill-intensity
(S/L) and thus decrease the disparity in income per capita. The relative wages of skilled workers
fall along this path till they reach their Ramsey steady state level.
        Now consider the comparative statics of a (surprise) skill-biased technological change
which shifts the isoquant for all countries from Ft-1 to Ft. The new Ramsey steady state will be at a
point like D, where the marginal product of skill is again equal to the rate of time preference. The
shift in isoquants implies faster TFP growth for countries with higher skill intensity and causes
divergence in income per capita.
        Thus the Ramsey model augmented with factor-biased technological change admits both
periods of divergence and periods of convergence. This interpretation of the cross-country data is
inherently hopeful about convergence. Despite factor-bias, eventually Solow’s decreasing returns
mechanism induces all countries to arrive at point D, with equal income per capita.
        That argument underscores the importance of establishing the relative importance of
factor-bias, market failures in accumulation and failures in technology transfer in explaining slow
convergence. An examination of the1990s, during which factor-biased technological change may
have spread to low-income countries such as China and India, would be a first empirical step in
that agenda.




        20
           That is the prediction of a model with constant returns to skill and capital combined
[Barro1991]. Interestingly, these data cannot reject that possibility, especially for the middle income
countries for which the point estimates indicate slightly increasing combined returns for skill and capital.

                                                      29
                                          REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Productivity Differences,” MIT mimeo, April 2000.
Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz and Alan Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the
        Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4) (1998) 1169-1214.
Bartelsman, Eric and Wayne Gray "National Bureau of Economic Research Manufacturing Productivity
        Database" National Bureau of Economic Research, mimeo, 1994.
Barro, Robert “Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106,
        407-444.
Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee, “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling Quality,”
        ftp://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee, 1997.
Barro, Robert and Xavier Sala-I-Martin, Economic Growth, New York, McGraw Hill, 1995.
Basu, Susanto and David N. Weil, "Appropriate Technology and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 113(4) (1998) 1025-1054.
Baumol, W.J. “Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the Long-run Data Show,”
       American Economic Review, 76, (1986) 1072-1085.
Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches, "Changes in the demand for skilled labor within U.S.
       manufacturing industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing," Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, CIX (1994), 367-98.
Berman, Eli, John Bound and Stephen Machin, "Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change:
       International Evidence,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6166, 1997.
____________________________________, "Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change:
       International Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4) ( 1998) 1245-1280.
Berman, Eli and Stephen Machin, “Skill-Biased Technology Transfer: Evidence of Factor Biased
       Technological Change in Developing Countries,” Boston University mimeo, 2000.
Bound, John and George Johnson, "Changes in the structure of Wages During the 1980s: An Evaluation of
       Alternative Explanations," American Economic Review, LXXXII (1992), 371-392.
Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Manuel Trajtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies: `Engines of Growth?’”
       Journal of Econometrics, LXV: 1091-1126, 1997.
Christensen, Laurits R., Dale W. Jorgenson and Lawrence J. Lau, “Transcendental Logarithmic Production
        Frontiers,” Review of Economics and Statistics 55:1, (February 1973) 28-45.
Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne and Kenneth R. Troske “Workers, Wages and Technology,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 253-290.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum “Trade in Ideas: Patenting and Productivity in the OECD,” Journal
        of International Economics XL (1996) 251-278.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “International Technology Diffusion: Theory and Measurement,”
        Journal of International Economics, 1999.
Feliciano, Zadia, "Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms in Mexico on Wages
        and Employment," Queen's College, mimeo, May 1995.


                                                  30
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon Hanson, "Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality" American
        Economic Review Paper and Proceedings, LXXXVI (1996), 240-245.
Freeman, Richard and Lawrence Katz, "Rising wage inequality: The United States vs. other advanced
       countries," in Working Under Different Rules, Richard Freeman, ed. (New York, NY: Russell
       Sage Foundation, 1994).
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Technology, Skill and the Wage Structure: Insights from the
        Past,” American Economic Review LXXXVI (1996), 252-257.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998), 693-732.
-Gottschalk, Peter and Mary Joyce, “Cross-national Differences in the Rise of Earnings Inequality–Market
        and Institutional Factors” Review of Economics and Statistics (1999?.
Griliches, Zvi “Capital-Skill Complementarity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 51 (November
        1969), 465-468.
Griliches, Zvi and Dale W. Jorgenson “The Explanation of Productivity Change,” Review of Economic
        Studies, 34(3), (July 1967).
Griliches, Zvi and Jacques Mairesse, “Productivity Functions: The Search for Identification,” National
        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 5067, March 1995.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann Harrison, "Trade, Technology and Wage Inequality", National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper 5110, 1995.
Haskel, Jonathan E. and Matthew J. Slaughter “Does the Sector Bias of Skill-Biased Technological Change
        Explain Changing Wage Inequality?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
        6565, May 1998.
Helpman, Elhanan “Introduction,” in Helpman (ed.) General Purpose Technologies and Economic
      Growth (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
Helpman, Elhanan and Gene M. Grossman Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy
      (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
Kahn, James A., and Jong-Soo Lim “Skilled-Labor Augmenting Technical Progress in U.S.
       Manufacturing,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4) (November 1998) 1281-1308.
Katz, Lawrence F., Gary W. Loveman and David G. Blanchflower, "A comparison of Changes in the
        Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries," in Differences and Changes in Wage Structures,
        Katz and Freeman, eds. (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand
        Factors," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 35-78.
Klenow, Peter, “Ideas vs. Rival Human Capital: Industry Evidence on Growth Models,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics, 42 (August 1998), 3-24.
Kremer, Michael, “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 108(3) 681-716, (August 1993).
Lawrence, Robert and Matthew Slaughter, "International Trade and U.S. wages in the 1980s: Great
       sucking sound or small hiccup," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, II (1993), 161-227.




                                                    31
Machin, Stephen, and John Van Reenen, "Technology and changes in skill structure: Evidence from Seven
       OECD Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4) (1998) 1215-1244.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and David N. Weil “A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
      Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2) (May 1992), 407-437.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch, "The Structure of Wages," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII
      (1992), 285-326.
Nelson, Richard and Edmund Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion and Economic
        Growth,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 56, 1966, 69-75.
Psacharolpoulos, George (1994) “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update,” World
       Development 22(9) 1325-1343.
Psacharolpoulos, George (1999) “The Opportunity Cost of Child Labor: A Review of the Benefits of
       Education,” University of Athens mimeo.
Ray, Debraj, Development Economics, (Princeton University Press: Princeton NJ, 1998)
Robbins, Donald J., "Trade, Trade Liberalization and Inequality in Latin America and East Asia-
       Synthesis of Seven Country Studies." Harvard, mimeo, 1995.
Solow, Robert “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70,
       (1956) 65-94.
Solow, Robert “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 39(3) (August 1957) 312-320.
Schumacher E.F., Small is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered (Harper and Row, New York,
      1973).
Summers and Heston, “Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of International Comparisons,
      1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 106 (1991), 327-368.
United Nations, Dept. of Economic and Social Affairs, Statistical Office, Industrial Statistics Yearbook,
        Volume I: General Industrial Statistics, (New York, NY: 1992).
Weil, David N. Economic Growth, manuscript, Brown University, 2000.
Young, Alwyn “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian Growth
       Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 641-680.




                                                    32
                            Table 1. Factor Shares in Value Added


                                  Middle Income                               High Income
                        ~1980          ~1990         change         ~1980         ~1990         change
 production              25.5           23.1          -2.4           30.3          25.7           -4.6
 nonproduction           10.1           10.2          +0.1           18.4          18.0           -0.4
 capital                 64.4           66.7          +2.3           51.3          56.3          +5.0

Notes: The wagebill shares of production and nonproduction workers are wagebill/value added. The capital
share is the complement so that the three shares sum to one. These figures are calculated from the UN GIS
database, using the same sample as regression results in the other Tables, which is restricted to countries
for which capital can be calculated both near the beginning and near the end of the 1980s. Middle Income
countries have GDP per capita between $2,000 and $10,000 US in 1980. They are: Turkey, Columbia,
Czechoslovakia, Malta, Portugal, Chile, Cyprus, South Korea, Ireland and Spain. High Income countries
(those with GDP per capital above $10,000 US) are: Japan, UK, Austria, Finland, Denmark, West
Germany, Sweden, Australia, US.




                                                    33
                                Table 2. Sample Descriptive Statistics - 1980

Country         GDP/capita     Manuf.        Manufactur Manufactu          Annual         Annual         Proportion       Years of
                 (1985 $)       Value          Value    Employme          Production       Non-             Non-         education
                               Added /        Added as      nt             Wage ($)      Production      production        /adult
                              Worker ($)     % of GDP    (1000s)                          Wage ($)
A. Middle Income Group
Turkey             2872              5780         14                795          3290           4312        0.22           2.6
Colombia           2948              4662         23                508          2660           5139        0.27           4.2
S. Korea           3093              6764         28               2015          3346           4772        0.21           6.8
Czecho-            3731              5651          -               2472          2780           3064        0.27
slovakia.
Chile              3898             7472          21                206          4711         14496         0.27           5.9
Malta              4488             7790           -                 25          5826         11584         0.15           6.3
Portugal           4982             2390           -                663          4157          6766         0.14           3.2
Cyprus             5289             6990           -                 36          4884          7252         0.16           7.2
Ireland            6828            11894           -                212         12929         18383         0.19           7.6
Spain              7391             8835           -               1159         11842         16478         0.23           5.2

B. High Income Group
Japan             10068          18467            29              10500      10506          11908           0.46           8.2
UK                10161          13988            27               6462      14559          19045           0.30           8.3
Austria           10499          15657            25                679      11602          19309           0.30           6.2
Finland           10843          16256            28                531      13645          20597           0.24           9.6
Denmark           11333          15664            20                381      22356          29948           0.28           10.1
W. Germany        11916          20262             -               6302      20810          31450           0.28            8.5
Norway            12141          14360            15                354      18619          25869           0.26           10.3
Sweden            12447          17813            23                853      17520          27207           0.29           9.5
Australia         12518          15702            19               1138      16380          19517           0.26           10.1
US                15311          40078            22              19200      18357          28145           0.28           11.9


      Notes: All manufacturing figures are author’s calculations from the United Nations General Industrial Statistics
      Database. These apply to 1980, except where otherwise noted. GDP/capita, is from the Penn World Tables. Percent
      of GDP in manufacturing is from World Development Indicators, 1999. Years of education/adult (aged 25 or more)
      are from the Barro-Lee data. All pecuniary figures reported in 1985$ deflated by the implicit Laspeyres GDP
      deflator in the Penn World Tables.
      1
       Employment reflects the sample rather than the population. Samples typically include only plants with ten or
      more employees.




                                                             34
                        Table 3. Descriptive Statistics for Estimation

                                    All 19                10 middle income            9 high income
                                   countries                  countries                 countries

 Growth rate (x100):

  total factor                 1.62         (3.47)        1.72          (4.59)      1.52          (1.82)
 productivity

  value added                  3.11         (5.30)        4.16          (6.90)      2.10          (2.71)
  production                  -0.73         (3.16)        -0.02         (3.65)      -1.42         (2.42)

  nonproduction                0.62         (3.36)        1.44          (3.91)      -0.18         (2.49)
  capital                      2.64         (3.47)        3.70          (4.24)      1.62          (2.07)



 Log level of:
  production                  10.44         (1.83)        9.64          (1.73)     11.20          (1.59)

  nonproduction                9.46         (2.05)        8.44          (1.82)     10.45          (1.76)
  capital                     21.53         (2.09)        20.40         (1.90)     22.62          (1.63)
 Observations                         422                         197                       225

Notes: Each observation is a country-industry. Of the 532 potential observations (28 industries x 19
countries) 422 are available (79%). Appendix 1 provides details of coverage by industry. Standard
deviations in parentheses. Observations are weighted by their value-added share within each country. Total
factor productivity is calculated using wagebill shares in value added as weights. Those weights are
predicted by regression using a full set of country and industry indicators. Production worker weights are
predicted with an R2 of 0.84 and nonproduction worker weights are predicted with an R2 of 0.77. Capital
weights are calculated as the complement so that the weights sum to one.




                                                     35
                   Table 4: Factor Bias Estimates from a Production Function

Dependent variable: Annualized change in log value added (x100)
                                             country effects         ..& industry         .. & impose
                                                                        effects           unchanging
                                                                                             returns
 production                  -1.46                 -1.24                -2.15
                             (0.72)               (0.44)                (0.51)
 nonproduction               -0.17                 0.77                 0.69                  0.89
                             (0.69)               (0.29)                (0.43)               (0.44)
 capital                      1.51                 0.58                 0.87                  0.91
                             (0.61)               (0.45)                (0.41)               (0.42)


      production             34.9                  22.5                 21.5                  19.3
                             (12.9)               (14.5)                (13.8)               (14.2)
      nonproduction           27.1                 41.7                 48.6                  49.9
                             ( 9.9)                (9.4)                (9.2)                 (9.5)
      capital                 77.4                 44.8                 37.9                  37.3
                             (8.3)                 (8.5)                (6.6)                 (7.0)
 19 country effects                                  x                    x                    x
 28 industry effects                                                      x                    x
 R2                           0.65                 0.84                 0.87                  0.87
 Sum of elasticities          139                  109                   108                  107
 (’s)                        (10)                 (09)                  (11)                 (11)
 sum of factor bias          -0.11                 0.10                 -0.59                  0
 coefficients ( ’s)          (0.20)               (0.13)                (0.24)                 -
   l assuming                                                                                      -1.80
 unchanged r.t.s.                                                                                 (0.51)
Notes: All specifications include 422 observations of industries within countries. Standard errors (in
parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-consistent, allowing a country specific grouped error term.
Observations are weighted by value added share within each country. The sum of factor bias coefficients
sums estimated coefficients of production workers, nonproduction workers and capital. The coefficient l
assuming unchanged returns to scale is the estimated coefficient on production workers, using the same
specification but restricting the three factor bias coefficients to sum to zero. The “constant returns”
specification imposes constant returns to scale. The dependent variable in that case is log(value added)-
  log(production). For descriptive statistics see Table 3. Estimating equation is (10) in text.




                                                    36
                     Table 5: Factor Bias Estimates from a Production Function
                                        - Specification Checks

Dependent variable: Annualized change in log value added (x100)
                       lag level     ..& un-         impose     ..& un-              impose        ..& un-
                        instru-      changing       constant    changing              s = 0       changing
                         ments        returns        returns     returns                            returns
production                   -2.10                         -2.07                      -2.07
                             (0.55)                      (0.53)                       (0.58)
nonproduction                 0.63         0.82            0.70         0.89           0.47          0.71
                             (0.42)       (0.44)         (0.42)        (0.43)         (0.52)         (0.52)
capital                       0.89         0.93            0.82         0.87           0.87          0.93
                             (0.42)       (0.43)         (0.38)        (0.41)         (0.43)         (0.45)


        production            21.5         19.4            17.1         15.8           58.2          56.7
                             (13.9)       (14.2)            -             -           (10.4)         (10.9)
        nonproduction         48.6         49.8            48.4         49.6            0              0
                              (9.2)        (9.5)           (9.1)        (9.5)            -             -
        capital               37.9         37.3            34.5         34.6           48.5          48.1
                              (6.6)        (7.0)           (5.4)        (5.5)         (7.4)          (7.9)
19 country effects &
28 industry effects            x             x              x             x             x              x
    2
R                             0.87         0.87            0.78         0.77           0.84          0.84
Sum of elasticities           108          107               -            -            107           105
(’s)                         (11)         (11)                                        (12)          (12)
sum of factor bias           -0.57           0           -0.55            0           -0.72            0
coefficients ( ’s)           (0.24)          -           (0.26)           -           (0.30)           -
  l assuming                  -1.76          -1.76          -1.76          -1.76         -1.64         -1.64
unchanged r.t.s.             (0.57)         (0.57)          (0.52)        (0.52)        (0.55)         (0.54)
 Notes: All specifications include 422 observations of industries within countries. Standard errors (in
 parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-consistent, allowing a country specific grouped error term.
 Observations are weighted by value added share within each country. The sum of factor bias coefficients
 sums estimated coefficients of production workers, nonproduction workers and capital. The coefficient l
 assuming unchanged returns to scale is the estimated coefficient on production workers, using the same
 specification but restricting the three factor bias coefficients to sum to zero. The “constant returns”
 specification imposes constant returns to scale. The dependent variable in that case is log(value added)-
   log(production). For descriptive statistics see Table 3. Estimating equation is (10) in text.



                                                      37
                   Table 6. Factor Bias Estimates using a TFP specification

Dependent variable: Annualized change in TFP (x100)
                                                  country effects       ..& industry       ..& un-changing
                                                                           effects             returns

 production                      -1.34                -0.98                 -1.83
                                 (0.77)               (0.46)               (0.49)
 nonproduction                    0.13                 0.78                 0.53                  0.73

                                 (0.73)               (0.36)               (0.40)                (0.38)
 capital                          1.11                 0.41                 0.71                  0.76

                                 (0.59)               (0.47)               (0.44)                (0.46)


 country effects                                           x                  x                    x

 industry effects                                                             x                    x
 R2                               0.09                 0.59                 0.65                  0.65
 sum of factor bias              -0.10                 0.22                -0.59                   0
 terms ( ’s)                     (0.21)               (0.13)               (0.33)                  -

  l assuming                     -1.17                -1.04                -1.49                 -1.49
 unchanged r.t.s.                (0.54)               (0.45)               (0.43)                (0.43)

Notes: All specifications include 422 observations of industries within countries. Standard errors (reported
in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-consistent and allow a country specific grouped error term.
Observations are weighted by their value added share within each country. Total factor productivity is
calculated using wagebill shares in value added as weights. In all but the rightmost column those weights
are predicted using country and industry effects (see text and Table 3 for details). In the rightmost column
the TFP weights are calculated by averaging across all industries and countries. The sum of factor bias
coefficients sums estimated coefficients of production workers, nonproduction workers and capital. The
coefficient l assuming unchanged returns to scale is the estimated coefficient on unskilled labor,
calculated using the same specification but restricting the three factor bias coefficients to sum to zero. For
descriptive statistics see Table 3. Estimating equation is (11) in text.




                                                      38
               Table 7. Factor Bias Estimates: High vs. Middle Income Countries
                                 Unchanged Returns Assumed

 Dependent variable: Annualized change in log value added (x100)
                                  High Income                                   Middle Income
                                                         ..&                                         ..&
                                       country        industry                      country       industry
                                       effects         effects                      effects        effects
nonproduction             1.47           0.67           0.23          -1.25          1.05           1.28
                         (0.52)         (0.45)         (0.33)         (1.33)        (0.67)         (1.28)
capital                   0.12           0.27          -0.70           2.48          0.62           1.42
                         (0.35)         (0.25)         (0.63)         (0.89)        (0.89)         (0.62)


     production           61.7           49.8           55.6           21.8          12.4            6.1
                         (14.8)          (6.6)         (7.4)          (16.4)        (20.8)         (19.0)
     nonproduction        -0.1           21.8           30.9           43.6          51.7           60.6
                         (10.4)          (6.7)         (5.2)          (13.0)        (14.1)         (11.1)
     capital              23.0           19.2           11.2          84.2           50.5           41.7
                         (11.8)          (4.4)         (5.4)          (10.0)         (9.9)         (10.4)

country effects                            x               x                           x              x
28 industry effects                                        x                                          x
R2                        0.65           0.76           0.83           0.70          0.85           0.89
sum of elasticities        85             91            98             149           114            108
(’s)                     (10)            (6)           (8)            (11)          (13)           (16)
 l assuming              -1.60          -0.94          + 0.46         -1.23         -1.67          -2.71
unchanged r.t.s.         (0.20)         (0.23)         (0.41)         (1.00)        (0.45)         (0.84)
Observations                             225                                            197
 Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are heteroskedasticity-consistent, allowing a country specific
 grouped error term. Observations are weighted by value added share within each country. The sum of
 factor bias coefficients sums estimated coefficients of production workers, nonproduction workers and
 capital. The coefficient l assuming unchanged returns to scale is the estimated coefficient on production
 workers, using the same specification but restricting the three factor bias coefficients to sum to zero. The
 “constant returns” specification imposes constant returns to scale. The dependent variable in that case is
   log(value added)- log(production). For descriptive statistics see Table 3 . Estimating equation is (10) in
 text.




                                                      39
                                  Table A1. Industry Coverage

                                                     Observations                       Value Added
                                                                                           Share
    Industry                         10 Middle            9 High          Total             (%)
                                      Income              Income
                                      Contries           Countries
    Food                                 8                   9              17              11.8
    Beverages                            8                   8              16              4.3
    Tobacco                              7                   7              14              1.9
    Textiles                            10                   9              19              5.7
    Apparel                              9                   9              18              4.0
    Leather Products                    10                   8              18              0.5
    Footwear                             9                   8              17              1.1
    Food Products                        9                   8              17              2.5
    Furniture                            8                   8              16              1.7
    Paper Products                      10                   9              19              4.7
    Printing & Publishing               10                   9              19              5.5
    Industrial Chemicals                 6                   8              14              3.6
    Other Chemicals                      7                   7              14              4.4
    Petroleum Refineries                 6                   6              12              1.5
    Petroleum and Coal                   3                   5               8              0.2
    Rubber Products                      8                   8              16              1.2
    Plastic Products                     5                   9              14              2.3
    Pottery & China                      4                   7              11              0.3
    Glass Products                       6                   8              14              1.0
    Non metalic minerals n.e.c.          7                   8              15              3.2
    Iron and Steel                       4                   8              12              2.5
    Nonferrous metals                    5                   7              12              2.2
    Metal Products                       6                   9              15              5.6
    Machinery                            8                   9              17              9.8
    Electrical Machinery                 8                   9              17              9.2
    Transportation Equipment             8                   8              16              6.4
    Professional Goods                   4                   9              13              1.3
    Other Goods                          4                   8              12              0.8

     Total                                 197             225                422              100
Notes: Observations record the number of countries reporting for each industry at both the beginning and
end of the 1980s so that a useful observation existed. There are 28 2.5 digit ISIC industries and 19
countries so the potential number of industry-country observations is 532, of which 422 useful observations
are available. The value added share reports the average share of manufacturing value added in that
industry for countries reporting at the end of the 1980s.

                                                    40
         % GDP/capita growth: 1960-90
                                                             5




                                                             0




                                                                   0                                                    5000                                                         10000
                                                                                                              1960 GDP/capita (1985 US$)



                                                                   Figure 1A: Nonconvergence 1960-90

                                                                                                KOREA, R



                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                                 o
GDP/capita growth: 1980-90




                                                            5                               o
                                                                                                          o   CYPRUS
                                                                                o
                                                                                                            PORTUGAL
                                                                       o                                   o
                                                                           o                                                                          JAPAN
                                                                            o                  o   o                        IRELAND                                  o
                                                                            o       o       TURKEY                              SPAIN                   U.K.
                                                                                                                                                          FINLAND
                                                                            o
                                                                                                                                                        AUSTRIA   NORWAY
                                                                                                                                                          o DENMARK
                                                                                                                                                               GERMANY,
                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                         o                          oSWEDEN           U.S.A.
                                                                       o            oo o                                o                                        o o AUSTRALI    o
                                                                       o   o         oo COLOMBIA
                                                                                              CHILE
                                                                                              o                                                            o
                                                                                           CZECHOSL
                                                                                         o          o
                                                                       o    o
                                                                       o oo o         o o
                                                            0              oo          o
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                       o oo     o          oo o
                                                                        oo    o o o                 o
                                                                         o                   o oo
                                                                                    o    oo
                                                                                          o
                                                                         oo      o  o             o                 o                o
                                                                            o
                                                                           oo  o
                                                                           o
                                                                       o               o
                                                                                                                             o
                                                                           o
                                                                           o    o o                                                                             o
                                                                                  o


                                                            -5
                                                                                        o


                                                                  0                                           5000                10000                                          15000
                                                                                                              1980 GDP/capita (1985 US$)



                                                                   Figure 1B: Nonconvergence 1980-90

                                                                  Manufacturing
         % growth of VA / worker: 1980-90 , Manufacturing




                                                            10
                                                                  S. Korea




                                                                            Chile

                                                                                                              Ireland

                                                             5                                                                                   UK
                                                                                                                                             Japan
                                                                                                                                                Austria                                 US
                                                                                                                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                                 Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                            W. Germa
                                                                                    Malta
                                                                 Colombia                                                                                Denmark
                                                                                                                                                      Finland    Australi
                                                                 Turkey                                            Spain

                                                             0
                                                                                            Portugal



                                                                       Czechosl




                                                            -5
                                                                                            5000                             10000                                               15000
                                                                                                              1980 GDP/capita (1985 US$)



                  Figure 1C: Nonconvergence in Manufacturing Sample
                                   (product/worker)

                                                                                                                            41
42
Figure 3: Technological Change with a Relative Skill Bias




                           43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Weighted by Y share - as in regression

                10                                                                                                                                                                                                      10




                 5                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
growth of Y/L




                                                                                                                                                                                                        growth of Y/L
                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                 -5                                                                                                                                                                                                      -5




                -10                                                                                                                                                                                                     -10

                                  -1                                   0                                                                                                                            1                                       -1                                         0                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                   Log Production Worker Employment                                                                                                                                                                                Log Production Worker Employment
                      countries                                                                                                                                                                                                industries
                                                                                                                  Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Petr Ref
                10                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                      Finland                                                              Denmark                                                                                                                              Tobacco                                                                                           Tobacco
                                                                            Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ind Chem
                                                                                                   Finland U S                                                                                                                                                                                                    Petr&C                       To     oa     bacco
                                                                    S. Korea                                    Chile                                                                                                                                                         Wood Pro                                       Ind Chem
                                                                                                                                               Colombia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tobacco
                                                              Australi                      Cyprus                                                                                                                                                                       Glass Pr                           Petr               Ref
                 5                                                  CzechoslCzechosl U K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5                                                     Footwear Apparel
                                                                                                                                   Australi Colombia        Czechosl                                                                                                                                                                    T o b aPetr                       c c o Ref PPetr                        e t r & Ref
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Coa
                                                                             Austria            Austria
                                                                                                  T u S.   rColombia
                                                                                                              k eKorea  y Colombia                                                                                                                                                 W o o d PFootwear             Petr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o Furnitur        Ref
                                                                         S. Korea           Colombia
                                                                                         Portugal
                                                                                                Czechosl
                                                                                                                                                        Malta Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Footwear             Rubber       Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Professi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P                         Glass                M aPr        c h n i nPee t r & C o a
growth of Y/L




                                                                                                                                                                                                        growth of Y/L




                      Cyprus                                                               Portugal
                                                                                               Colombia
                                                                                         Portugal
                                                                                            Chile
                                                                                       Finland         Colombia                                                                                                               Ind Chem                                                                 Iron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ePaper   Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rubber     T Pr   ranspor                 P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oBdeM
                                                                      S.Czechosl
                                                                             Korea                                                  UCzechosl
                                                                                                                                            KPortugal       Austria                                                                                                               Leather                    vaecr rohag   n ievae                                                                         Iron&Ste
                                                            T u rS.    y Chile
                                                                  k Cyprus
                                                                     e Korea            S.
                                                                                    Australi    Korea
                                                                                                U
                                                                                            CzechoslS
                                                                                                    Portugal
                                                                                                        Austria  Colombia                  Ireland              Colombia                                                                                                             W oB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MpaocrRubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Non-ferr                vP   eTextiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i nBT eerFurnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nP    eM     rsIron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nePottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      aag                erne       Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non                     & Non-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          meta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cPrint   a&
                                                                                 Ireland  Malta     Czechosl   Malta         Colombia
                                                                                                                                   Malta                                                                                                                                                               Electric          Iron&Ste                     B    pOthr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cesoehvT                 irrnagChe        eApparel
                                       Japan          ChileChile
                                                              Portugal       S.
                                                                      Portugal
                                                                             W.      Korea
                                                                                     S  W.Cyprus
                                                                                        Spain
                                                                                           Colombia
                                                                                           Malta
                                                                                        Germa
                                                                                         w   e
                                                                                            S.    d Portugal
                                                                                                  Germa
                                                                                             FinlandChile
                                                                                                     e    n            Finland
                                                                                                                            Czechosl
                                                                                                                     Colombia
                                                                                                                        Malta
                                                                                                                         U     K Malta     U
                                                                                                                                         AustraliSAustrali
                                                                                                                                            FinlandFinland  U S Portugal                                                                     Wood Pro                      o T rPlastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               T o b aLeather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cLeather  nosNon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TLeatherb   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hmeta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Footwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c   c    o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Textiles       F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nElectric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rubber   oTextiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F   o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o   d o F T   d o   r    o Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P  a      d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        n  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Furnitur    p   tNono
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r   a&    n   esometa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Non-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C Pr       pa o    r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Professi
                                                          UJJS             aDenmark
                                                                         Australi
                                                                  JananDenmark
                                                              appaW.   pGerma  nJGerma
                                                                                    aDenmark
                                                                                        p aU  nAustrali
                                                                                            Colombia
                                                                                            Colombia
                                                                                       AustralienW.
                                                                                                    Korea
                                                                                                    Portugal
                                                                                                      Finland
                                                                                                       eFinland rU
                                                                                                              Germa
                                                                                                              AustriadJK
                                                                                                                        W.
                                                                                                                        S           UGerma
                                                                                                                                    ColombiaS
                                                                                                                                            W.
                                                                                                                                            Spain    Germa      J a pMalta                                                                                       Beve       Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r ag ePr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Furnitur          Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Apparel    Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Othr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     M     Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            aApparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Plastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Metal    hPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  cPottery,     Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W Che   Metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ie&o&       oPr       d Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Print      PPr    rmetao& Pr            W oRef
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           od Pro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aonF
                                                                             Spain             S    ST  Jw     eKAustrali
                                                                                                            unPortugal
                                                                                                                   kSpain
                                                                                                                        aeaeS.
                                                                                                                             nypnChile
                                                                                                                                    aaKorea                            a n Cyprus                                                                                                 WOthr          dcProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CheFurnitur     Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Print  FootwearApparel  vnnd&      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           iPr    roeNon                                          Petr
                                                             aCzechosl
                                   J a p a n J a p a n Denmark
                                                                         W.
                                                                          US    Austria
                                                                                 w
                                                                              Malta
                                                                                        Sdw
                                                                                  UCzechosl
                                                                               KDenmark K
                                                                                      eDenmarkJw adeU
                                                                                            eAustrali
                                                                                       Czechosl
                                                                                        Denmark          aK
                                                                                                         U U
                                                                                                     pAustralia
                                                                                                              nU SpColombia
                                                                                                           Portugal
                                                                                                               Finland
                                                                                                                   Ireland
                                                                                                              AustraliKGerma
                                                                                                                 Finland    Australi
                                                                                                                            SU     w
                                                                                                                                 JAustria
                                                                                                                                   S     enpW. danennGerma
                                                                                                                                                        JUS
                                                                                                                                                          aSSn                    Sweden                                                    Leather P e t r & C o a Metal    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RubberT  oo bo  oaLeather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d ocP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PApparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      voPrint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Professi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rInd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cvNon  o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Non rProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ceProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e&orOtherP  M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Othr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TextilesaF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          emeta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       meta      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T cRubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Othr   PorehCheMetal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Rubber   sChe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Professi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      opaPr dsPronPr  re Plastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           &pFurnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sPoPr     Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  oP            Chem W o o d PNon-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dPetr
                                                                                 Cyprus         U   S                                                                                                                                                                                     B   raePlastic                         Pr    Metal          F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ref  ao                  d
                                                                Sw
                                                            Denmark S.eIreland
                                                                    CyprusdKorea
                                                                             eChile
                                                                                 n      S
                                                                                  Finland
                                                                                           S
                                                                                           Australi
                                                                                           w    e   d
                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                Finland
                                                                                                   JS.a d
                                                                                                        eS
                                                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                                          Austria
                                                                                                           KW.
                                                                                                            p e
                                                                                                              Korea
                                                                                                       Australi
                                                                                                       Ireland  w
                                                                                                                a  n
                                                                                                              Finland
                                                                                                              n    U
                                                                                                                CyprusS   S w
                                                                                                                      Austria
                                                                                                                      Spain
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                      e    Kd   weeU
                                                                                                                               DenmarkndS
                                                                                                                                    Cyprus
                                                                                                                                       e    SCyprus
                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                         Czechosl
                                                                                                                                             U   e
                                                                                                                                                 w  U UUS
                                                                                                                                                  Portugal
                                                                                                                                                  K ne d  e
                                                                                                                                                             pan
                                                                                                                                                         Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BF eo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apparel            oeb dRef
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  agW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Professi  W  Non
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ro    oag  dChem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             meta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eRubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Non
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Print   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Plastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    vcrrInd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NonGorT&Paper rmeta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rLeather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 oOther
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Plastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            eh      nIron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nPottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Other  meta    Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          edFoIndPpoPetr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Metal         rdInd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Plastic     Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Chem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rRef
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oaePr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Leather
                 0                                    J a p aFinland Finland
                                                                      S.JTS
                                                              nColombia    auKorea
                                                                              pAustria
                                                                             Sw
                                                                                raAustria
                                                                               Chile nedyw
                                                                                  keS.
                                                                                    JS
                                                                                            Chile
                                                                                             eUaS
                                                                                             U
                                                                                           Korea
                                                                                          eColombia
                                                                                             n     K
                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                   KDenmark
                                                                                                    W.
                                                                                                    w   U
                                                                                                    Austria aKU
                                                                                                      JUCyprus
                                                                                                          neK
                                                                                                    Denmark          eK
                                                                                                               dpGerma
                                                                                                         Czechosl
                                                                                                               K    Finland
                                                                                                              wFinland
                                                                                                        Austria
                                                                                                nedColombia
                                                                                                     eColombia      eS
                                                                                                                      aJU  nw
                                                                                                                         Finland
                                                                                                                     Cyprus      Denmark
                                                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                                                 pFinland
                                                                                                                            Austria
                                                                                                                            aAustrali
                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                               KTK
                                                                                                                               eeS. UuadS
                                                                                                                                    Finland      e yDenmark
                                                                                                                                            nekKorea
                                                                                                                                           rK    n          U KAustria
                                                                                                                                                       Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                        Denmark      S. Korea                                            0                                      FootwearPottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Petr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W    oProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Petr    oTextiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ref
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ind Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TPPrint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F raPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ooneChem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o   M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sPaper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d   & aElectric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               oPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pMetal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Plastic      Iron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        eOthr        Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tF       o&&in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           meta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 hrrePlastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pr Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PlasticioGlass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other   o      o   aPr Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dPrGo    PT     Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        rPlastic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Go       nvsep&  oOther
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ag        Go
                                                                   Australi      w
                                                                                 S    w
                                                                                  CyprusadW.
                                                                                       eSpain
                                                                                          eS.Austria
                                                                                           ped
                                                                                           Czechosl Germa
                                                                                                     U S
                                                                                                   nKorea
                                                                                                     n   Czechosl
                                                                                                      Spain
                                                                                                Austria                 SdUSpain
                                                                                                                               S.
                                                                                                                              Austria
                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                               KpSeaw
                                                                                                                               w
                                                                                                                              S.        JCyprus
                                                                                                                                          Korea
                                                                                                                                          d      U
                                                                                                                                                 pdnaS
                                                                                                                                             aeColombia
                                                                                                                                         Korea         nnUChile
                                                                                                                                                     eChile   UaCzechosl
                                                                                                                                                             JS  KpS.
                                                                                                                                                                   a nKorea                                                                                                WInd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o o dChem   PTextilesoOthr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Footwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rPottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PaperPlastic  Footwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Othr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Glass   F vChe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pr       aoFootwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          oeoPrint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               orP    ag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Che
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ElectricdPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dChem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       anM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Textiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &    nNon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Apparel     Che
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              eF           &Metalmeta   Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ncePr    nFnPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         hOthr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ind    Chem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     oNon-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ioeProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      edProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    nPr Che
                                                          Denmark                Austria
                                                                             Australi
                                                                                 T    u
                                                                                 Denmark r k   e
                                                                                        Czechosl   y     UCzechosl
                                                                                                                SU
                                                                                                              ColombiaCyprus
                                                                                                                    Czechosl
                                                                                                                       U     Denmark
                                                                                                                              Austria
                                                                                                                            Austria                                                                                                                                    Leather              Othr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rubber   Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T     r  aChe nInd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P  s P  pNon   Bo   T   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Paper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      v     eanTextiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            meta    arcn sag  chpePrhM oPr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     nGo e iro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          nPranFootwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i hd   e
                                                     DenmarkAustria
                                                                                      U   K
                                                                                        Chile       Denmark
                                                                                              S.T uKorea
                                                                                                       UFinland
                                                                                                         rUkd S  S
                                                                                                                 eeS.
                                                                                                                       J
                                                                                                                       w
                                                                                                                      Malta
                                                                                                                       ynS.
                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                       Australi    U
                                                                                                                              eFinland    S n
                                                                                                                                            Czechosl
                                                                                                                                   dUeSnMalta
                                                                                                                                 Korea
                                                                                                                                                Czechosl
                                                                                                                                             Australi          p aJ na paanIreland
                                                                                                                                                                J
                                                                                                                                                           J aSpaina p
                                                                                                                                                                            n      S. Spain
                                                                                                                                                                                      Korea                                                                     Footwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T oIron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b a c c o Othr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Glass    Apparel     IndPr  Ind
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Paper M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chem  a   Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Chem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a   c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Apparel c h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Metal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Metalh  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Plastic      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            oPrint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Pr i       i  M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o dFootwearn   Glass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e  aOthr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pr  c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             & Electric n   i  Che
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T r a n s p oTr Leather
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           obacco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BElectric                                                                                Footwear
                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                        Portugal                 K
                                                                                                                Austria                                        Chile                                                                                                                                  Other         Che Electric                                                                             Othr    Non-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Che
                                                              S. Korea                         S    wJ   e
                                                                                                      Colombia
                                                                                               Australi  a    p    a     n             Korea                       S.    Korea                                                                                                                                   Other        vGo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e rGo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Electric
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ePlastic                 ag     Othr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              eeocvP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PChe                                 Pottery,
                                                                   CyprusAustrali
                                                                          Colombia
                                                                           Chile           Ireland
                                                                                           W.       Germa
                                                                                              PortugalPortugalChile
                                                                                                                UK     Austria
                                                                                                                             Spain
                                                                                                                               Austria
                                                                                                                               Cyprus
                                                                                                                            Cyprus      S. Colombia   W.
                                                                                                                                                  Korea W.   Germa
                                                                                                                                                         Chile Germa
                                                                                                                                                               S.   KoreaU K Chile                                                                                          Rubber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M  Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     aIron&Ste      PiNon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cFhTextiles     ndeIron&Ste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Go            Bmeta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Electric  Pottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e v eM            Pottery,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BFootwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rTextiles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tag
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aM             aeheen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b             agrFurnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  articProfessi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n  c&Professi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eoeCF   Print
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Iron&Ste   d & Non-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ooaoNon-ferr          Wood Pro
                                                                       Finland
                                                                       W.          Ireland
                                                                                 Germa     Ireland Portugal      Australi
                                                                                                                       Finland
                                                                                                                                Finland
                                                                                                                              Ireland
                                                                                                                                 Portugal
                                                                                                                                  Ireland
                                                                                                                                                  W.
                                                                                                                                                  Australi
                                                                                                                                                     MaltaGerma          Austria                                                                                                  Iron&Ste        onoW         o oMetal d PTr oo                Glass  bPr Apparel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aPrint            c ohNon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cFootwear      Prn&i n emeta Non-ferr
                                                                  PortugalChile Cyprus Ireland
                                                                                                                                              Chile
                                                                                                                                                 Australi                       Portugal S. Korea                                                                            Petr Ref          Print & Electric Paper                                                                                                              Non-ferr Rubber P
                                                                                                                                                  Czechosl Chile U S                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Footwear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ind Chem               PrB e v e rNon-ferr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ag e
                                                                                                    Malta      Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                Leather  Transpor
                                                                                                                            Portugal
                                                                                                                                   Finland                                                                                                                                                                                   r a n sW                  p ooTextiles     ro d P r o
                 -5                                                    Czechosl Portugal               Australi                                                                                                          -5                                                       P e t r & C o a TNon-ferr
                                                                                             Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                     Non meta
                                                                                                                                   Ireland                                             Malta                                                                                                                                              Furnitur                                                                 Tobacco
                                                                                                            Ireland                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Leather
                                                                                                       Malta                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Transpor

                                                                                                Portugal
                                                                                                Ireland                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Furnitur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Footwear
                -10                                                                                                       Colombia                                                                                      -10                                                                                                                                  Petr Ref

                                  -1                                   0                                                                                                                            1                                       -1                                         0                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                   Log Production Worker Employment                                                                                                                                                                                Log Production Worker Employment




                               Figure 4: Leverage Plot of Labor-Saving Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                        44
                                   Country Effects                             TFP growth

                                S. KoreaChile                Ireland


                           5
% growth rate: 1980-90




                                                    Cyprus
                               Turkey                                            UK
                                            Malta

                                                                                  Austria                       US
                                                                  Spain        Japan            Sweden
                                                                                            W. Germa

                                                                                        Denmark
                           0                                                                      Australi
                                                Portugal
                               Colombia
                                                                                      Finland




                                    Czechosl



                          -5
                                                5000                       10000                             15000
                                                             1980 GDP/capita (1985 US$)




                         Figure 5: TFP Convergence Conditional on Factor Bias?




                                                                          45
