 %*  ( ( ! !

       



  
  
  ! "#$
%&#' ()+,+ ).//#'/))$/+,+    0 0 1   ! 
2-3- $$4$ $ "#4
'5  -6278
  6---

           
      !" " #$ " % 
& '  () $ *         
      +( ,     
          &+
-./// 0+1&+ & + +0  +  
,  ,  2  ,    
 -    +

#' #' #  #"##
  5   5 #   ! "#$
 %&#' ()  +,+  6--  
#"##  )9 $4$$#$ #$#'9 4$ # $$4$    #'
#' $ $ ) 9 4$  #"##  #$:4#$  $  " 9  :4# 9
  9    #  #  #' #'5 # ) 9 4$ #"##  )9
# "# #$ # $"$   #$ # $ # ## "$  " $'##  $ # 
)   #' )'$$ $ ))5 )) $  )      #'
   

   ; <#/$" !#=5 $4>$ 

#"##  #$ $ 4# #&#' # #' #' #   #$
  45 $4"9$  '#' #   4 #  #  #  # #'9 # 
#"## 5 # ?)$  # " ) #$  $ #9$$ % '#    
""   #$  #' #'5 # # ?#  ) # $ 
#'9 #  #"## # $ .  9 # ) "#  #4 ##" #
#      4 #   $  #"##  )9 #   #  #5
#"## 9 #9 #'9@  9 # )$  #"##  $$4$   
#'9 4$#@ # #9$$   ) " #' ) $   # "
#"##  )9 #$ 4# $

% #4   $4''$ #$  4  $ #

#' #' #  #"## 
  
! -62
#$ 0#"$ 9
% 5  -6B3B
# 
DC#$4
  ! "#$
# 1 *##9 !  "##
+, 1* ! 
'5  -6278
 E$ "#$C"4

  
$4$   14 4
2A2A ( !  %
%$#' #5  6--7A
#C'

I. Introduction
In the last decade, discussions of environmental economics and policy have become
increasingly permeated by issues related to technological change. An understanding of the
process of technological change is important for two broad reasons. First, the environmental
impact of social and economic activity is profoundly affected by the rate and direction of
technological change. New technologies may create or facilitate increased pollution, or may
mitigate or replace existing polluting activities. Further, because many environmental problems
and policy responses thereto are evaluated over time horizons of decades or centuries, the
cumulative impact of these technological changes on the severity of environmental problems is
likely to be large. Indeed, uncertainty about the future rate and direction of technological change
is often an important sensitivity in “baseline” forecasts of the severity of environmental
problems.

In global climate change modeling, for example, different assumptions about

autonomous improvements in energy efficiency are often the single largest source of difference
in predictions about the cost of achieving given policy objectives (Weyant 1993; Energy
Modeling Forum 1996).
Second, environmental policy interventions themselves create new constraints and incentives
that affect the process of technological change. These induced effects of environmental policy

1

on technology may have profound implications for the normative analysis of policy decisions.
They may have quantitatively important consequences in the context of cost-benefit or costeffectiveness analyses of such policies. They may also have broader implications for welfare
analyses, because the process of technological change is characterized by externalities and
market failures with important welfare consequences beyond those associated with
environmental issues.
Our goals in this chapter are to summarize for environmental economists current thinking
on technological change in the broader economics literature; to survey the growing literature on
the interaction between technology and the environment; and to explore the normative
implications of these analyses.

This is a large task, inevitably requiring unfortunate but

necessary omissions. In particular, we confine ourselves to the relationship between technology
and problems of environmental pollution, leaving aside a large literature on technological change
in agriculture and natural resources more broadly. 1 Because of the significant environmental
implications of fossil fuel combustion, however, we include in our review some of the relevant
literature on technological change and energy use. 2
Section II provides a brief overview of the general literature on the economics of
technological change. It is intended less as a true survey than as a checklist of issues that the
interested reader can use to find entry points into the literature. Sections III, IV and V each deal
with particular topics where technological change and the environment interact. Section III
discusses the idea of “induced innovation” and related literature on the idea that environmental

1

See the recent surveys by Sunding and Zilberman (2000) and Ruttan (2000).

2

Because our focus is technological change, we also exclude the growing literature on political and policy
innovation, including the political economy of environmental policy. See the chapter on “Political Economy of
Environmental Policy” in this volume.

2

policy can stimulate the creation of new environmentally friendly technology.

Section IV

focuses on environmental issues related to technology diffusion. Section V surveys the growing
literature analyzing the comparative technological impacts of alternative environmental policy
instruments. Section VI provides concluding observations and suggestions for future research.

II. Fundamental Concepts in the Economics of Technological Change
The literature in economics on technological change is large and diverse. Major sub-areas
(with references to surveys related to those areas) include: the theory of incentives for research
and development (Tirole 1988; Reinganum 1989; Geroski 1995); the measurement of innovative
inputs and outputs (Griliches 1984 and Griliches 1998); analysis and measurement of
externalities resulting from the research process (Griliches 1992; Jaffe 1998a); the measurement
and analysis of productivity growth (Jorgenson 1990; Griliches 1998; Jorgenson and Stiroh
2000); diffusion of new technology (Karshenas and Stoneman 1995; Geroski 2000); the effect of
market structure on innovation (Scherer 1986; Sutton 1998); market failures related to innovation
and appropriate policy responses (Martin and Scott 2000); the economic effects of publicly
funded research (David et al. 2000); the economic effects of the patent system (Jaffe 2000); and
the role of technological change in endogenous macroeconomic growth (Romer 1994; Grossman
and Helpman 1994).

In this section, we present a selective overview designed to provide

environmental economists with entry points into this large literature.
A. Schumpeter and the Gale of Creative Destruction
The modern theory of the process of technological change can be largely traced to the
ideas of Josef Schumpeter (1942), who saw innovation as the hallmark of the modern capitalist
system. Entrepreneurs, enticed by the vision of the temporary market power that a successful
new product or process offers, continually introduce such products. They enjoy excess profits
3

for some period of time, until they are displaced by subsequent successful innovators, in a
continuing process that Schumpeter called “creative destruction.”
Schumpeter distinguished three steps or stages in the process by which a new, superior
technology permeates the marketplace.

Invention constitutes the first development of a

scientifically or technically new product or process. 3 Inventions may be patented, though many
are not.

Either way, most inventions never actually develop into an innovation, which is

accomplished only when the new product or process is commercialized, that is, made available
on the market. 4 A firm can innovate without ever inventing, if it identifies a previously existing
technical idea that was never commercialized, and brings a product or process based on that idea
to market. The invention and innovation stages are carried out primarily in private firms through
a process that is broadly characterized as “research and development” (R&D). 5

Finally, a

successful innovation gradually comes to be widely used in relevant applications through
adoption by firms or individuals, a process labeled diffusion. The cumulative economic or
environmental impact of new technology results from all three of these stages, 6 which we refer to
collectively as the process of technological change.

3

The Schumpeterian “trichotomy” focuses on the commercial aspects of technological change. As discussed in
Section II.C.4 below, the public sector also plays an important role. In addition, a non-trivial amount of basic
research—which one might think of as prior even to the invention stage—is carried out by private firms
(Rosenberg 1990).

4

More precisely, an invention may form the basis of a technological innovation. Economically important
innovations need not be based on new technology, but can be new organizational or managerial forms, new
marketing methods, and so forth. In this chapter, we use the word innovation as short-hand for the more precise
technological innovation.

5

Data regarding R&D expenditures of firms are available from the financial statements of publicly traded firms, if
the expenditure is deemed “material” by the firm’s auditors, or if the firm chooses for strategic reasons to report
the expenditure (Bound, et al. 1984). In the United States, the government carries out a “census” of R&D activity,
and reports totals for broad industry groups (National Science Board 1998). Many industrialized countries now
collect similar statistics, which are available through the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD 2000).

6

Typically, for there to be environmental impacts of a new technology, a fourth step is required utilization, but
that is not part of the process of technological change per se. Thus, for example, a new type of hybrid motor

4

B. Production Functions, Productivity Growth, and Biased Technological Change
The measurement of the rate and direction of technological change rests fundamentally
on the concept of the transformation function,
T (Y, I, t ) ≤ 0 ,

(1)

where Y represents a vector of outputs, I represents a vector of inputs, and t is time. Equation (1)
describes a production possibility frontier, that is, a set of combinations of inputs and outputs
that are technically feasible at a point in time.

Technological change is represented by

movement of this frontier that makes it possible over time to use given input vectors to produce
output vectors that were not previously feasible.
In most applications, separability and aggregation assumptions are made that make it
possible to represent the economy’s production technology with a production function,
Y = f (K ,L ,E ;t ) ,

(2)

where Y is now a scalar measure of aggregate output (for example, gross domestic product). The
list of inputs on the right-hand side of the production function can be made arbitrarily long. For
illustrative purposes, we conceive of output as being made from a single composite of capital
goods, K, a single composite of labor inputs, L, and a single composite of environmental inputs,
E. Again, technological change means that the relationship between these inputs and possible
output levels changes over time.
Logarithmic differentiation of Equation (2) with respect to time yields
yt = At + β Lt lt + βKt kt + βEt et ,

(3)

vehicle engine might be invented, which emits fewer pollutants per mile; the same or another firm might
commercialize this engine and place the innovation in new cars available for purchase on the market; individuals
might purchase (or adopt) these cars, leading to diffusion of the new technology; and finally, by driving these cars
instead of others (utilization), aggregate pollutant emissions might be reduced. Conversely, if higher efficiency

5

in which lower case letters represent the growth rates of the corresponding upper case variable;
the β ’s represent the corresponding logarithmic partial derivatives from Equation (2); and the t
indicate that all quantities and parameters may change over time. 7 The term At corresponds to
“neutral” technological change, in the sense that it represents the rate of growth of output if the
growth rates of all inputs were zero. But the possibility that the β ’s can change over time
allows for “biased” technological change, that is, changes over time in relative productivity of
the various inputs.
Equations (2) and (3) are most easily interpreted in the case of process innovation, in
which firms figure out more efficient ways to make existing products, allowing output to grow at
a rate faster than inputs are growing.

In principle, these equations also apply to product

innovation. Y is a composite or aggregate output measure, in which the distinct outputs of the
economy are each weighted by their relative value, as measured by their market price. Improved
products will typically sell at a price premium, relative to lower quality products, meaning that
their introduction will increase measured output even if the physical quantity of the new goods
does not exceed the physical quantity of the old goods they replaced. In practice, however,
product improvement will be included in measured productivity only to the extent that the price
indices used to convert nominal GDP or other nominal output measures to real output measures
are purged of the effects of product innovation.

In general, official price indices and the

corresponding real output measures achieve this objective only to a limited extent.

and the resulting reduced marginal cost causes users to increase utilization, then the emissions reduction associated
with higher efficiency may be partially or totally offset by higher utilization.
7

This formulation can be considered a first-order approximation to an arbitrary functional form for Equation (2).
Higher-order approximations can also be implemented.

6

On its face, Equation (3) says nothing about the source of the productivity improvement
associated with the neutral technological change term, At. If, however, all inputs and outputs are
properly measured, and inputs (including R&D) yield only normal investment returns, then all
endogenous contributions to output should be captured by returns to inputs, and there should be
no “residual” difference between the weighted growth rates of inputs and the growth rate of
output. The observation that the residual has been typically positive is therefore interpreted as
evidence of some source of exogenous technological change. 8
There is now a large literature on the measurement and explanation of the productivity
residual. There are two basic approaches to the measurement of productivity. The “growth
accounting” approach relies on neoclassical production theory under constant returns to scale for
the proposition that the β ’s in Equation (3) are equal to the corresponding factor shares, and
thereby calculates the At as an arithmetic residual after share-weighted input growth rates are
subtracted from the growth rate of output (Denison 1979; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2000).
The “econometric” approach estimates the parameters of Equation (3) from time series data and
infers the magnitude of At as an econometric residual after the estimated effects of all measurable
inputs on output have been allowed for (Jorgenson and Griliches 1967; Jorgenson and Stiroh,
2000).

In both of these approaches, much attention has focused on the difficulties of

appropriately measuring both inputs and outputs (Jorgenson and Griliches 1967; Griliches 1994).
A particular focus has been understanding the slowdown in productivity growth in the 1970s and

8

Fabricant (1954) was the first to observe that the growth of conventional inputs explained little of the observed
growth in output in the twentieth century. This observation was elaborated by Abramowitz (1956), Kendrick
(1956) and Solow (1957). The early writers were clear that the large “residual” of unexplained growth was “a
measure of our ignorance” (Abramowitz, 1956) rather than a meaningful measure of the rate of technological
progress.

7

1980s relative to the earlier postwar period, including the role played by rising energy prices in
that slowdown (Berndt and Wood 1986).
In many contexts, it is difficult to distinguish the effects of innovation and diffusion. We
observe improvements in productivity (or other measures of performance) but do not have the
underlying information necessary to separate such improvements between movements of the
production frontier, and movements of existing firms towards the frontier. A related issue, and
one that is often significant for environment-related technological change, is that innovation can
be undertaken either by the manufacturers or the users of industrial equipment. In the former
case, the innovation must typically be embodied in new capital goods, and must then diffuse
through the population of users via the purchase of these goods, in order to affect productivity or
environmental performance. In the latter case, the innovation may take the form of changes in
practices that are implemented with existing equipment. Alternatively, firms may develop new
equipment for their own use, which they then may or may not undertake to sell to other firms.
The fact that the locus of activity generating environment-related technological change can be
supplying firms, using firms, or both, has important consequences for modeling the interaction of
technological change and environmental policy.
The embodiment of new technology in new capital goods creates an ambiguity regarding
the role played by technology diffusion with respect to Equations (2) and (3). One interpretation
is that these equations represent “best practice,” that is, what the economy would produce if all
innovations made to date had fully diffused.

In this interpretation, innovation would drive

technological change captured in Equation (3); the issue of diffusion would then arise in the form
of the presence of firms producing at points inside the production possibility frontier. Frontier
estimation techniques (Aigner and Schmidt 1980) or data envelopment methods (Fare et al.

8

1994) would be needed to measure the extent to which such sub-frontier behavior is occurring. 9
Alternatively, one can assume that the users of older equipment make optimal, informed
decisions regarding when to scrap old machines and purchase newer ones that embody better
technology. In this formulation, observed movements of the frontier—measured technological
change—comprise the combined impacts of the invention, innovation and diffusion processes.
C. The Microeconomics of Invention and Innovation
As noted above, the production function/productivity growth paradigm says little about
what generates technological change. There has been some tendency to treat technology as a
“black box” (Rosenberg 1982). But following Schumpeter, there has been a line of theoretical
and empirical analysis that has cast invention and innovation as a purposive economic activity,
and has attempted to discern its determinants and effects. Milestones in this line of research are:
Schmookler 1966; Mansfield 1968; Rosenberg 1982; Griliches 1984; Nelson and Winter 1982;
and Scherer 1986. 10
It is useful to identify two major strands of thought regarding the determinants of
innovative activity. We call these two broad categories of modeling approaches the “investment
subject to market failure” approach and the “evolutionary” approach.
1. The Investment/Market Failure Model
Under the “investment subject to market failure” (hereinafter, “investment”) approach,
firms undertake an investment activity called “R&D” with the intention of producing profitable
new products and processes. Decisions regarding the magnitude and nature of R&D activities

9

10

Boyd and McClelland (1999) and Boyd and Pang (2000) employ data envelopment analysis to evaluate the
potential for improvements at paper and glass plants that increase productivity and reduce pollution.
See also the survey by Thirtle and Ruttan (1987).

9

are governed by firms’ efforts to maximize their value, or, equivalently, to maximize the
expected discounted present value of cash flows. In some applications, the output of R&D is
explicitly modeled as “knowledge capital,” an intangible asset that firms use together with other
assets and other inputs to generate revenues. 11
When viewed as an investment activity, R&D has important characteristics that
distinguish it from investment in equipment or other tangible assets. First, although the outcome
of any investment is uncertain to some extent, R&D investment appears to be qualitatively
different. Not only is the variance of the distribution of expected returns much larger than for
other investments, but much or even most of the value may be associated with very lowprobability but very high value outcomes (Scherer et al. 2000). This skewness in the distribution
of the outcomes of the research process has important implications for modeling firms’ R&D
decision making (Scherer and Harhoff, 2000). In addition, the asset produced by the R&D
investment process is specialized, sunk and intangible, so that it cannot be mortgaged or used as
collateral. The combination of great uncertainty and intangible outcomes makes financing of
research through capital market mechanisms much more difficult than for traditional investment.
The difficulty of securing financing for research from outside sources may lead to underinvestment in research, particularly for small firms that have less internally generated cash and/or
less access to financial markets.
In addition to these financing difficulties, research investment differs from physical
investment because the asset produced by the research process — new knowledge about how to
make and do things — is difficult to exclude others from using. As first noted in the classic

11

See Griliches (1979) for the seminal statement of this research approach. An example of a recent application
measuring the knowledge capital of firms is Hall et al. (2000).

10

paper by Arrow (1962a), this means that the creator of this asset will typically fail to appropriate
all or perhaps most of the social returns it generates. Much of this social return will accrue as
“spillovers” to competing firms, to downstream firms that purchase the innovator’s products, or
to consumers (Griliches 1979, 1992; Jaffe 1986, 1998a). This “appropriability problem” is
likely to lead to significant underinvestment by private firms in R&D, relative to the social
optimum (Spence 1984).
An important special case of the appropriability problem is created by “general purpose
technologies” (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg, 1995). GPTs are technologies that find use in many
distinct application sectors within the economy, such as the electric motor, the steam engine, the
internal combustion engine and now, the semiconductor and possibly the Internet.

The

development of such technologies increases the returns to R&D designed to incorporate them
into the different applications sectors; development of such applications in turn increases the
return to improving the GPT. Because of these dynamic feedback effects, GPTs may be an
important factor in economic growth (Helpman, 1998). The dynamic feedback between a GPT
and its applications sectors also creates an important example of “path dependence,” discussed in
Section IV below. With respect to the environment, whether the GPTs that drive a particular era
are pollution-intensive or pollution-saving may have profound implications for the long-term
environmental prognosis.
As a profit-motivated activity, R&D investment decisions are governed by the cost of
R&D and its expected return. Theory and evidence suggest that the most important factors
affecting the optimal level of R&D are the after-tax cost of R&D (Hall and van Reenen 2000),
the size of the market (Schmookler 1966), technological opportunity (Rosenberg 1982), and
appropriability conditions (Jaffe 1988). Each of these varies intrinsically across time, markets,

11

and technologies, and also is affected by government policy. In particular, patents and other
forms of intellectual property are used by firms to overcome the appropriability problem,
although the effect of these institutions on investment in R&D or inventive activity has not been
clearly demonstrated empirically (Jaffe, 2000: Cohen, et al, 2000).
The recognition that R&D is a profit-motivated investment activity leads to the
hypothesis that the rate and direction of innovation are likely to respond to changes in relative
prices. Since environmental policy implicitly or explicitly makes environmental inputs more
expensive, the “induced innovation” hypothesis suggests an important pathway for the
interaction of environmental policy and technology, and for the introduction of impacts on
technological change as a criterion for evaluation of different policy instruments. These issues
are discussed in Sections III and V below.
2. The Evolutionary Model
While viewing R&D as a profit-motivated investment activity comes naturally to most
economists, the large uncertainties surrounding the outcomes of R&D investments make it very
difficult for firms to make optimizing R&D decisions. Accordingly, Nelson and Winter (1982)
used Herbert Simon’s idea of boundedly rational firms that engage in “satisficing” rather than
optimizing behavior (Simon 1947) to build an alternative model of the R&D process. In this
“evolutionary” model, firms use “rules of thumb” and “routines” to determine how much to
invest in R&D, and how to search for new technologies. The empirical predictions of this model
depend on the nature of the rules of thumb that firms actually use (Nelson and Winter 1982;
Winter et al 2000).
Because firms are not optimizing, a logical consequence of the evolutionary model is that
it cannot be presumed that the imposition of a new external constraint (for example, a new

12

environmental rule) necessarily reduces profits. There is at least the theoretical possibility that
the imposition of such a constraint could be an event that forces a satisficing firm to rethink its
strategy, with the possible outcome being the discovery of a new way of operating that is
actually more profitable for the firm. This possibility of environmental regulation leading to a
“win-win” outcome in which pollution is reduced and profits increased is discussed in Section III
below.
3. Market Structure and Innovation
The recognition that the costs and benefits of R&D for the firm are affected by the
appropriability problem and financing issues has led to a large literature on the effects of market
structure on innovation. In the older literature, it was argued that both the difficulty of financing
uncertain R&D investments, and the problem of appropriating the returns to R&D, would be
overcome more easily by large firms and/or firms operating in concentrated industries
characterized by market power. From these observations, it was hypothesized that innovation
comes disproportionately from large firms and concentrated industries. This conjecture is known
as the “Schumpeterian Hypothesis,” despite the fact that it does not appear in any of
Schumpeter’s writings. 12 After much debate about what the Schumpeterian Hypothesis really
means, the volume of evidence seems to show that: (1) much innovation in modern economies
comes from large firms in moderately concentrated industries, if only because much economic
activity comes from such firms; (2) truly competitive industries (for example, construction)

12

Schumpeter did emphasize that large corporations were important engines of innovation in modern economies,
and that atomistic competitive firms were unlikely to engage in much R&D. He does not, however, seem to have
endorsed, at least in writing, the notion of a monotonic relationship between innovative intensity and size or
concentration (Cohen and Levin 1989). Note that the “Schumpeterian Hypothesis” discussed here is distinct from,
and in some ways inconsistent with, the notion of “Schumpeterian competition” that is invoked in many modern
endogenous growth and other R&D models. The latter refers to the idea that innovators achieve market power in

13

perform little R&D; (3) beyond minimal size and concentration, there is little evidence of any
monotonic relationship between innovation intensity and either size or concentration; and (4)
innovation and market structure interact dynamically in a way that is not captured by an alleged
causal influence of firm size and market concentration on innovation. 13
More recently, a large game-theoretic literature related to strategic R&D incentives has
emerged (surveyed by Reinganum 1989). This literature has two strands. One views R&D or
other innovative activities in a context of continuous competition in which, for example,
marginal R&D investments result in marginal cost reductions or product improvements (for
example, Dasgupta and Stiglitz 1980a; Levin and Reiss 1988; Spence 1984). Industry structure,
represented by the number of competing firms, can be viewed either as an exogenous element of
industry structure, or the endogenous result of a free-entry equilibrium.

In these models,

innovation intensity tends to be positively associated with industry concentration, because firms
with larger market shares can spread the cost of R&D over more unit sales and suffer less from
R&D spillovers.
The other R&D theory literature focuses on patent races. Firms compete to be the first to
achieve a specific innovation goal (for example, Dasgupta and Stiglitz 1980b; Reinganum 1982;
Fudenberg, et al 1983).

In this literature, there is no necessary connection between the

competitiveness of the R&D process and the competitiveness of the market itself. For this
reason, the “market share” effect that makes competition unconducive to innovation in the
continuous competition models does not operate. Results regarding the relationship between

the short run, but that “creative destruction,” modeled as a dynamic free-entry equilibrium causes all firms to earn
zero expected profits.
13

For an extensive survey of this literature, see Cohen and Levin (1989).

14

competition and the rate of innovation tend to be less robust, depending on the structure of the
game and the way in which the “rate of innovation” is characterized (Reinganum 1989).
4. Public Policy and Innovation
As noted above, both the appropriability problem and the possibility of capital market
failures in the financing of R&D lead to a presumption that laissez-faire levels of investment in
innovation will be too low from a social perspective. There is, however, an offsetting negative
externality that suggests that private R&D incentives may be too great. R&D is a fixed cost that
must, in equilibrium, be financed by the stream of quasi-rents it produces. The entry of another
R&D competitor, or an increase in the R&D investment level of a competitor, reduces the
expected quasi-rents earned by other R&D firms. This “rent-stealing” effect (Mankiw and
Whinston 1986) could, as a theoretical matter, lead to over-investment in R&D.

This is

analogous to the over-fishing of a common-property fishery by a competitive fishing industry. 14
The empirical evidence suggests, however, that positive externalities associated with
knowledge spillovers dominate the rent-stealing effect, leading to social rates of return to R&D
substantially in excess of the private rates of return (Griliches 1992). In practice, virtually all
industrialized countries engage in policies designed to encourage investment in innovation
(Guellec and van Pottelsberghe 2000; Mowery and Rosenberg 1989). It is difficult to determine
how well these policies do in moving R&D toward optimal levels. There is some evidence that
social rates of return remain well above private levels (Griliches 1992; Jones and Williams
1998), but there is also evidence that R&D subsidies drive up the wages of scientists enough to

14

There is also a dynamic analogue to the tension between spillovers and rent-stealing. Over time, innovation may
become cumulatively easier because subsequent inventors “stand on the shoulders” of those who came before; or it
may become harder, because the pool of potential inventions is “fished out.” In the 1980s, there was considerable
interest in the idea that “fishing out” of invention potential may explain the productivity slowdown of the 1970s

15

prevent significant increases in real R&D (Goolsbee 1998). This implies that the supply of
scientists and engineers is relatively inelastic; whether such inelasticity could hold in the long
run remains unresolved.
Policy can try to increase social investment in R&D by engaging in R&D in the public
(and/or nonprofit) sector, or by trying to reduce the after-tax cost of R&D for private firms.
R&D in the public sector and in universities is an important, though declining component of the
overall research effort in the U.S. and other developed nations. 15

The evidence on the

effectiveness of public research is mixed, partly because of the difficulty of measuring the output
of the basic research process (Jaffe 1998b), and partially because of the difficulty of determining
the extent of complementarity or substitutability between public research investment and private
investment (David, et al 2000). Examples of successful government technology development (as
opposed to research) have been particularly few (Cohen and Noll 1991). Nonetheless, public
R&D may well play a particularly important role with respect to environment-related science and
technology.
Government policy affects the after-tax cost of R&D via tax incentives (Hall and Van
Reneen (2000), 16 direct subsidies and grants for research (Klette, et al. 2000; Trajtenberg 2000),
and also via educational policies that affect the supply of scientists and engineers (Romer 2000).

(Evenson 1991). But the surge in patenting and productivity growth rates in the 1990s has led to a fading of the
fishing-out idea (Jaffe, 2000).
15

Research performed in government labs, universities and other non-profit institutions is currently about one-fourth
of all research performed in the U.S., versus three-quarters performed in the for-profit sector. In addition, some of
the research performed by firms is funded by public money; altogether, over one-third of all R&D is funded by
public sources (National Science Board, 1998). This estimate excludes the implicit public subsidy for private
research represented by the Research and Experimentation Tax Credit.

16

The effect of taxation on R&D incentives is theoretically complex. On the one hand, any tax on profits derived
from R&D drives a wedge between the before- and after-tax returns and hence discourages R&D investment. On
the other hand, returns from R&D are taxed much more lightly than returns from investment in equipment and
structures, both because of explicit R&D incentives, and also because R&D can be expensed rather than
amortized. Thus relative to traditional investment, R&D is strongly tax-preferred.

16

Public policies can affect the market for new technologies via direct government purchase, and
also subsidies for purchase or installation of products incorporating particular technologies
(Stoneman 1987). Finally, policies can affect the extent to which firms can successfully
appropriate the returns to their research, by establishing the institutional environment of patent
systems, employment relations, and antitrust or other competition policies. 17
D. The Microeconomics of Diffusion
From the mechanical reaper of the nineteenth century (David 1966), through hybrid corn
seed (Griliches 1957), steel furnaces (Oster 1982), optical scanners (Levin, et al. 1987) and
industrial robots (Mansfield 1989), research has consistently shown that the diffusion of new,
economically superior technologies is a gradual process. Typically, the fraction of potential
users that has adopted a new technology follows a sigmoid or “S-shaped” path over time, rising
only slowly at first, then entering a period of very rapid growth, followed by a slowdown in
growth as the technology reaches maturity and most potential adopters have switched (Geroski
2000).
The explanation for the apparent slowness of the technology diffusion process has been a
subject of research in a variety of disciplines. Two main forces have been emphasized. First,
potential technology adopters are heterogeneous, so that a technology that is generally superior
will not be equally superior for all potential users, and may remain inferior to existing
technology for some users for an extended period of time after its introduction.

Second,

adopting a new technology is a risky undertaking, requiring considerable information, both about
the generic attributes of the new technology and about the details of its use in the particular

17

The primary explicit non-fiscal mechanism for encouraging innovation in industrialized countries is the patent
system. Empirical evidence on the impact of patent protection on the rate of innovation is ambiguous. For a
survey, see Jaffe (2000).

17

application being considered.

It takes time for information to diffuse sufficiently, and the

diffusion of the technology is limited by this process of diffusion of information.
The two main models of the diffusion process each emphasize one of these two aspects of
the process. 18 The probit or rank model, first articulated in an unpublished paper by Paul David
(1969), posits that potential adopters are characterized by a distribution of value or returns
associated with the new technology. 19 Because adoption is costly, at any moment in time there is
a threshold point on this distribution, such that potential users with values at or above this
threshold will want to adopt, and users for whom the value of the new technology is below this
threshold will not want to adopt. Because the new technology will typically get cheaper and
better as time passes after its initial introduction, this threshold will gradually move to the right,
and eventually sweep out the entire distribution. If the distribution of underlying values is
normal (or another single-peaked distribution with similar shape), this gradual movement of the
threshold across the distribution will produce the typical S-shaped diffusion curve.
The other widely-used model is called the epidemic model (Griliches 1957; Stoneman
1983). The epidemic model presumes that the primary factor limiting diffusion is information,
and that the most important source of information about a new technology is people or firms who
have tried it. Thus technology spreads like a disease, with the instigation of adoption being
contact between the “infected” population (people who have already adopted) and the uninfected
population. Denoting the fraction of the potential using population that has adopted as f, this
leads to the differential equation

18
19

df
= β f (1 − f ) . Solution of this equation yields a logistic
dt

For an empirical example that integrates the two models, see Trajtenberg (1990).
This has sometimes been called the rank model since potential adopters can be ranked in terms of their potential
benefits from adoption (Karshenas and Stoneman 1995).

18

function, which has the characteristic S-shape. The parameter β captures the “contagiousness”
of the disease, presumably related to the cost of the new technology and the degree of its
superiority over the technology it replaces (Griliches 1957). 20
The probit model emphasizes adoption as the result of value-maximizing decisions by
heterogeneous adopters. As such, at least in its basic form, it does not suggest that the slow
diffusion of new technology is anything but optimal. In contrast, in the epidemic model each
adopter generates a positive externality by transferring information to other potential adopters.
This suggests that laissez-faire adoption rates may indeed be socially suboptimal. We return to
this issue in Section IV below.
Finally, we note an important issue of feedback from the diffusion process to the earlier
stages of invention and innovation. The rate at which a technology diffuses determines in large
part the rate at which its production volume grows. And as stated earlier, market size tends to be
an important determinant of R&D effort and innovative activity, so that growing use increases
the incentive for R&D to improve the product. Furthermore, if the production process is
characterized by learning by doing, then quality may rise and production costs fall as production
experience is accumulated. This possibility creates an additional source of positive externality
associated with technology adoption, and may introduce dynamic increasing returns to scale for
individual technologies. This issue is also discussed in Section IV.

20

Both the probit and epidemic models focus on the fraction of the population that had adopted at a point in time. If
one has individual-level data on adopters, one can take as the dependent variable the individual time until
adoption. This leads to a duration or hazard model (Karshenas and Stoneman 1995; Rose and Joskow 1990). Kerr
and Newell (2000) employed a duration model to analyze technology adoption decisions by petroleum refineries
during the phasedown of lead in gasoline, as discussed in Section IV and V below.

19

E. Technological Change and Endogenous Economic Growth
In the last two decades there has emerged a large macroeconomic literature that builds on
the above concepts to produce models of overall economic growth based on technological
change (Romer 1990, 1994; Grossman and Helpman 1994).

In these models, R&D is an

endogenous equilibrium response to Schumpeterian profit incentives. Spillovers associated with
this R&D generate a form of dynamic increasing returns, which allows an economy
endogenously investing in R&D to grow indefinitely. 21 This stands in contrast to the older
neoclassical growth model, in which exogenous technological change, in the presence of
decreasing returns to investment in physical capital, typically yields an economy that tends
towards a steady state in which income per capita does not grow. 22
Endogenous growth theory has played an important role in re-introducing technological
change—and the associated policy issues deriving from R&D market failures—into discussions
about economic growth. 23 Modeling growth as a process driven by the endogenous creation and
diffusion of new technology ought to have implications for important environmental issues such
as sustainable development and global climate change.

Its policy utility has been limited,

however, by its relative lack of empirical foundation, and by the difficulty of linking the
macroeconomic endogenous growth models to the microeconomic foundations of technological

21

It is also possible to generate such endogenous growth through human capital investment (Lucas 1988).

22

Thus, in the literature, “endogenous technological change” and “induced technological change” refer to different
concepts, even though the opposite of each is often described by the same phrase, that is, exogenous technological
change. Endogenous technological change refers to the broad concept that technological change is the result of
activities within the economic system, which are presumed to respond to the economic incentives of the system.
Induced technological change refers to the more specific idea that changes in relative factor prices affect the rate
and direction of innovation. In practice, papers that use the phrase “endogenous technological change” tend to
focus on aggregate R&D expenditure and neutral technological change. Papers that used the phrase “induced
technological change” or “induced innovation” tend to focus on the direction of R&D efforts and biases in
technological change.

23

See, for example, Jones and Williams (1998), and the symposium on “New Growth Theory” in the Winter 1994
Journal of Economic Perspectives.

20

innovation and diffusion (Caballero and Jaffe 1993). This remains an important area for future
research.

III. The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and its Importance for Environmental Economics
As discussed in the introduction, if the imposition of environmental requirements can
induce innovation that reduces the (static) cost of complying with those requirements, this has
profound implications for both the setting of environmental policy goals and the choice of policy
instruments. In this section we discuss the two main theoretical frameworks for analyzing
induced innovation, and evaluate the empirical evidence, particularly as it relates to inducement
associated with environmental objectives. 24
A. Neoclassical Induced Innovation
The induced-innovation hypothesis was first articulated by Sir John Hicks:
“a change in the relative prices of the factors of production is itself a spur to invention,
and to invention of a particular kind — directed to economizing the use of a factor which
has become relatively expensive.” (Hicks 1932), p. 124) 25
Analysis of this hypothesis has a long and somewhat tortured history in economics. Early
empirical work was largely confined to aggregate data, and focused primarily on questions such
as whether historical cross-country differences in wage levels could explain the location of
development of labor-saving inventions (Thirtle and Ruttan 1987).
Hicks did not link the induced-innovation hypothesis in a formal way to the research
process, or to profit-maximizing R&D decisions by firms. This link was formalized in the 1960s

24

In this and the following section, we focus separately on induced innovation and the economic forces driving
diffusion. As noted above, however, the analytical distinction between innovation and diffusion may be blurred in
practice.

25

Writing before Schumpeter, Hicks does not appear to use the word “invention” in the specific sense used by
Schumpeter and adopted by later authors. Rather, Hicks uses it in a general sense encompassing both invention
and innovation, as used today.

21

by Ahmad (1966) and Kamien and Schwartz (1968), and developed further by Binswanger
(1974). Binswanger and Ruttan (1978) summarize this literature. The general approach is to
postulate a “meta” production function according to which investing in R&D changes the
parameters of a production function such as Equation (2). Unfortunately, theoretical conclusions
regarding the induced affect of changes in factor prices on the parameters of the production
function are sensitive to the specification of the “meta” production function governing the
research process.
Although formulated in terms of the R&D decisions of firms, this theory is nonetheless
aggregate, because the result of the research process is change in the parameters of the aggregate
production function. That is, “labor-saving” innovation in these models means a change in the
parameters of Equation (2) that results in less labor being used. The model abstracts entirely
from what kinds of new machines or processes might be yielding these changes.

Further,

because of the ambiguity described in Section II.B as to whether the production frontier does or
does not encompass technology diffusion, there is really no distinction in these models between
induced innovation and the effect of factor prices on the rate of technology diffusion.
A natural way to move the modeling of induced innovation to the microeconomic level is
to recognize that factor-saving technological change comes about largely through the
introduction of new capital goods that embody different input ratios. These input ratios can then
be thought of as attributes or characteristics of the capital goods in the sense of Lancaster (1971).
Newell (1997, Chapter 2) and Newell, et al. (1999) showed that improvements in the energy
efficiency of equipment can be modeled in this way. The existing technology for making a given
type of equipment at a point in time is identified in terms of vectors of characteristics (including
cost of manufacture) that are feasible. The process of invention makes it possible to manufacture

22

“models” (characteristics vectors) that were previously infeasible. Innovation means the offering
for commercial sale of a model that was not previously offered for sale. Induced innovation is
then represented as movements in the frontier of feasible models that reduce the cost of energy
efficiency in terms of other attributes.
Hicks formulated the induced innovation hypothesis in terms of factor prices. Newell, et
al. (1999) generalized this concept to include inducement by regulatory standards, such as
labeling requirements that might increase the value of certain product characteristics by making
consumers more aware of them. More generally, non-price regulatory constraints can fit within
the inducement framework if they can be modeled as changing the shadow or implicit price that
firms face in emitting pollutants.
B. Regulation and Innovation in the Evolutionary Paradigm
The neoclassical theory of induced innovation is a positive theory, not a normative one.
There is no suggestion that inducing technological change is a desirable thing. In general, if
firms are choosing R&D to maximize profits, then the imposition of a constraint that induces a
change in the R&D level would tend to lower profits (Palmer, et al 1995). 26
The evolutionary approach replaces optimizing firms with satisficing firms, and thereby
admits greater scope for a variety of consequences when the firm’s environment is modified.
Satisficing firms may miss opportunities for increased profits simply because they don’t look
very hard for such opportunities as long as things are going reasonably well. An external shock
such as a new environmental constraint can therefore constitute a stimulus to new search,
possibly leading to discovery of previously undetected profit opportunities. This observation

26

Of course, if R&D creates net positive externalities, than an induced increase in R&D could increase social
welfare even if it reduces profits. We return to this issue below.

23

forms the basis for the normative observation that environmental regulation may not be as costly
as we expect, because the imposition of the new constraint may lead to the discovery of new
ways of doing things. In the limit, these new ways of doing things might actually be more
profitable than the old ways, leading to an asserted “win-win” outcome. 27
In general, advocates of the “win-win” view of the consequences of environmental
regulation seem unaware of the connection between their argument and the evolutionary school
of technological change. 28 But the ideas are similar:
It is sometimes argued that companies must, by the very notion of profit seeking, be
pursuing all profitable innovation…In this view, if complying with environmental
regulation can be profitable, in the sense that a company can more than offset the cost of
compliance, then why is such regulation necessary?
The possibility that regulation might act as a spur to [profitable] innovation arises
because the world does not fit the Panglossian belief that firms always make optimal
choices…[T]he actual process of dynamic competition is characterized by changing
technological opportunities coupled with highly incomplete information, organizational
inertia and control problems reflecting the difficulty of aligning individual, group and
corporate incentives. Companies have numerous avenues for technological improvement,
and limited attention. (Porter and van der Linde 1995, pp. 98-99)
Porter and other “win-win” theorists argued that in this non-optimizing world, regulation
may lead to “innovation offsets” that “can not only lower the net cost of meeting environmental
regulations, but can even lead to absolute advantages over firms in foreign countries not subject
to similar regulations” (Porter and van der Linde 1995, p. 98). Of course, the fact that firms
engage in non-optimizing behavior creates a possibility for profit improvements, without

27

Another related idea is that of “X-inefficiency” (Leibenstein, 1966). It is also, of course, possible to model
apparently inefficient firm behavior as the (second-best) efficient outcome of imperfect information and divergent
incentives among managers or between owners and managers in a principal/agent framework.

28

Neither Simon (1947) nor Nelson and Winter (1982) appear in the references of Porter and van der Linde (1995).
Interestingly, Nelson and Winter themselves anticipated the connection. In their 1982 book, they say “In a regime
in which technical advance is occurring and organizational structure is evolving in response to changing patterns
of demand and supply, new nonmarket interactions that are not contained adequately by prevailing laws and
policies are almost certain to appear, and old ones may disappear…The canonical ‘externality’ problem of

24

suggesting that such improvements would be the norm, would be systematic, or even likely. But
win-win theorists propose several reasons why innovation offsets are likely to be common.
First, they argue that regulation provides a signal to companies about likely resource
inefficiencies and potential technological improvements; that pollution is, by its very nature,
indicative of resources being wasted, or at least not fully utilized. Regulation focuses attention
on pollution, and such attention is likely to lead to the saving of resources, which will often
lower costs.

Second, regulation provides or requires the generation of information; since

information is a public good it may be underprovided without such incentives. Third, regulation
reduces uncertainty about the payoffs to investments in environmental innovation. There may be
potential investments that are believed to be profitable in an expected value sense, and also
deliver environmental benefits, but which are highly risky in the absence of regulation that
ensures that the environmental benefits are also privately valuable.

Regulation, in effect,

provides “insurance” against the risk of investing in new technology, part of whose benefit
cannot be internalized. Fourth, new technology that is initially more costly may produce longrun competitive advantage, because of learning-by-doing or other “first-mover” advantages, if
other countries eventually impose similarly strict standards. Finally, regulation simply creates
pressure. Such pressure plays an important role in the innovation process, “to overcome inertia,
foster creative thinking and mitigate agency problems” (Porter and van der Linde 1995, p. 100).
It should be emphasized that win-win theorists do not claim that all environmental
regulations generate significant innovation offsets. Indeed, they emphasize that regulation must

evolutionary theory is the generation by new technologies of benefits and costs that old institutional structures
ignore.” (page 368) See also Kemp and Soete (1990).

25

be properly designed in order to maximize the chances for encouraging innovation. We return to
this issue in Section V.
Generally, economists have been skeptical of the win-win theory (Palmer, et al 1995;
Oates et al. 1993). It is not clear that pollution generally signals “waste;” most physical and
biological processes have by-products of some sort, and whether the extent of such by-products
is “wasteful” or not is inherently a question of prices and costs.

More generally, firms’

rationality is surely bounded, but that does not mean that unexploited profit opportunities are
frequent. For regulation to have important informational effects, the government must have
better information than firms have about the nature of environmental problems and their
potential solutions.

This seems questionable.

Of course, the government may have better

information about which environmental problems it considers most important, but it is not clear
how conveying this type of information would produce win-win outcomes. As to overcoming
inertia, most firms in today’s world feel a lot of pressure, so it seems unlikely that the additional
pressure of regulation is going to have beneficial stimulating effects on innovation. Finally,
while it seems likely that environmental regulation will stimulate the innovation and diffusion of
technologies that facilitate compliance, creation and adoption of new technology will typically
require real resources, and have significant opportunity costs. The observation that the new
technology is cost-saving on a forward-looking basis is not sufficient to conclude that the firm
was made better off by being induced to develop and/or adopt the new technology.
C. Empirical Evidence on Induced Innovation
Thirtle and Ruttan (1987) provided a review of the non-environmental literature on
induced innovation. Much of this work is in the agricultural area in which excellent microdata

26

has long provided fertile ground for empirical work on innovation and diffusion. 29 In general,
available empirical analyses confirm that factor price changes are associated with factor-saving
technological change.
The greatest challenge in testing the induced innovation hypothesis specifically with
respect to environmental inducement is the difficulty of measuring the extent or intensity of
inducement across firms or industries (Jaffe, et al. 1995). Ideally, one would like to look at the
relationship between innovation and the shadow price of pollution or environmental inputs. In
practice, such shadow prices are not easily observed. Consequently, one must use proxies for
this shadow price, such as expert judgements about relative regulatory stringency in different
states (Gray and Shadbegian 1998), number of enforcement actions (Gray and Shadbegian 1995),
Clean Air Act attainment status (Greenstone 1998), specific regulatory events (Berman and Bui
1998), or expenditures on pollution abatement (Lanjouw and Mody 1996). 30
Lanjouw and Mody (1996) showed a strong association between pollution abatement
expenditures and the rate of patenting in related technology fields. Jaffe and Palmer (1997)
examined the correlation between pollution expenditures by industry and indicators of
innovation more broadly. They found that there is a significant correlation within industries over
time between the rate of expenditure on pollution abatement and the level of R&D spending.
They did not, however, find evidence of an effect of pollution control expenditure on overall
patenting.

29

More recently, the availability of computerized firm-level data on R&D and patents has led to an increase in
parallel analyses in the industrial sector.

30

Of course, there is a parallel problem with respect to measurement of the rate of invention or innovation. See
Griliches (1990) and Lanjouw and Schankerman (1999).

27

There is a large literature on the impact of environmental regulation on productivity and
investment. 31 To the extent that regulation inhibits investment and/or slows productivity growth,
this can be viewed as indirect evidence suggesting that induced innovation effects are either
small or are outweighed by other costs of regulation. Results of this type seem to be industry
and methodology dependent.

For example, Berman and Bui (1998) found significant

productivity increases associated with air pollution regulation in the oil refining industry, but
Gray and Shadbegian (1998) found that pollution abatement investment “crowds out” productive
investment almost entirely in the pulp and paper industry. Greenstone (1998) found overall that
air pollution regulation has a statistically significant but very small impact on overall costs,
implying a small negative productivity impact.
Evidence of inducement has also been sought by examining the response to changing
energy prices. Newell, et al. (1999) examined the extent to which the energy efficiency of the
menu of home appliances available for sale changed in response to energy prices between 1958
and 1993, using the model (discussed above) of induced innovation as changing characteristics
of capital goods. By constructing a series of dynamic simulations, they examined the effects of
energy price changes and efficiency standards on average efficiency of the menu of products
over time. They found that a substantial amount of the improvement was what may be described
as autonomous (that is, associated with the passage of time), but significant amounts of
innovation were also due to changes in energy prices and changes in energy-efficiency standards.
They found that technological change in air conditioners was actually biased against energy
efficiency in the 1960s (when real energy prices were falling), but that this bias was reversed

31

See, for example, Gollop and Roberts (1983), Kolstad and Turnovsky (1998) and Yaisawarng and Klein (1994).
This literature is discussed at greater length in the chapter on “Calculating the Costs of Environmental
Regulation.”

28

after the two energy shocks of the 1970s. In terms of the efficiency of the average model
offered, they found that energy efficiency in 1993 would have been about one-quarter to one-half
lower in air conditioners and gas water heaters, if energy prices had stayed at their 1973 levels,
rather than following their historical path.
Popp (2000a and 2000b) looked more broadly at energy prices and energy-related
innovation.

In the first paper, he found that patenting in energy-related fields increases in

response to increased energy prices, but that the effect fades over time. Popp attributed this
fading to diminishing returns to R&D. In the second paper, he attempted to decompose the
overall reduction in energy use that is associated with changing energy prices between the
substitution effect—movements along a given production frontier—and the induced innovation
effect—movement of the production frontier itself induced by the change in energy prices.
Using energy-related patents as a proxy for energy innovation, he found that approximately onethird of the overall response of energy use to prices is associated with induced innovation, with
the remaining two-thirds associated with factor substitution. Because energy patents are likely to
measure energy innovation only with substantial error, one might interpret this result as placing a
lower bound on the fraction of the overall response of energy use to changing prices that is
associated with innovation.
Porter and van der Linde (1995) provided numerous case studies of particular firms who
developed or adopted new technology in response to regulation, and appear to have benefited as
a result. Palmer, et al (1995) surveyed firms affected by regulation—including those cited by
Porter and van der Linde as success stories — and found that most firms say that the net cost to
them of regulation is, in fact, positive. Overall, the evidence on induced innovation and the win-

29

win hypothesis seems to be a case of a “partially full glass” that analysts see as mostly full or
mostly empty, depending on their perspective. This balance is summarized in Table 1.

D. Induced Innovation and Optimal Environmental Policy
Though the magnitude of induced innovation effects remains uncertain, a few researchers
have begun to explore the consequences of induced innovation for environmental policy.
Section V addresses the important question of how considerations related to technological
change (including induced innovation) affect the normative choice among different policy
instruments. In this section, we consider the larger question of whether the possibility of induced
innovation ought to change environmental policy targets, or the pace at which we seek to
achieve them.
Intuitively, it seems logical that if environmental policy intervention induces innovation,
this in some sense reduces the social cost of environmental intervention, suggesting that the
optimal policy is more stringent than it would be if there were no induced innovation. This
intuition contains an element of truth, but a number of complexities arise. First, there is no
theoretical reason to believe that welfare changes associated with innovation are necessarily
large relative to the welfare effects associated with getting the right static incentives to reduce
pollution (Parry, et al (2000)). Second, one has to be careful what is meant by “reducing the cost
of intervention.” As shown by Goulder and Schneider (1999), if the policy intervention induces
a reduction in the marginal cost of abatement, then any given policy target (for example, a
particular aggregate emission rate or a particular ambient concentration) will be achieved at
lower cost than it would without induced innovation. On the other hand, the lower marginal
abatement cost schedule arising from induced innovation makes it socially optimal to achieve a

30

Table 1
Overview of Conclusions on Induced Innovation and the “Win-win” Hypothesis

AREAS OF AGREEMENT
Historical evidence indicates that a significant but not predominant fraction of innovation in the energy and environment area is
induced.
Environmental regulation is likely to stimulate innovation and technology adoption that will facilitate environmental compliance.
Much existing environmental regulation uses inflexible mechanisms likely to stifle innovation; “incentive-based” mechanisms are
likely to be more conducive to innovation.
Firms are boundedly rational so that external constraints can sometimes stimulate innovation that will leave the firm better off.
First-mover advantages may result from domestic regulation that correctly anticipates world-wide trends.

AREAS OF DISAGREEMENT
Win-Win Theory
Widespread case-study evidence indicates significant “innovation
offsets” are common.
Innovation in response to regulation is evidence of offsets that
significantly reduce or eliminate the cost of regulation.
Pollution is evidence of waste, suggesting why cost-reducing
innovation in response to regulation might be the norm.
Existing productivity or cost studies do not capture innovation
offsets.
There is much evidence of innovation offsets even though
existing regulations are badly designed. This suggests that offsets
from good regulation would be large.

31

Neoclassical Economics
Case studies are highly selective. Firms believe regulation is
costly.
When cost-reducing innovation occurs, the opportunity cost of
R&D and management effort makes a true “win-win” outcome
unlikely.
Costs are costs; even if firms are not at the frontier, side-effects of
pollution reduction could just as easily be bad as good.
Existing productivity and cost studies suggest that innovation
offsets have been very small.
Since there is agreement that bad regulations stifle innovation, the
apparent beneficial effects of existing regulation only show that
case studies can be very misleading.

greater level of pollution abatement. For a plausible social benefit function, this results in
greater total expenditure on abatement (at the social optimum) even as the marginal abatement
cost falls.
Another important issue is the general equilibrium effect of induced environmental
innovation on innovation elsewhere in the economy (Schmalensee1994). If inducement operates
through increased R&D expenditure, then an issue arises as to the elasticity of supply of R&D
inputs. To the extent that this supply is inelastic, then any induced innovation must come at the
expense of other forms of innovation, creating an opportunity cost that may negate the
“innovation offsets” observed in the regulated portion of the economy. 32 The general equilibrium
consequences of these effects for welfare analysis depend on the extent of R&D spillovers or
other market failures, and the magnitude of these distortions in the regulated firms or sectors
relative to the rest of the economy (Goulder and Schneider 1999).
Goulder and Mathai (2000) looked at optimal abatement in a dynamic setting,
considering not only the optimal overall amount of abatement but also its timing. In addition to
R&D-induced innovation, they considered (in a separate model) reductions in abatement costs
that come about via learning-by-doing. In the R&D model, there are two effects of induced
innovation on optimal abatement: it reduces marginal abatement costs, which increases the
optimal amount of abatement. But it also reduces the shadow cost of emissions today, because
of lower abatement costs in the future. The combination of these effects implies that with R&Dinduced innovation, optimal abatement is lower in early years and higher in later years than it
would otherwise be. In the learning-by-doing model, there is a third effect: abatement today

32

Goolsbee (1998) provided evidence that the supply of R&D inputs (scientists and engineers) is relatively inelastic
in the short run. It seems less likely that this supply is inelastic in the long run. See Romer (2000).

32

lowers the cost of abatement in the future. This reinforces the tendency for cumulative optimal
abatement to be higher in the presence of induced innovation, but makes the effect on optimal
near-term abatement ambiguous.
Goulder and Mathai also considered the impact of innovation on the optimal tax rate.
One might suppose that the potential for induced technological change justifies a higher
environmental tax rate (or higher time-profile for an environmental tax), since in this setting
environmental taxes have a dual role: discouraging emissions and triggering new technologies.
Goulder and Mathai showed, however, that under typical conditions (a downward-sloping
marginal damages curve) the presence of induced innovation implies a lower time-profile for the
optimal environmental tax. The reason is that with induced innovation, a lower tax is all that is
needed to achieve the desired abatement, even when the desired extent of abatement is higher.
Nordhaus (2000) introduced induced technological change into the “DICE” model of
global climate change and associated economic activities. To calibrate the model, he needed
parametric estimates of the private and social returns to fossil-fuel-related R&D. Using the
existing R&D intensity of the fossil sector to derive these parameters, he found that the impact of
induced innovation is modest. Essentially, the existing share of R&D investment in this sector is
so small that even with large social returns the overall impact is modest. Indeed, comparing a
model with induced innovation (but no factor substitution) with a model that has factor
substitution but no induced innovation, he concluded that induced innovation has less effect than
factor substitution on optimal emissions levels.
Overall, there is considerable ambiguity regarding the importance of induced innovation
for the optimal stringency of environmental policy. Partly, this is because predictions depend on
the magnitudes of parameters that are hard to measure.

33

But, more fundamentally, if

environmental policy affects the innovation process, and the innovation process is itself
characterized by market failure, then this is a classic problem of the “second best.” We know
that robust results are generally hard to come by with respect to such problems. It will typically
make a big difference whether we imagine optimizing R&D policy first, and then environmental
policy, or vice versa, or if we imagine simultaneous optimization in both realms, or if we assume
that we are designing optimal environmental policy taking non-optimal R&D policy as given.
Theory may be able to indicate the considerations that come into play, but is unlikely to provide
robust prescriptions for policy.

IV. Technology Diffusion and the Potential for Green Technology
While the induced innovation literature focuses on the potential for environmental policy
to bring forth new technology through innovation, there is also a widely-held view that
significant reductions in environmental impacts could be achieved through more widespread
diffusion of existing economically-attractive technologies, particularly ones that increase energy
efficiency and thereby reduce emissions associated with fossil fuel combustion. For example, the
report of the Interlaboratory Working Group (1997) compiled a comprehensive analysis of
existing technologies that reportedly could reduce energy use and hence CO2 emissions at low or
even negative net cost to users. The observation that energy-efficient technologies that are costeffective at current prices are diffusing only slowly dates back to the 1970s, having been
identified as a “paradox” at least as far back as Shama (1983).
As discussed in Section II above, the observation of apparently slow diffusion of superior
technology is not a surprise when viewed in historical context.

Nonetheless, the apparent

potential for emissions reductions associated with faster diffusion of existing technology raises
two important questions. First, what is the theoretical and empirical potential for “induced
34

diffusion” of lower-emissions technologies? That is, what is the likely magnitude of the impact
on the diffusion rate of these technologies of environmental policy interventions that implicitly
or explicitly increase the economic incentive to reduce emissions?
A second and related question is the degree to which historical diffusion rates have been
limited by market failures in the energy and equipment markets themselves (Jaffe and Stavins
1994). To the extent that diffusion has been and is limited by market failures, it is less clear that
policies that operate by increasing the economic incentive to adopt such technology will be
effective. On the other hand, if such market failures are important, then policies focused directly
on correction of such market failures provide, at least in principle, opportunities for policy
intervention that are social-welfare increasing, even without regard to any environmental benefit.
Table 2 summarizes the potential influence on technology diffusion of many of the factors
discussed in this section.
Table 2: Factors Influencing Technology Diffusion

Factor

Likely Direction of
Effect

Potential Policy/Institutional
Instrument

Increased relative price of resource
conserved by the technology
Decreased cost and/or increased quality
of technology
Inadequate information, uncertainty, and
agency problems regarding benefits and
costs of technology adoption
Learning-by-doing and learning-by-using

(+)

tax on the resource

(+)

technology subsidy

(-)

information dissemination,
technology demonstration

(+)

Network externalities

(?)

technology demonstration and
deployment, tax/subsidy
standards, planning,
coordination
flexible regulation

Characteristics of potential adopters

varied

35

A. Theory and Evidence on Induced Diffusion
In the literature unrelated to environmental technology, both theory and empirical
evidence are clear that technology diffusion rates depend on the strength of economic incentives
for technology adoption. Both of the models discussed in Section II predict that the present
value of benefits from adoption and the initial adoption cost enter into decisions affecting the
diffusion rate. 33 In the probit model, this net present value comparison determines the location of
the adoption threshold that determines what fraction of potential adopters will adopt at a moment
in time. In the epidemic model, this net present value comparison determines the magnitude of
the “contagiousness” parameter, which in turn determines the speed at which the technology
spreads from adopters to previous non-adopters.
Empirical studies have addressed the influence on diffusion of factors such as firm size,
R&D expenditure, market share, market structure, input prices, technology costs, firm
ownership, and other institutional factors. The classic empirical study is Griliches (1957), which
showed that the rate of adoption of hybrid corn seed in different regions depended on the
economic superiority of the new seed in that region. David (1966) showed that the first adopters
of the mechanical reaper were larger farms, who benefited more from the decreased variable cost
it permitted. Mansfield (1968) also found the rate of diffusion to depend on firm size (as do
most studies), as well as the riskiness of the new technology and the magnitude of the investment
required for adoption. Rose and Joskow (1990) find a positive, though statistically insignificant

33

The fact that technology costs enter into the adoption decision demonstrates the close link between technology
innovation and diffusion in both theory and reality. A key mechanism of diffusion is the gradual adoption of a new
technology as its cost falls (and/or quality improves). Such cost and quality improvements represent innovation.
Likewise, incentives for innovation will depend on the eventual demand for a new or improved product, that is,
diffusion. This linkage also points to the difficulty of empirically distinguishing between technology innovation
and diffusion since they depend on one another and also both depend on similar external incentives such as
relative price changes.

36

effect of fuel prices on the adoption of a new fuel-saving technology in the U.S. electricitygeneration sector. 34
Jaffe and Stavins (1995) carried out econometric analyses of the factors affecting the
adoption of thermal insulation technologies in new residential construction in the United States
between 1979 and 1988. They examined the dynamic effects of energy prices and technology
adoption costs on average residential energy-efficiency technologies in new home construction. 35
They found that the response of mean energy efficiency to energy price changes was positive and
significant, both statistically and economically. Interestingly, they also found that equivalent
percentage adoption cost changes were about three times as effective as energy price changes in
encouraging adoption, although standard financial analysis would suggest they ought to be about
equal in percentage terms. This finding offers confirmation for the conventional wisdom that
technology adoption decisions are more sensitive to up-front cost considerations than to longerterm operating expenses.
Hassett and Metcalf (1995) found an even larger discrepancy between the effect of
changes in installation cost (here coming through tax credits) and changes in energy prices.
There are three interrelated possible explanations for this. One possibility is a behavioral bias
that causes purchasers to focus more on up-front cost than they do on the lifetime operating costs
of an investment. An alternative (but probably indistinguishable) view is that purchasers focus
equally on both, but uncertainty about future energy prices makes them give less weight to the
current energy price (which is only an indicator of future prices) than they do to the capital cost,

34
35

For further evidence and discussion, see the survey by Karshenas and Stoneman (1995).
The effects of energy prices can be interpreted as suggesting what the likely effects of taxes on energy use would
be, and the effects of changes in adoption costs can be interpreted as indicating what the effects of technology
adoption subsidies would be. See Section V of this chapter.

37

which is known.

A final interpretation might be that consumers actually have reasonably

accurate expectations about future energy prices, and their decisions reflect those expectations,
but our empirical proxies for their expectations are not correct.
Kerr and Newell (2000) used a duration model to analyze the influence of plant
characteristics and the stringency and the form of regulation on technology adoption decisions by
petroleum refineries during the leaded gasoline phasedown.

They found that increased

stringency (which raised the effective price of lead) encouraged greater adoption of leadreducing technology. They also found that larger and more technically sophisticated refineries
were more likely to adopt the new technology.
B. Market Failures in the Technology Diffusion Process
Inadequate Information.

As discussed in Section II, above, information plays an

important role in the technology diffusion process. There are two reasons why the importance of
information may result in market failure.

First, information is a public good that may be

expected in general to be underprovided by markets. Second, to the extent that the adoption of
the technology by some users is itself an important mode of information transfer to other parties,
adoption creates a positive externality and is therefore likely to proceed at a socially suboptimal
rate. 36 Howarth, et al. (2000) explored the significance of inadequate information in inhibiting
the diffusion of more efficient lighting equipment.

Metcalf and Hassett (1999) compared

available estimates of energy savings from new equipment to actual savings realized by users
who have installed the equipment.

36

Transfer of useful information via technology adoption is a special case of the more general phenomenon of
consumption externalities in technology adoption (Berndt and Pindyck 2000). If early adopters act randomly
rather than on the basis of better information, then consumption externalities can result in socially excessive
adoption or “herding” effects.

38

Agency Problems.

Also related to imperfect information are a variety of agency

problems that can inhibit the adoption of superior technology. The agency problem can be either
external or internal to organizations. An example of an external agency problem would be a
landlord/tenant relationship, in which a landlord pays for utilities but the tenant makes decisions
regarding which appliances to purchase, or vice versa. Internal agency problems can arise in
organizations where the individual or department responsible for equipment purchase or
maintenance differs from the individual or department whose budget covers utility costs. 37
DeCanio (1998) explored the significance of organizational factors in explaining firms’
perceived returns to installation of energy-efficient lighting. 38
Other Market Imperfections.

For households and small firms, adoption of new

technologies with significant capital costs may be constrained by inadequate access to financing.
Finally, in some countries, import barriers may inhibit the adoption of technology embodied in
foreign-produced goods (Reppelin-Hill 1999).
C. Other Barriers to Technology Diffusion
Uncertainty. Uncertainty is a factor limiting the adoption of new technology (Geroski
2000). Such uncertainty is not a market failure, merely a fact of economic life. Uncertainty can
be inherent in the technology itself, in the sense that its newness means that users are not sure
how it will be perform (Mansfield 1968). For resource-saving technology, there is the additional
uncertainty that the economic value of such savings depends on future resource prices, which are

37

For a discussion of the implications of the insulation of environmental decision-making in major firms from
relevant economic signals, see: Hockenstein et al., (1997). A series of related case studies are provided by
Reinhardt (2000).

38

Agency problems are probably part of the basis for the hypothesis that energy-saving investments are ignored
simply because energy is too small a fraction of overall costs to justify management attention and decisionmaking.
This idea actually dates back to Alfred Marshall; one of his four laws of demand was “the importance of being

39

themselves uncertain. This uncertainty about future returns means that there is an “option value”
associated with postponing the adoption of new technology (Pindyck 1991; Hassett and Metcalf
1995, 1996).
Discount Rates. Closely related to the issue of uncertainty is the issue of the discount
rate or investment hurdle rate used by purchasers in evaluating the desirability of new
technology, particularly resource-conserving technology. A large body of research demonstrates
that purchasers appear to use relatively high discount rates in evaluating energy-efficiency
investments (Hausman 1979; Ruderman et al. 1987; Ross 1990). The implicit or explicit use of
relatively high discount rates for energy savings does not represent a market failure in itself; it is
rather the manifestation of underlying aspects of the decision process including those just
discussed.

At least some portion of the discount rate premium is likely to be related to

uncertainty, although the extent to which the premium can be explained by uncertainty and
option value is subject to debate (Hassett and Metcalf 1995, 1996; Sanstad et al. 1995). 39 Capital
market failures that make it difficult to secure external financing for these investments may also
play a role.
D. Increasing Returns and Technology Lock-In
Increasing returns to adoption — in the form of learning curves and positive adoption
externalities — are a significant feature of market penetration processes for many technologies.
Learning-by-doing describes how cumulative production experience with a product leads to
reduced production costs, while learning-by-using captures how the value of a good increases for

unimportant.” Marshall (1922) argued that inputs with small factor shares would receive little attention from firms
and hence face inelastic factor demand curves.
39

Option values can arise for investments that can be postponed, and unless explicit account is taken of the option
value, it will result in an increased effective hurdle rate for the investment.

40

consumers as they gain experience using it. Positive adoption externalities arise when a nonuser’s probability of adoption is increased the greater the number of potential users who have
already adopted (Berndt and Pindyck 2000). This could occur because of fad or herding effects,
or because of “network externalities.” Network externalities exist if a product is technologically
more valuable to an individual user as other users adopt a compatible product (for example,
telephone and computer networks).

These phenomena can be critical to understanding the

existing technological system, forecasting how that system might evolve, and predicting the
potential effect of some policy or event.
Furthermore, increasing returns to adopting a particular technology or system have been
linked with so-called technology “lock-in,” in which a particular product, technical standard,
production process, or service is produced by a market, and it is difficult to move to an
alternative competing technology. Lock-in implies that, once led down a particular technological
path, the barriers to switching may be prohibitive. This can be problematic if it would have been
in the broader social interest to adopt a fundamentally different pattern of technological capacity.
In turn, it raises the question of whether policy interventions — possibly involving central
coordination and information assessment, direct technology subsidies, or publicly funded
research, development, demonstration, and procurement programs — might avoid undesirable
cases of technology lock-in by guiding technological paths in directions superior to those that
would be taken by the free market.
A classic, although somewhat controversial, example given is the QWERTY keyboard
layout (David 1985). As the story goes, the so-called Dvorak keyboard system is ergonomically
more efficient than the standard layout. In other words, we could all type faster and better if we
learned the Dvorak system. Unfortunately, the QWERTY system got there first, so to speak, and

41

we may be stuck with it, due in part to network externalities and learning-by-doing. In the
energy and environment arenas, similar claims are made regarding renewable energy (Cowan
and Kline 1996), alternative-fuel vehicles (Cowan and Hulten 1996), pesticides (Cowan and
Gumby 1996), electricity supply (Islas 1997), and nuclear power (Cowan 1990). The idea that
we are “locked into” a fossil-fuel-based energy system is a recurring theme in policy discussions
regarding climate change and other energy-related environmental problems.
Increasing returns are necessary but not sufficient conditions for persistent and
undesirable lock-in. There must also be costs associated with maintaining parallel rival networks
or “switching costs” associated with moving between systems (for example, cost of buying a
new keyboard or learning to type on a new keyboard layout). The presence of these factors,
however, in theory has the potential to lead to a market equilibrium in which a socially
suboptimal standard or technology is employed. Nonetheless, an inefficient outcome need not
necessarily result, and if it does it may not be lasting. Market forces will eventually tend to
challenge the predominance of an inferior technology (see Ruttan 1997).
A related characteristic of products or systems subject to increasing returns or “positive
feedbacks” is that history can be critical. While other markets can often be explained by current
demand and supply, markets subject to increasing returns may not be fully understandable
without knowing the pattern of historical technology adoption. Work by Arthur (1989, 1990,
1994), David (1985, 1997) and others (Foray 1997) on the importance of such “path
dependence” have focused on the lasting role that chance historical events can play in leading
market outcomes down one rather than another possible path. It is important to note that
increasing returns and technology lock-in do not necessarily imply market failure. In cases

42

where they may, the question becomes what policies, markets, or institutions, if any, can
ameliorate undesirable technological paths or eventual lock-in.
We are far from having a well-established theoretical or empirical basis for when
intervention is preferable to an unregulated market outcome or the form that intervention should
take. David (1997, p 36) suggested that perhaps the most productive question to ask is “how can
we identify situations in which it is likely that at some future time individuals really would be
better off had another equilibria been selected” from the beginning. One thing that public policy
can do, David suggested, is try to delay the market from irreversible commitments before enough
information has been obtained about the likely implications of an early, precedent-setting
decision. 40 One could construe current policy discussions surrounding certain biotechnology
developments as potentially doing just that. At a more aggregate level, there has been much
discussion of the question of whether it is possible for developing countries to take less
environmentally-damaging paths of development than did currently industrialized countries, for
example by relying less on fossil fuels. 41
Network Externalities.

Besen and Farrell (1994), Katz and Shapiro (1994), and

Liebowitz and Margolis (1994) together provide an overview of issues surrounding network
effects. Several properties of “network markets” distinguish them from other markets, influence
the strategies firms pursue, and may lead to market inefficiencies including oligopoly or
monopoly. Network markets tend to tip; that is, the coexistence of incompatible products may
be unstable, resulting in a single standard dominating the market. Two potential inefficiencies

40

See Majd and Pindyck (1989) for an analysis that explicitly treats learning-by-doing as an irreversible investment
decision.

41

See the chapter on “Environment and Development” for a discussion of related issues, including the
“environmental Kuznets curve.”

43

can also arise due to demand side coordination difficulties in the presence of network
externalities: excess inertia (users wait too long to adopt a new technology) or excess momentum
(users rush to an inferior technology to avoid being stranded) (see Farrell and Saloner 1985). The
role of information is central; the possibility of locking into an inferior technology is greater
when users have incomplete information, and it is expectations about the ultimate size of a
network that is crucial to which technology dominates. The root problem is the difficulty of
collective coordination in a decentralized process (David 1997).
One way to address this coordination problem is through standards — that is, a particular
technology chosen for universal adoption — which are often adopted by government or industry
associations when network externalities are present (telephone signals, for example). 42 While
standards may help avoid excess inertia and reduce users’ search and coordination costs, they
can also reduce diversity and may be subject to the strategy of a dominant firm. Katz and
Shapiro (1994) pointed out that while network effects can lead to market inefficiencies, there are
many possible market responses to these problems that do not necessarily involve government
intervention. Furthermore, there is a question about whether the government has the proper
incentives and information to improve the situation. Although network externalities can be an
important element of increasing returns, especially for information and communication
technologies, their role in environmental technologies is less evident.
Learning-by-Doing and Learning-by-Using. In early production stages, the manufacture
of technologically complex products is fraught with difficulties. As a firm produces more and
more of the product, however, it learns to produce it more efficiently and with higher levels of
quality. Production experience leads to the rationalization of processes, reduced waste, and

42

See, for example: Katz and Shapiro (1986, 1994).

44

greater labor force expertise. When this is so, average production costs will tend to decrease
over time and with increases in the firm's cumulative output, albeit at a decreasing rate.
Alternative terms used to denote this characteristic learning pattern and related phenomena
include “learning curve”, “experience curve”, “learning-by-doing”, and “progress function.”
Energy and environment-related examples include work related to renewable energy and climate
modeling (Nakicenovic 1996; Neij 1997; Grübler and Messner 1999; Grübler, et al. 1999),
nuclear reactors (Joskow and Rozanski 1979; Zimmerman 1982; Lester and McCabe 1993), and
electricity supply (Sharp and Price 1990). Learning-by-using, the demand-side counterpart of
learning-by-doing, can complement and reinforce these learning effects as adoption increases
with greater experience in use and increased productivity over time by the user (see Sunding and
Zilberman 2000).
A technology with an initial cost advantage can allow for pricing that increases market
share. In turn, increased market share can lead to even greater learning, cost reductions, and
competitive advantage — a virtuous circle for the firms producing the technology.
Unfortunately, as with network effects, this persistent cost advantage can create a kind of entry
barrier if knowledge spillovers are incomplete.

In the extreme, the cost advantage may

completely deter or “lock out” the entry of new technologies or rival systems, at least for a time.
Spence (1981) showed that the main factors affecting costs and competition in the presence of
learning are the rate of learning, the extent of learning-induced cost decline relative to the
market, the intertemporal pattern of demand (that is, demand elasticity and growth), and the
degree of spillovers of learning to other firms. 43

43

See also Fudenberg and Tirole (1983) on strategic aspects of learning-by-doing and early work by Arrow (1962b).
Yelle (1979), Dutton and Thomas (1984), Day and Montgomery (1983), and Argote and Epple (1990) together

45

V. Effects of Alternative Environmental Policy Instruments on Technological Change
The effect of environmental policies on the development and spread of new technologies
may, in the long run, be among the most important determinants of success or failure in
environmental protection (Kneese and Schultze 1975). 44

It has long been recognized that

alternative types of environmental policy instruments can have significantly different effects on
the rate and direction of technological change (Orr 1976). Environmental policies, particularly
those with large economic impacts (for example, those intended to address global climate
change) can be designed to foster rather than inhibit technological invention, innovation, and
diffusion (Kempe and Soete 1990).
A. Categories of Policy Instruments and Criteria for Comparisons
For purposes of examining the link between environmental policy instruments and
technological change, policies can be characterized as either command-and-control or marketbased approaches. Market-based instruments are mechanisms that encourage behavior through
market signals rather than through explicit directives regarding pollution control levels or
methods. These policy instruments — such as pollution charges, subsidies, tradeable permits,
and some types of information programs — have been described as “harnessing market forces.”
This is because if they are well designed and implemented, they encourage firms (and/or
individuals) to undertake pollution control efforts that are in their own interests and that
collectively meet policy goals. 45

provide an excellent overview of the fairly large empirical literature on learning curves, which spans the fields of
economics, marketing, and business administration.
44

Whereas we focus in this section of the chapter on the effects of environmental policy instruments on
technological change, it is also the case that exogenous technological change can differentially affect the
performance of alternative environmental policy instruments. For example, technological change in monitoring
and enforcement, such as improvements in remote-sensing of motor vehicle emissions, could render particular
policy instruments that focus on emissions, rather than abatement equipment, more attractive.

45

See the chapter on “Experience with Market-Based Instruments for Environmental Protection” in this volume.

46

Conventional approaches to regulating the environment are often referred to as
“command-and-control” regulations, since they allow relatively little flexibility in the means of
achieving goals. Such regulations tend to force firms to take on similar shares of the pollutioncontrol burden, regardless of the cost. Command-and-control regulations do this by setting
uniform standards for firms, the most prevalent of which are technology- and performance-based
standards.

Technology-based standards specify the method, and sometimes the actual

equipment, that firms must use to comply with a particular regulation. A performance standard
sets a uniform control target for firms, while allowing some latitude in how this target is met.
Holding all firms to the same target can be expensive and, in some circumstances,
counterproductive. While standards may effectively limit emissions of pollutants, they typically
exact relatively high costs in the process, by forcing some firms to resort to unduly expensive
means of controlling pollution. Because the costs of controlling emissions may vary greatly
among firms, and even among sources within the same firm, 46 the appropriate technology in one
situation may not be appropriate (cost-effective) in another.
All of these forms of intervention have the potential for inducing or forcing some
amount of technological change, because by their very nature they induce or require firms to do
things they would not otherwise do. Performance and technology standards can be explicitly
designed to be "technology forcing," mandating performance levels that are not currently viewed
as technologically feasible or mandating technologies that are not fully developed. One problem
with these approaches, however, is that while regulators can typically assume that some amount
of improvement over existing technology will always be feasible, it is impossible to know how
much. Standards must either be made unambitious, or else run the risk of being ultimately
unachievable, leading to great political and economic disruption (Freeman and Haveman 1972).

46

Control costs can vary enormously due to a firm’s production design, physical configuration, inputs, age of assets,
and other factors.

47

Technology standards are particularly problematic, since they tend to freeze the
development of technologies that might otherwise result in greater levels of control. Under
regulations that are targeted at technologies, as opposed to emissions levels, no financial
incentive exists for businesses to exceed control targets, and the adoption of new technologies is
discouraged. Under a “Best Available Control Technology” (BACT) standard, a business that
adopts a new method of pollution abatement may be “rewarded” by being held to a higher
standard of performance and thereby not benefit financially from its investment, except to the
extent that its competitors have even more difficulty reaching the new standard (Hahn and
Stavins 1991). On the other hand, if third parties can invent and patent better equipment, they
can — in theory — have a ready market. Under such conditions, a BACT type of standard can
provide a positive incentive for technology innovation. Unfortunately, as we note below, there
has been very little theoretical or empirical analysis of such technology-forcing regulations.
In contrast with such command-and-control regulations, market-based instruments can
provide powerful incentives for companies to adopt cheaper and better pollution-control
technologies. This is because with market-based instruments, it pays firms to clean up a bit more
if a sufficiently low-cost method (technology or process) of doing so can be identified and
adopted.
In theory, the relative importance of the dynamic effects of alternative policy instruments
on technological change (and hence long-term compliance costs) is greater in the case of those
environmental problems which are of great magnitude (in terms of anticipated abatement costs)
and/or very long time horizon. 47 Hence, the increased attention that is being given by scholars

47

Parry et al. (2000) showed that the importance of the welfare gains from cost-reducing technological change
relative to the welfare gains from optimal pollution control using existing technology tends to be higher when
marginal benefits are flatter, marginal costs are steeper (and optimal abatement is lower), the discount rate is
lower, the rate of technological change is faster, and research costs are lower.

48

and by policy makers to the problem of global climate change 48 has greatly increased the
prominence of the issues that are considered in this part of the chapter.
There are two principal ways in which environmental policy instruments can be
compared with regard to their effects on technological change. First and foremost, scholars have
asked — both with theoretical models and with empirical analyses — the most direct question:
what effects do particular instruments have on the rate and direction of relevant technological
change? In keeping with the Schumpeterian trichotomy identified above, such investigations can
be carried out with reference to the pace of invention, innovation, or diffusion of new
technologies.
It is also possible to ask whether environmental policies encourage efficient rates (and
directions) of technological change, or more broadly, whether such policies result in overall
economic efficiency (that is, whether the efficient degree of environmental protection is
achieved). This second principal mode for comparison is linked more directly with criteria
associated with welfare economics, but such comparisons have been made much less frequently
than have direct assessments of technology effects. Within the limits of the existing literature,
we consider both sets of criteria. 49
Most of the work in the economics literature on the dynamic effects of environmental
policy instruments on technological change has been theoretical, rather than empirical, and so we
consider the theoretical literature first.

48

See the chapter on “The Economics of Climate Policy” in this volume. For particular attention to the links
between technological change and global climate policy, see: Jaffe, et al. (1999).

49

Enforceability of environmental regulations is another criteria for policy choice that it is rarely emphasized in the
technology literature. See Macauley and Brennan (1998) for an evaluation of the potential role of remote sensing
technology in the enforcement of environmental regulations.

49

B. Theoretical Analyses of the Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments
As emphasized above, both supply-side and demand-side influences affect each of the
three stages of technological change, but demand-side factors become relatively more important
the further we progress from invention, to innovation, to diffusion. The major force encouraging
adoption behavior is essentially anticipated utilization, just as the major force affecting
commercialization appears to be expected sales (adoption). The upstream link with inventive
activity, however, is somewhat weaker. We begin our review of theoretical analyses of the
effects of policy instruments with studies that have focused on effects on invention and
innovation, moving subsequently to studies that focus on effects on diffusion.

1. Theoretical Analyses of Effects of Policy Instruments on Invention and
Innovation
Although, as we suggested above, decisions about technology commercialization are
partly a demand-side function of anticipated sales (adoption), the relevant literature comparing
the effects of alternative environmental policy instruments has given greater attention to the
supply side, focusing on incentives for firm-level decisions to incur R&D costs in the face of
uncertain outcomes. Models of innovation have either allowed for firms to choose their research
and development expenditures (Magat 1978, 1979) or have somehow incorporated uncertainty
over the outcome of research (Biglaiser and Horowitz 1995; Biglaiser, et al. 1995). Such R&D
could be either inventive or innovative, and the theoretical literature in this area makes no
particular distinction.
Magat (1978) compared effluent taxes and CAC standards using an innovation
possibilities frontier (IPF) model of induced innovation, where research can be used to augment
capital or labor in a standard production function. He compared the output rate, effluent rate,
output-effluent ratio, and bias (in terms of labor or capital augmenting technical change), but this
produced ambiguous results.

Magat (1979) compared taxes, subsidies, permits, effluent

standards, and technology standards, and showed that all but technology standards would induce
50

innovation biased toward emissions reduction. 50 If taxes and permits are set so that they lead to
the same reduction in emissions as an effluent standard at all points in time, then the three
instruments provide the same incentives to innovate.
A theoretical ranking of policy instruments in terms of their ability to achieve the optimal
level of innovation was provided by Fischer, et al. (1998). Once the benefits of innovation were
assessed (rather than the level of innovation), however, an unambiguous ranking of policy
instruments was not forthcoming. Rather, the ranking of policy instruments was shown by the
authors to depend on firms’ adoption costs, environmental benefit functions, and the number of
firms producing emissions. The basic model consists of three stages. First, firms decide how
much to invest in R&D by setting their marginal cost of innovation equal to their marginal
benefits.

Second, firms decide whether or not to adopt the technology, use an (inferior)

imitation, or do nothing. Finally, firms minimize control expenditures by setting their marginal
costs equal to the price of pollution. Policy instruments affect the firms’ decisions through four
effects: (1) an abatement cost affect; (2) an emissions payment effect; (3) an imitation effect; and
(4) an adoption price effect. Generally, market-based instruments encourage innovation through
the abatement cost effect, but discourage it through the imitation and adoption price effects,
although there is some variation in this pattern depending on the instrument. Table 3 summarizes
the direction of the four effects under three alternative policy instruments. The ranking of
instruments depends on the relative strength of the four effects.

50

Technology standards provided no incentives for innovation whatsoever.

51

Table 3: Theoretical Determinants of the Incentives for Innovation
(Fischer, et al. 1998)

Emissions Tax

Freely-Allocated
Tradeable Permits

Auctioned
Tradeable Permits

Abatement Cost Effect

(+)

(+)

(+)

Imitation Effect

(-)

(-)

(-)

Emissions Payment Effect

None

None

(+)

Adoption Price Effect

None

(-)

(-)

Determinant

In an analysis that is reminiscent of Fischer, et al. (1998), Ulph (1998) compared the
effects of pollution taxes and command-and-control standards, and found that increases in the
stringency of the standard or tax had ambiguous effects on the level of R&D, because
environmental regulations have two competing effects: a direct effect of increasing costs, which
increases the incentives to invest in R&D in order to develop cost-saving pollution-abatement
methods; and an indirect effect of reducing product output, which reduces the incentive to
engage in R&D. 51
Laffont and Tirole (1996a) recognized the inability of the government to induce the
optimal level of innovation through an ordinary tradeable permit system, and asked how such
systems could — in theory — be modified to achieve the desired incentive effects. They
demonstrated that although spot markets for permits cannot induce the socially optimal degree of
innovation, futures markets can improve the situation (Laffont and Tirole 1996a). 52

51

In addition, Ulph (1998) examined a situation where two firms produce identical products with two characteristics.
If both firms innovate on the same characteristic, price competition will eliminate any gains from R&D; but
consumer pressure can affect the direction of R&D by influencing the characteristic that firms focus on improving.
See also: Ulph and Ulph (1996).

52

In a subsequent analysis, Laffont and Tirole (1996b) examined the government’s ability to influence the degree of
innovative activity by setting the number of permits (and permit prices) in various ways in a dynamic setting.

52

The literature on the effects of alternative policy instruments on technology innovation in
non-competitive settings is limited.

Montero (2000) compared instruments under non-

competitive circumstances, but found — not surprisingly — that the results are less clear than
with perfect competition is assumed. He modeled a two-firm oligopoly facing environmental
regulation in the form of emissions standards, freely-allocated permits, auctioned permits, and
taxes. Firms can invest in R&D to lower their marginal abatement costs, and they can also
benefit from spillover effects from the other firm’s R&D efforts. In choosing whether and how
much to invest in R&D in order to maximize profits, a firm must consider two effects of its
investment choice: (1) the increase in profits due to a decrease in its abatement costs (less the
R&D cost); and (2) the decrease in profits due to changes in the other firm’s output, as a result of
spillover from the first firm’s R&D. The result is that standards and taxes yield higher incentives
for R&D when the market is characterized by Cournot competition, but the opposite holds when
the market is characterized by Bertrand competition. 53
Cadot and Sinclair-Desgagne (1996) posed the following question:

if a potentially

regulated industry has private information on the costs of technological advances in pollution
control (frequently a reasonable assumption), then since the industry has an incentive to claim
that such technologies are prohibitively expensive (even if that is not the case), can the
government somehow design an incentive scheme that will avoid the problems of this
information asymmetry? The authors developed a solution to this game-theoretic problem. Not
surprisingly, the scheme involves government issued threats of regulation (which diminish over
time as the firm completes stages of technology development).
Taking a somewhat broader view than most economic studies, Carraro and Siniscalco
(1994) suggested that environmental policy instruments should be viewed jointly with traditional
industrial policy instruments in determining the optimal way to attain a given degree of pollution

53

Addressing the same trade-off, Katsoulacos and Xepapadeas (1996) found that a simultaneous tax on pollution
emissions and subsidy to environmental R&D may be better suited to overcoming the joint market failure
(negative externality from pollution and positive externality or spillover effects of R&D).

53

abatement. They showed that innovation subsidies can be used to attain the same environmental
target, but without the output reductions that result from pollution taxes. Similarly, Carraro and
Soubeyran (1996) compared an emission tax and an R&D subsidy, and found that an R&D
subsidy is desirable if the output contractions induced by the tax are small or if the government
finds output contractions undesirable for other reasons.

2. Theoretical Analyses of Effects of Policy Instruments on Diffusion
The predominant theoretical framework for analyses of diffusion effects has been what
could be called the “discrete technology choice” model: firms contemplate the use of a certain
technology which reduces marginal costs of pollution abatement and which has a known fixed
cost associated with it.

While some authors have presented this approach as a model of

“innovation,” 54 it is more appropriately viewed as a model of adoption.
With such models, several theoretical studies have found that the incentive for the
adoption of new technologies is greater under market-based instruments than under direct
regulation (Zerbe 1970; 55 Downing and White 1986; Milliman and Prince 1989; Jung, et al.
1996). With the exception of Downing and White (1986), all of these studies examined the gross
impacts of alternative policy instruments on the quantity of technology adoption. 56
Theoretical comparisons among market-based instruments have produced some
inconsistencies, but these disagreements seem to have been resolved. In a frequently-cited

54

Downing and White (1986) and Malueg (1989) framed their work in terms of “innovation.” Milliman and Prince
(1989) used one model to discuss both diffusion and “innovation,” the latter being defined essentially as the initial
use of the technology by an “innovating” firm.

55

Zerbe (1970) compared taxes, subsidies, and direct regulation (emissions standards). If a technology reduces
emissions levels, rather than costs, taxes are still superior to direct regulation, but subsidies are not.

56

Downing and White (1986) compared market-based instruments and command-and-control standards, and found
for the case of small changes in emissions (so that the optimal pollution tax or permit quantity is unchanged) that
all of the instruments except CAC standards would induce the socially optimal level of adoption. But for nonmarginal emission changes, where the control authority does not modify the policy (tax or quantity of available
permits), market-based instruments would induce too much diffusion, relative to the social optimum.

54

article, Milliman and Prince (1989) examined firm-level incentives for technology diffusion
provided by five instruments: command-and-control; emission taxes; emission subsidies; freelyallocated emission permits, and auctioned emission permits. Firm-level incentives for adoption
in this representative-firm model were pictured as the consequent change in producer surplus.
They found that auctioned permits would provide the largest adoption incentive of any
instrument, with emissions taxes and subsidies second, and freely allocated permits and direct
controls last. The Milliman and Prince (1989) study was criticized by Marin (1991) because of
its assumption of identical firms, but it was subsequently shown that the results remain largely
unchanged with heterogeneous abatement costs (Milliman and Prince 1992).
In 1996, Jung, et al. built on Milliman and Prince's basic framework for comparing the
effects of alternative policy instruments, but rather than focusing on firm-level changes in
producer surplus, they considered heterogeneous firms, and modeled the “market-level
incentive” created by various instruments. 57 Their rankings echoed those of Milliman and Prince
(1989): auctioned permits provided the greatest incentive, followed by taxes and subsidies, free
permits, and performance standards.
More recent theoretical analyses (Parry 1998; Denicolò 1999; Keohane 1999) have
clarified several aspects of these rankings. First, there is the question of relative firm-level
incentives to adopt a new, cost-saving technology when the price of pollution (permit price or tax
level) is endogenous. Milliman and Prince (1989), as well as Jung, et al. (1996), argued that
auctioned permits would provide greater incentives for diffusion than freely-allocated permits,
because technology diffusion lowers the equilibrium permit price, bringing greater aggregate
benefits of adoption in a regime where all sources are permit buyers (that is, auctions). But when
technology diffusion lowers the market price for tradeable permits, all firms benefit from this

57

This measure is simply the aggregate cost savings to the industry as a whole from adopting the technology.

55

lower price regardless of whether or not they adopt the given technology (Keohane 1999). Thus,
if firms are price takers in the permit market, auctioned permits provide no more adoption
incentive than freely-allocated permits.
The overall result is that both auctioned and freely-allocated permits are inferior in their
diffusion incentives to emission tax systems (but superior to command-and-control instruments).
Under tradeable permits, technology diffusion lowers the equilibrium permit price, thereby
reducing the incentive for participating firms to adopt. Thus, a permit system provides a lower
adoption incentive than a tax, assuming the two instruments are equivalent before diffusion
occurs (Denicolò 1999; Keohane 1999). 58
Complete theoretical analysis of the effects of alternative policy instruments on the rate
of technological change must include modeling of the government’s response to technological
change, because the degree to which regulators respond to technologically-induced changes in
abatement costs affects the magnitude of the adoption incentive associated with alternative
policy instruments. 59 Because technology diffusion presumably lowers the aggregate marginal
abatement cost function, it results in a change in the efficient level of control. Hence, following
diffusion, the optimal agency response is to set a more ambitious target. Milliman and Price
(1989) examined the incentives facing private industry, under alternative policy instruments, to
oppose such policy changes. Their conclusion was that firms would oppose optimal agency

58

59

The difference between diffusion incentives of permits and taxes/subsidies depends upon four conditions: (1)
some diffusion occurs; (2) firms have rational expectations and recognize that diffusion lowers the permit price;
(3) taxes and permits are equivalent ex ante; and (4) the level of regulation is fixed over the time horizon
considered. Parry (1998) found that the welfare gain induced by an emissions tax is significantly greater than that
induced by tradable permits only in the case of very major innovations. Similarly, Requate (1998) included an
explicit model of the final output market, and finds that whether (auctioned) permits or taxes provide stronger
incentives to adopt an improved technology depends upon empirical values of relevant parameters. See, also:
Parry (1995).
See our discussion, above, of “Induced Innovation and Optimal Environmental Policy” in Section III.D.

56

adjustment of the policy under all instruments except taxes. Under an emissions tax, the optimal
agency response to cost-reducing technological change is to lower the tax rate (assuming convex
damages); under a subsidy, the optimal response is to lower the subsidy; under tradeable permit
systems, the optimal response is to decrease the number of available permits, and thereby drive
up the permit price. Thus, firms have unambiguous incentives to support the optimal agency
response only under an emissions tax regime.
In a comparison of tradeable permits and pollution taxes, Biglaiser, et al. (1995)
examined these instruments’ ability to achieve the first-best outcome in a dynamic setting. They
found that effluent taxes can do so, but permits cannot. With an effluent tax, the optimal tax is
presumably determined by marginal damages (which the authors assume to be constant),
yielding a policy which is time consistent. Whether or not firms adopt a cost-saving technology,
the government has no incentive to change the tax rate.

From this perspective, however,

tradeable permits are not time consistent, because the optimal number of permits in each period
depends on both firms’ costs, which are determined by all previous investments, and marginal
damages. With constant marginal damages, and marginal abatement costs decreasing over time,
the optimal number of permits should also be decreasing over time. Firms may internalize this,
and thereby invest less than optimally in pollution control technology.
The unambiguous result of Biglaiser, et al. (1995) depends, however, on the assumption
of constant marginal damages. If marginal damages are not constant, then the optimal policy is
determined by the interaction of marginal damages and marginal abatement costs for both taxes
and permits. The result appears to be analogous to Weitzman's (1974) rule: if the marginal
damage curve is relatively flat and there is uncertainty in marginal costs (from the regulator's

57

perspective) due to potential innovation at the firm level, then a price instrument is more
efficient.

C. Empirical Analyses of the Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments
Empirical analyses of the relative effects of alternative environmental policy instruments
on the rate and direction of technological change have been limited in number. Most analyses
have investigated technological change in energy-efficiency, and thus are related to
environmental policy partly because of the relevance of fossil-fuel energy generation for global
climate policy and other air pollution problems. These studies can be considered within the three
stages of technological change — invention, innovation, and diffusion. We take these in order,
beginning with invention and innovation.

1. Empirical Analyses of Effects of Policy Instruments on Invention and
Innovation
As described in Section III.A, above, the innovation process can be thought of as
affecting improvements in the characteristics of products on the market, and the process can be
framed as the shifting inward over time of a frontier representing the tradeoffs between different
product characteristics for the range of models available on the market. If one axis is the cost of
the product and another axis is the energy flow associated with a product, that is, its energy
intensity, then innovation is represented by inward shifts of the curve — greater energy
efficiency at the same cost, or lower cost for given energy efficiency. With this approach,
Newell, et. al (1999) assessed the effects of changes in energy prices and in energy-efficiency
standards in stimulating innovation (see Section III.C, above). Energy price changes induced
both commercialization of new models and elimination of old models. Regulations, however,
worked largely through energy-inefficient models being dropped, since that is the intended effect
58

of the energy-efficiency standards (models below a certain energy efficiency level may not be
offered for sale).
A closely related approach to investigating the same phenomena is that of hedonic price
functions. Given the attention paid to automobile fuel economy over the past two decades, it is
not surprising that several hedonic studies of automobiles have addressed or focused on energyefficiency, including Ohta and Griliches (1976) and Goodman (1983). Atkinson and Halvorsen
(1984) found that the fuel efficiency of the new car fleet responds more than proportionally to
changes in expected fuel prices. Using an analogue to the hedonic price technique, Wilcox
(1984) constructed a quality-adjusted measure of automobile fuel economy over the period
1952–1980, finding that it was positively related to oil prices. Ohta and Griliches (1986) found
that gasoline price changes over the period 1970–1981 could alone explain much of the observed
change in related automobile characteristics.
More recently, Pakes, et. al (1993) investigated the effects of gasoline prices on the fuel
economy of motor vehicles offered for sale, and found that the observed increase in miles per
gallon (mpg) from 1977 onward was largely due to the consequent change in the mix of vehicles
on the market. Fewer low-mpg cars were marketed, and more high-mpg cars were marketed.
Subsequently, Berry, et al. (1996) combined plant-level cost data for the automobile industry and
information on the characteristics of models that were produced at each plant to estimate a
hedonic cost function — the supply-side component of the hedonic price function — finding that
quality-adjusted costs generally increased over the period 1972–1982, thus coinciding with
rising gasoline prices and emission standards.
Finally, Goldberg (1998) combined a demand-side model of discrete vehicle choice and
utilization with a supply-side model of oligopoly and product differentiation to estimate the

59

effects of Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFE) standards on the fuel economy of
the new car fleet. She found that automobile fuel operating costs have had a significant effect,
although a gasoline tax of a magnitude that could match the effect of CAFE on fuel economy
would have to be very large. 60

2. Empirical Analyses of Effects of Policy Instruments on Diffusion
Turning to the effects of environmental policy instruments on technology diffusion, the
analysis by Jaffe and Stavins (1995), described above in Section IV.A, provided evidence of the
likely effects of energy taxes and technology adoption subsidies on the adoption of thermal
insulation technologies in new residential construction in the United States.

Their findings

suggest the response to energy taxes would be positive and significant, and that equivalent
percentage technology cost subsidies would be about three times as effective as taxes in
encouraging adoption, although standard financial analysis would suggest they ought to be about
equal in percentage terms. These results were corroborated by the study of residential energy
conservation investments by Hassett and Metcalf (1995), also described in Section IV.A, which
suggested that tax credits for adoption would be up to eight times more effective than
“equivalent” energy taxes.
Although empirical evidence from these two studies indicate that subsidies may be more
effective than “equivalent” taxes in encouraging technology diffusion, it is important to
recognize some disadvantages of such subsidy approaches. First, unlike energy prices, (energyefficiency) adoption subsidies do not provide incentives to reduce utilization.

Second,

technology subsidies and tax credits can require large public expenditures per unit of effect,
since consumers who would have purchased the product even in the absence of the subsidy still

60

In one of the few attempts to analyze directly the effects of environmental policy instruments on technology
innovation, Bellas (1998) investigated changes in scrubbers at electric power plants.

60

receive it.

In the presence of fiscal constraints on public spending, this raises questions about

the feasibility of subsidies that would be sizable enough to have desired effects. 61
What about conventional command-and-control approaches? Jaffe and Stavins (1995)
also examined the effects of more conventional regulations on technology diffusion, in the form
of state building codes. They found no discernable effects. It is unclear to what extent this is
due to inability to measure the true variation across states in the effectiveness of codes, or to
codes that were in many cases not binding relative to typical practice. This is a reminder,
however, that although energy taxes, for example, will always have some effect, typical
command-and-control approaches may have little effect if they are set below existing standards
of practice.
One of the great successes during the modern era of environmental policy was the
phasedown of lead in gasoline, which took place in the United States principally during the
decade of the 1980's. The phasedown was accomplished through a tradeable permit system
among refineries, whereby lead rights could be exchanged and/or banked for later use.

62

As

noted in Section IV.A, Kerr and Newell (2000) used a duration model to assess the effects of the
phasedown program on technology diffusion.

They found that the tradeable permit system

provided incentives for efficient technology adoption decisions. Refineries with relatively low
costs of individual compliance (“sellers” versus “buyers” in the permit market) were more likely
to adopt lead-reducing technology than they would have been under a conventional performance
standard. 63

61

Mountain, et al. (1989) attempted to assess the effects of relative prices on relevant technology diffusion in the
Ontario manufacturing sector from 1962 to 1984. They found that fuel choices changed in response to changes in
fuel prices, but given the nature of their analysis, they could not distinguish between product substitution and
technology diffusion.

62

The tradeable permit system was also a great success. See the chapter on “Experience with Market-Based
Instruments for Environmental Protection” in this volume.

63

Another prominent application of tradeable permit systems which provides an opportunity for empirical analysis of
the effects of policy instruments on technology diffusion is the sulfur dioxide allowance trading program, initiated
under the U.S. Clean Air Act amendments of 1990. Several research efforts are currently underway, and a number
of relevant hypotheses are described by Stavins (1998).

61

Attention has also been given to the effects on technology diffusion of voluntary
environmental programs. Howarth, et al. (2000) examined two voluntary programs of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Green Lights and Energy Star programs, both of which
are intended to encourage greater private industry use of energy-saving technologies. A natural
question from economics is why would firms carry out additional technology investments as part
of a voluntary agreement? The authors respond that there are a set of agency problems that
inhibit economically wise adoption of some technologies (see discussion of these issues in
Section IV). For example, most energy-saving investments are small, and senior staff may
rationally choose to restrict funds for small projects that cannot be perfectly monitored. The
Green Lights program may be said to attempt to address this type of agency problem by
providing information on savings opportunities at the level of the firm where decisions are
made. 64
Although there are strong theoretical arguments against the efficiency or costeffectiveness of command-and-control technology standards, there has been relatively little
empirical research on the actual effects of technology-mandates on the rate and direction of
technology diffusion. In addition to the work described above by Jaffe and Stavins (1995), in
which building codes were found to be ineffective at encouraging the adoption of particular
energy-efficiency technologies in new home construction, Purvis and Outlaw (1995) carried out
a case study of EPA’s permitting process for acceptable water-pollution control technologies in
the U.S. livestock production sector. Those authors concluded that the relevant regulations
encouraged the use of “time-tested” technologies that provided lower levels of environmental
protection than other more innovative ones, simply because producers knew that EPA was more
likely to approve a permit that employed the established approach.

64

Another potential explanation arises where the benefits and costs of a project are born by different units of a firm.
Under such circumstances, projects that are good for the firm may not be undertaken. See discussion of this
phenomenon in the chapter on “Experience with Market-Based Instruments for Environmental Protection.”

62

More striking in regard to the effects of command-and control standards on technology
diffusion (and environmental quality) is a body of research that has examined the effects of such
standards when combined with “differential environmental regulations.” In many situations
where command-and-control standards have been used, the required level of pollution abatement
has been set at a far more stringent level for new sources than for existing ones. 65

There is

empirical evidence that such differential environmental regulations have lengthened the time
before plants were retired (Maloney and Brady 1988; Nelson et al. 1993). Further, this dual
system can actually worsen pollution by encouraging firms to keep older, dirtier plants in
operation (Stewart 1981; Gollop and Roberts 1983; McCubbins et al. 1989).
In addition to economic incentives, direct regulation, and information provision, some
research has emphasized the role that “informal regulation” or community pressure can play in
encouraging the adoption of environmentally clean technologies. For example, in an analysis of
fuel adoption decisions for traditional brick kilns in Mexico, Blackman and Bannister (1998)
suggested that community pressure applied by competing firms and local non-governmental
organizations was associated with increased adoption of cleaner fuels, even when those fuels had
relatively high variable costs.
VI. Conclusion
In opening this chapter, we suggested that an understanding of the process of
technological change is important for economic analysis of environmental issues for two broad
reasons. First, the environmental impact of social and economic activity is greatly affected by
the rate and direction of technological change. This linkage occurs because new technologies
may either create or mitigate pollution, and because many environmental problems and policy

65

It could be argued that new plants ought to have somewhat more stringent standards if their abatement costs are
lower, although such standards should obviously be linked with actual abatement costs, not with the proxy of plant
vintage.

63

responses are evaluated over timeframes in which the cumulative impact of technological
changes is likely to be large.
The importance of the first link is manifest in determining the economic and
environmental “baseline” against which to measure the impacts of proposed policies. That is,
before we can discuss what we should or should not do about some environmental problem, we
need to forecast how severe the problem will be in the absence of any action. Such forecasts are
always based, in some way, on extrapolation of historical experience. Within that historical
experience, the processes of technological change have been operating, often with significant
consequences for the severity of environmental impacts. Forecasts for the future based on this
historical experience depend profoundly on the relative magnitude of the effects of price-induced
technological change, learning-by-doing and learning-by-using, public sector R&D, and
exogenous technical progress. Sorting out these influences with respect to environmentally
relevant technologies and sectors poses a major modeling and empirical challenge.
A particularly important aspect of this set of issues is the historical significance of “lockin” phenomena for environmentally significant technologies.

We understand the theory of

increasing returns and other sources of path dependence, but we have almost no evidence
regarding their quantitative importance. We know that it is theoretically possible, for example,
that the dominant place of the internal combustion engine in our economy results from a
combination of historical accidents and path dependence. But the actual magnitude of such
effects, relative to the role played by the superior attractiveness of the technology to individual
users, has enormous consequences for the question of whether developing nations will be able or
likely to find a different path.

64

Another important area is in the conceptual and empirical modeling of how the various
stages of technological change are interrelated, how they unfold over time, and the differential
impact that various policies (for example, public-sector R&D, R&D subsidies to the private
sector, environmental taxes, information programs) may have on each phase of technological
change. We have reviewed the existing literature on various aspects of technology policy, but
there has been relatively little empirical analysis of these policy options directed specifically at
the development of environmentally beneficial technology.
There has been much debate surrounding the “win-win” hypothesis. Much of this debate
has been explicitly or implicitly ideological (Do firms really profit-maximize) or political (Can
we afford a variety of new environmental mandates).

More useful would be detailed

examinations regarding the kinds of policies and the kinds of private-sector institutions that are
most likely to generate innovative, low-cost solutions to environmental problems.
This observation is a natural bridge to the second broad linkage between technology and
environment, the effect of environmental policy interventions on the process of technological
change. The empirical evidence to date is generally consistent with theoretical findings that
market-based instruments for environmental protection are likely to have significantly greater,
positive impacts over time than command-and-control approaches on the invention, innovation,
and diffusion of desirable, environmentally-friendly technologies.

Further, these empirical

studies suggest that the response of technological change to relevant price changes can be
surprisingly swift, typically less than five years for much of the response in terms of patenting
activity and introduction of new model offerings. Substantial diffusion can sometimes take
considerably longer, depending on the rate of retirement of previously installed equipment. The
longevity of much equipment reinforces the importance of taking a longer-term view toward

65

improvements — on the order of decades. Existing empirical studies have also produced some
results that are not consistent with theoretical expectations, such as the finding from two
independent analyses that the diffusion of energy-efficiency technologies is more sensitive to
variation in adoption-cost than to commensurate energy price changes.

Further theoretical

and/or empirical work may resolve this apparent anomaly.
A variety of refutable hypotheses that emerge from theoretical models of alternative
instruments have not been tested rigorously with empirical data. For example, the predictions
from theory regarding the ranking of alternative environmental policy instruments is quite clear,
but much of the empirical analysis has focused on energy-efficient technologies, rather than
pollution abatement technologies per se. The increased use of market-based instruments and
performance-based standards has brought with it considerably more data with which hypotheses
regarding the effects of policy instruments on technology innovation and diffusion can be tested.
The potential long-run consequences of today’s policy choices create a high priority for
broadening and deepening our understanding of the effects of environmental policy on
innovation and diffusion of new technology. Unfortunately, these issues cannot be resolved at a
purely theoretical level, or on the basis of aggregate empirical analyses. For both benefit-cost
and cost-effectiveness analysis, we need to know the magnitudes of these effects, and these
magnitudes are likely to differ across markets, technologies, and institutional settings. Thus,
taking seriously the notion of induced technological change and its consequences for
environmental policy requires going beyond demonstration studies that test whether or not such
effects exist, to carry out detailed analyses in a variety of sectors in order to understand the
circumstances under which they are large or small.

This will require significant research

attention from multiple methodological viewpoints over an extended period of time. But the

66

alternative is continuing to formulate public policies with significant economic and
environmental consequences without being able to take into account what is going on “inside the
black box” of technological change.

67

References
Abramowitz, M, (1956), “ Resource and Output Trends in the U.S. since 1870”, American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 46:5-23.
Ahmad, S. (1966), "On the Theory of Induced Innovation", Economic Journal 76:344-357.
Aigner D.J. and P. Schmidt (1980), “Specification and Estimation of Frontier Production, Profit
and Cost Functions”, Journal of Econometrics 13:1-138.
Argote, L. and D. Epple (1990), “Learning Curves in Manufacturing”, Science 247:920-924.
Arrow, K.J, (1962a), “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention”, in: R.
Nelson, ed., The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity (Princeton University Press,
Princeton NJ)
Arrow, K.J. (1962b), “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing”, Review of Economic
Studies 29:155-173.
Arthur, W.B. (1989), “Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-In by Historical
Events”, Economic Journal 99:116-131.
Arthur, W.B. (1990), “Positive Feedbacks in the Economy”, Scientific American 262:92-95, 9899.
Arthur, W.B. (1994), “Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy”, Economics,
Cognition, and Society series (University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor).
Atkinson, S.E. and R. Halvorsen (1984), “A New Hedonic Technique for Estimating Attribute
Demand: An Application to the Demand for Automobile Fuel Efficiency”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 66:417–426.
Bellas, A.S. (1998), “Empirical Evidence of Advances in Scrubber Technology”, Resource and
Energy Economics 20:327-343.
Berman, E. and L. Bui (1998), “Environmental Regulation and Labor Demand : Evidence from
the South Coast Air Basin”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
6776.
Berndt, E.R. and D.O. Wood (1986), “Energy Price Shocks and Productivity Growth in U.S. and
UK Manufacturing”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy 2:1-31.
Berndt, E.R. and R. S. Pindyck (2000), “Consumption Externalities and Diffusion in
Pharmaceutical Markets: Antiulcer Drugs,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 7772.
Berry, S., S. Kortum, and A. Pakes (1996), "Environmental Change and Hedonic Cost Functions
for Automobiles", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. 93:1273112738.
Besen, S.M. and J. Farrell (1994), “Choosing How to Compete: Strategies and Tactics in
Standardization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 8:117-131.
Biglaiser, G., J.K. Horowitz (1995), “Pollution Regulation and Incentives for Pollution-Control
Research”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 3:663-684.
Biglaiser, G., J.K. Horowitz, and J. Quiggin (1995), "Dynamic Pollution Regulation", Journal of
Regulatory Economics 8:33-44.
Binswanger, H.P. (1974), "A Microeconomic Approach to Innovation", Economic Journal
84:940-958.
Binswanger, H.P. and V.W. Ruttan (1978), Induced Innovation: Technology, Institutions, and
Development (John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD).
68

Blackman, A. and G. J. Bannister (1998), "Community pressure and clean technology in the
informal sector: An econometric analysis of the adoption of propane by traditional
Mexican brickmakers" Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 35(1): 121.
Bound, J., C. Cummins, Z. Griliches, B. Hall and A. Jaffe (1984), “Who Does R&D and Who
Patents?”, in: Z. Griliches, ed., R&D, Patents and Productivity (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago).
Boyd, G. and J. McClelland (1999), "The Impact of Environmental Constraints on Productivity
Improvement and Energy Efficiency an Integrated Paper and Steel Plants", The Journal
of Economics and Environmental Management, 38:121-146.
Boyd, G. and J. Pang (2000), "Estimating the Linkage between Energy Efficiency and
Productivity", Energy Policy, 28:289-96.
Bresnahan, T. and M. Trajtenberg, (1995), “General Purpose Technologies: Engines of
Growth?” Journal of Econometrics, Annals of Econometrics 65:83-108.
Caballero, R.J. and A.B. Jaffe (1993), “How High Are the Giants' Shoulders: An Empirical
Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic
Growth”, in: O.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA) 15-74.
Cadot, O. and B. Sinclair-Desgagne (1996), “Innovation Under the Threat of Stricter
Environmental Standards”, in: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market
Structure (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht) 131-141.
Carraro, C. and A. Soubeyran (1996), “Environmental Policy and the Choice of Production
Technology”, in: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market Structure
(Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht) 151-180.
Carraro, C. and D. Siniscalaco (1994), “Environmental Policy Reconsidered: The Role of
Technology Innovation”, European Economic Review 38: 545-555.
Cohen, L. and R. Noll (1991), The Technology Pork Barrel (Brookings Institution, Washington
DC).
Cohen, W.M. and R. C. Levin (1989), “Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market Structure”
Chapter 18 in R. Schmalensee and W. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization
(North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Cohen, W.M. R.R. Nelson and J.P. Walsh (2000), “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not)”,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7552.
Cowan, R. (1990), “Nuclear Power Reactors: A Study in Technological Lock-in”, Journal of
Economic History 50:541-67.
Cowan, R. and D. Kline (1996), The Implications of Potential 'Lock-In' in Markets for
Renewable Energy (National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO).
Cowan, R. and P. Gunby (1996), “Sprayed to Death: Path Dependence, Lock-In and Pest Control
Strategies” Economic Journal 106:521-542.
Cowan, R. and S. Hulten (1996), “Escaping Lock-In: The Case of the Electric Vehicle”,
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 53:61-79.
Dasgupta, P. and J. Stiglitz (1980a), “Industry Structure and the Nature of Innovative Activity”,
Economic Journal 90:266-293.
Dasgupta, P. and J. Stiglitz (1980b), “Uncertainty, Industry Structure and the Speed of R&D”,
Bell Journal of Economics 11:1-28.

69

David, P. (1966), “The mechanization of reaping in the ante-bellum Midwest”, in: H. Rosovsky,
ed., Industrialization in Two Systems (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA) 3-39.
David, P. (1969), “A Contribution to the Theory of Diffusion”, mimeo. Forthcoming as
Chapters 1-3 of David, P., Behind the Diffusion Curve (Westview Press, Boulder)
David, P., B. Hall and A. Toole (2000), “Is public R&D a complement or substitute for private
R&D? A review of the econometric evidence”, Research Policy 29:497-529
David, P.A. (1985), “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY”, American Economic Review
75:332-337.
David, P.A. (1997), “Path Dependence and the Quest for Historical Economics: One More
Chorus in the Ballad of QWERTY”, Discussion Papers in Economic and Social History,
Number 20, University of Oxford.
Day, G.S., and D.B. Montgomery (1983), “Diagnosing the Experience Curve”, Journal of
Marketing 47:22-58.
DeCanio, S. J. (1998), “The Efficiency Paradox: Bureaucratic and Organizational Barriers to
Profitable Energy-Saving Investments”, Energy Policy 26:441-454.
Denicolo, V. (1999), "Pollution-reducing Innovations Under Taxes or Permits", Oxford
Economic Papers 51:184-199.
Denison, E, (1979), Accounting for Slower Economic Growth (Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC).
Downing, P.B. and L.J. White (1986), "Innovation in Pollution Control", Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 13:18-29.
Dutton, J.M., and A. Thomas (1984), “Treating Progress Functions as a Managerial
Opportunity”, Academy of Management Review 9:235-247.
Energy Modeling Forum, Stanford University (1996), Markets for Energy Efficiency, EMF
Report 13, Volume I.
Evenson, R.E. (1991), “Patent Data by Industry: Evidence for Invention Potential Exhaustion?”
in: Technology and Productivity: The Challenge for Economic Policy (Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris) 233-248.
Fabricant, S. (1954), Economic Progress and Economic Change (National Bureau of Economic
Research, New York).
Fare, R., S. Grosskopf and C. Lovell (1994), Production Frontiers (Cambridge University Press,
New York)
Farrell, J. and G. Saloner (1985), “Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation”, Rand Journal
of Economics 16:70-83.
Fisher, C., I.W.H. Parry, and W.A. Pizer (1998), "Instrument Choice for Environmental
Protection When Technological Innovation is Endogenous", Resources for the Future
Discussion Paper 99-04 (Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.).
Foray, D. (1997), “The Dynamic Implications of Increasing Returns: Technological Change and
Path Dependent Inefficiency”, International Journal of Industrial Organization 15:733752.
Freeman, A.M. and R.H. Haveman (1972), "Clean Rhetoric and Dirty Water", Public Interest
28:51-65.
Fudenberg, D. R. Gilbert, J. Stiglitz, and J. Tirole (1983), “Preemption, Leapfrogging and
Competition in Patent Races”, European Economic Review 22:3-31.
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (1983), “Learning by Doing and Market Performance”, Bell Journal
of Economics 14:522-530.

70

Geroski, P.A. (1995), “Markets for Technology: Knowledge, Innovation and Appropriability”,
in: P. Stoneman, ed., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological
Change (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers) 90-131.
Geroski, P.A. (2000), “Models of Technology Diffusion”, Research Policy 29:603-626.
Goldberg, P.K. (1998), “The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standards in the
U.S.”, Journal of Industrial Economics 46:1-3.
Gollop, F.M. and M.J. Roberts (1983), “Environmental Regulations and Productivity Growth:
The Case of Fossil-Fueled Electric Power Generation”, Journal of Political Economy
91:654-74.
Goodman, A.C. (1983), “Willingness to pay for car efficiency: A hedonic price approach”,
Journal of Transport Economics 17:247–266.
Goolsbee, A. (1998), “Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and Engineers?”
American Economic Review 88:298-302.
Goulder, L.H. and K. Mathai (2000), "Optimal CO2 Abatement in the Presence of Induced
Technological Change", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39:1-38.
Goulder, L.H. and S.L. Schneider (1999), "Induced Technological Change and the Attractiveness
of CO2 Emissions Abatement Policies", Resource and Energy Economics 21:211-253.
Gray, W.B and R.J. Shadbegian (1995), “Pollution Abatement Costs, Regulation, and PlantLevel Productivity”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4994.
Gray, W.B. and R.J. Shadbegian (1998), “Environmental Regulation, Investment Timing, and
Technology Choice”, Journal of Industrial Economics 46:235-256.
Greenstone, M. (1998), “The Marginal Effects of Environmental Regulations of the
Manufacturing Sector: Evidence from the 1970 and 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments, “
mimeo Princeton University.
Griliches, Z. (1957), “Hybrid Corn: An exploration in the economics of technical change”,
Econometrica 48:501-522.
Griliches, Z. (1979), “Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
Productivity Growth”, Bell Journal of Economics 10:92-116.
Griliches, Z. (1984), R&D, Patents and Productivity (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).
Griliches, Z. (1990), “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey”, Journal of Economic
Literature 28:1661-1707.
Griliches, Z. (1992), “The Search for R&D Spillovers”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics
94:S29-S47.
Griliches, Z. (1994), “Productivity, R&D and the Data Constraint”, American Economic Review
84:1-23.
Griliches, Z. (1998), R&D and Productivity, The Econometric Evidence (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago).
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1994), “Endogenous Innovation in the Theory of Growth”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 8:23-44.
Grübler, A. and S. Messner (1999), “Technological Change and the Timing of Mitigation
Measures”, Energy Economics 20:495- 512.
Grübler, A., N. Nakicenovic, and D.G. Victor (1999), “Dynamics of Energy Technologies and
Global Change,” Energy Policy 27:247-280.
Guellec, D. and B. van Pottelsberghe (2000), “The Impact of Public R&D Expenditure on
Business R&D,” (DSTI Working Paper, Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris)

71

Hahn, R.W. and R.N. Stavins (1991), “Incentive-based Environmental Regulation: a New Era
from an Old Idea?” Ecology Law Quarterly 18:1-42.
Hall, B. and J. Van Reenen (2000), “How Effective Are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A Review of
the Evidence,” Research Policy 29:449-469.
Hall, B., A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg (2000), “Market Value and Patent Citations: A First
Look,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7741.
Hassett, K.A. and G.E. Metcalf (1995), "Energy Tax Credits and Residential Conservation
Investment: Evidence form Panel Data", Journal of Public Economics 57:201-217.
Hassett, K.A. and G.E. Metcalf (1996), “Can Irreversibility Explain the Slow Diffusion of
Energy Saving Technologies?”, Energy Policy 24: 7-8.
Hausman, J.A. (1979), “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of EnergyUsing Durables”, Bell Journal of Economics 10:33.
Helpman, E., ed. (1998), General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth (MIT Press,
Cambridge MA).
Hicks, J. (1932), The Theory of Wages (Macmillan, London).
Hockenstein, J.B., R.N. Stavins and B.W. Whitehead (1997), “Creating the Next Generation of
Market-Based Environmental Tools”, Environment 39(4):12-20, 30-33.
Howarth, R.B., B.M. Haddad, and B. Paton (2000), "The Economics of Energy Efficiency:
Insights from Voluntary Participation Programs", Energy Policy, 28:477-86.
Interlaboratory Working Group (1997), Scenarios of Carbon Reductions: Potential Impacts of
Energy Technologies by 2010 and Beyond (Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Technologies, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington)
Islas, J. (1997), “Getting Round the Lock-in in Electricity Generating Systems: The Example of
the Gas Turbine”, Research Policy 26:49-66.
Jaffe, A.B. (1986), “Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’
Patents, Profits and Market Value”, American Economic Review 76:984-1001.
Jaffe, A.B. (1988), "Demand and Supply Influences in R&D Intensity and Productivity Growth",
Review of Economics and Statistics 70:431-437
Jaffe, A.B. (1998a), “The Importance of ‘Spillovers’ in the Policy Mission of the Advanced
Technology Program”, Journal of Technology Transfer, Summer 1998:11-19.
Jaffe, A.B. (1998b), “Measurement Issues”, in: L.M. Branscomb and J.H. Keller, eds., Investing
in Innovation (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge MA).
Jaffe, A.B. (2000), “The U.S. patent system in transition: policy innovation and the innovation
process”, Research Policy 29:531-558.
Jaffe, A.B. and K. Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel Data
Study”, Review of Economics and Statistics 79:610-619
Jaffe, A.B. and R.N. Stavins (1994), “The Energy Paradox and the Diffusion of Conservation
Technology”, Resource and Energy Economics 16:91-122.
Jaffe, A.B and R.N. Stavins (1995), “Dynamic Incentives of Environmental Regulations: The
Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments on Technology Diffusion”, Journal of
Environmental Economics & Management 29:S43-63.
Jaffe, A.B., R.G. Newell, and R.N. Stavins (1999), “Energy-Efficient Technologies and Climate
Change Policies: Issues and Evidence”, Resources for the Future Climate Issue Brief No.
19 (Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.).

72

Jaffe, A.B., S. Peterson, P. Portney, and R.N. Stavins (1995), “Environmental Regulation and the
Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence Tell Us?”, Journal of
Economic Literature 33:132-63.
Jones, C. and J. Williams (1998), "Measuring the Social Return to R&D", Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113:1119-1135.
Jorgenson, D. (1990), “Productivity and Economic Growth”, in: E. Berndt and J. Triplett, eds.,
Fifty Years of Economic Measurement (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) 19-118.
Jorgenson, D. and Z. Griliches (1967), “The Explanation of Productivity Change”, Review of
Economic Studies 34:249-283.
Jorgenson, D.W. and K.J. Stiroh (2000), “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the
Information Age”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 125-211.
Joskow, P.L. and G.A. Rozanski (1979), “The Effects of Learning by Doing on Nuclear Plant
Operating Reliability”, Review of Economics and Statistics 61:161-68.
Jung, C.H., K. Krutilla and R. Boyd (1996), "Incentives for Advanced Pollution Abatement
Technology at the Industry Level: An Evaluation of Policy Alternatives", Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 30:95-111.
Kamien, M.I. and N.L. Schwartz (1968), "Optimal Induced Technical Change", Econometrica,
36:1-17.
Karshenas, M. and P. Stoneman (1995), “Technological Diffusion”, in: P. Stoneman, ed.,
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change (Blackwell
Publishers, Oxford).
Katsoulacos, Y. and A. Xepapadeas (1996), “Environmental Innovation, Spillovers and Optimal
Policy Rules”, in: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market Structure
(Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht) 143-150.
Katz, M.L. and C. Shapiro (1986), “Technology Adoption in the Presence of Network
Externalities”, Journal of Political Economy 94:822-841.
Katz, M.L. and C. Shapiro (1994), “Systems Competition and Network Effects”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 8:93-115.
Kemp, R. and L. Soete. (1990), "Inside the 'Green Box:' on the economics of technological
change and the environment," in: Freeman, C. and L. Soete, eds. New Explorations in the
Economics of Technological Change (Pinter, London).
Kendrick, J.W. (1956), Productivity Trends: Capital and Labor (National Bureau of Economic
Research, New York).
Keohane, N.O. (1999), "Policy Instruments and the Diffusion of Pollution Abatement
Technology", mimeo Harvard University.
Kerr, S. and R.G. Newell (2000), “Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence from the
U.S. Lead Phasedown”, Resources for the Future Discussion Paper, (Resources for the
Future, Washington, DC).
Klette, T, J. Møen and Z. Griliches (2000), “Do subsidies to commercial R&D reduce market
failures? Microeconometric evaluation studies”, Research Policy 29:471-495.
Kneese, A. and C. Schultze (1975) Pollution, Prices, and Public Policy (Brookings Institution,
Washington, D.C.).
Kolstad, C.D. and M.H.L. Turnovsky (1998), “Cost Functions and Nonlinear Prices: Estimating
a Technology with Quality-Differentiated Inputs”, Review of Economics & Statistics
80:444-53.

73

Laffont, J. and J. Tirole (1996a), "Pollution Permits and Compliance Strategies", Journal of
Public Economics 62:85-125.
Laffont, J. and J. Tirole (1996b), "Pollution Permits and Environmental Innovation", Journal of
Public Economics 62:127-140.
Lancaster, K. (1971), Consumer Demand: A New Approach (Columbia University Press, New
York).
Landjouw, J.O. and A. Mody (1996), "Innovation and the International Diffusion of
Environmentally Responsive Technology", Research Policy 25:549-71.
Lanjouw, J. and M. Schankerman (1999), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation with
Multiple Indicators,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7345.
Leibenstein, H. (1966), “Allocative Efficiency as ‘X-Inefficiency’”, American Economic Review
56:392-415.
Lester, R.K. and M.J. McCabe (1993), “The Effect of Industrial Structure on Learning by Doing
in Nuclear Power Plant Operation”, Rand Journal of Economics 24:418-438.
Levin, R.C. and P.C. Reiss (1988), “Cost-reducing and Demand-Creating R&D with Spillovers”,
Rand Journal of Economics 19:538-556
Levin, S., S. Levin and J. Meisel (1987), “A Dynamic Analysis of the Adoption of a New
Technology: The Case of Optical Scanners”, Review of Economics and Statistics 69:1217.
Liebowitz, S.J., and S.E. Margolis (1994), “Network Externality: An Uncommon Tragedy”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 8:133-150.
Lucas, R.E. (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development”, Journal of Monetary
Economics 22:3-42.
Macauley, M.K. and T.J. Brennan (1998), "Enforcing Environmental Regulation: Implications
of Remote Sensing Technology" RFF Discussion Paper 98-33 (Resources for the Future,
Washington, DC).
Magat, W.A. (1978), "Pollution control and technological advance: A dynamic model of the
firm", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 5:1-25.
Magat, W.A. (1979), "The effects of environmental regulation on innovation", Law and
Contemporary Problems 43:3-25.
Majd, S. and R.S. Pindyck (1989), “The Learning Curve and Optimal Production under
Uncertainty,” Rand Journal of Economics 20:331-343.
Maloney, M.T. and G.L. Brady (1988), “Capital Turnover and Marketable Pollution Rights”,
Journal of Law and Economics 31:203-226.
Malueg, D.A. (1989), "Emission Credit Trading and the Incentive to Adopt New Pollution
Abatement Technology", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 16:5257.
Mankiw, N.G. and M.D. Whinston (1986), “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency”, Rand Journal of
Economics 17:48-58.
Mansfield, E. (1968), Industrial Research and Technological Innovation (Norton, New York).
Mansfield, E. (1989), “Industrial robots in Japan and the USA”, Research Policy 18:183-192.
Marin, A. (1991), "Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in Pollution Control:
Comment", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 21:297-300.
Marshall, A. (1922), Principles of Economics (Macmillan, London), Book V, Chapter 6.
Martin, S. and J. Scott (2000), “The nature of innovation market failure and the design of public
support for private innovation”, Research Policy 29:437-448.

74

McCubbins, M.D., R.G. Noll, and B.R. Weingast. (1989), “Structure and Process, Politics and
Policy: Administrative Arrangements and the Political Control of Agencies”, Virginia
Law Review 75:431-482.
Metcalf, G.E. and K.A. Hassett (1999), “Measuring the Energy Savings from Home
Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data”, The Review of
Economics and Statistics 81: 516-528.
Milliman, S.R. and R. Prince (1989), "Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in
Pollution Control", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 17:247-265.
Milliman, S.R. and R. Prince (1992), "Firm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in
Pollution Control: Reply", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
22:292-296.
Montero, J.P. (2000), "Market Structure and Environmental Innovation", mimeo Catholic
University of Chile.
Mowery, D. and N. Rosenberg (1989), Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth
(Oxford University Press, Oxford).
Mountain, D.C., B.P. Stipdonk, and C.J. Warren (1989), "Technological Innovation and a
Changing Energy Mix--A Parametric and Flexible Approach to Modeling Ontario
Manufacturing", The Energy Journal 10:139-58.
Nakicenovic, N. (1996), “Technological Change and Learning”, in: N. Nakicenovic, W. D.
Nordhaus, R. Richels and F. L. Toth, eds., Climate Change: Integrating Science,
Economics, and Policy (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA),
Laxenburg, Austria).
National Science Board (1998), Science and Engineering Indicators—1998 (National Science
Foundation,
Washington;
available
online
at
http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind98/frames.htm).
Neij, L. (1997), “Use of Experience Curves to Analyze the Prospects for Diffusion and Adoption
of Renewable Energy Technology”, Energy Policy 23:1099-1107.
Nelson, R. and S. Winter (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change (The Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
Nelson, R., T. Tietenberg, and M. Donihue (1993), “Differential Environmental Regulation:
Effects on Electric Utility Capital Turnover and Emissions”, Review of Economics and
Statistics 75:368-373.
Newell, R.G, A.B. Jaffe and R.N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and
Energy-Saving Technological Change”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:941-75.
Newell, R.G. (1997), Environmental Policy and Technological Change, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Harvard University.
Nordhaus, W.D. (2000), "Modeling Induced Innovation in Climate-Change Policy", mimeo,
Yale University.
Oates, W.E., K. Palmer, and P.R. Portney (1993), “Environmental Regulation and International
Competitiveness: Thinking About the Porter Hypothesis”, Resources for the Future
Discussion Paper 94-02 (Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.).
Ohta, M. and Z. Griliches (1976), “Automobile prices revisited: Extensions of the hedonic
hypothesis”, in: N.E. Terleckyj, ed., Household Production and Consumption (New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research).

75

Ohta, M. and Z. Griliches (1986), “Automobile prices and quality: Did the gasoline price
increases change consumer tastes in the U.S.?”, Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics 4:187–198.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2000), Basic Science and
Technology Statistics: 1999 Edition (Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, Paris).
Orr, L. (1976), "Incentive for Innovation as the Basis for Effluent Charge Strategy", American
Economic Review 66:441-447.
Oster, S. (1982), “The diffusion of innovation among steel firms: the basic oxygen furnace”,
The Bell Journal of Economics 13:45-56.
Pakes, A., S. Berry, and J.A. Levinsohn (1993), "Applications and Limitations of Some Recent
Advances in Empirical Industrial Organization: Prices Indexes and the Analysis of
Environmental Change", American Economic Review 83:240-246.
Palmer, K., W.E. Oates and P.R. Portney (1995), “Tightening Environmental Standards: The
Benefit-Cost or the No-Cost Paradigm?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9:119-132.
Parry, I. W., W. A. Pizer and C. Fischer (2000), “How Important is Technological Change in
Protecting the Environment?” Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 00-15
(Resources for the Future, Washington, DC).
Parry, I.W.H. (1995), "Optimal Pollution Taxes and Endogenous Technological Progress",
Resource and Energy Economics 17:69-85.
Parry, I.W.H. (1998), "Pollution Regulation and the Efficiency Gains from Technological
Innovation", Journal of Regulatory Economics 14:229-254.
Pindyck, R. (1991), “Irreversibility, uncertainty, and investment”, Journal of Economic
Literature 29:1110-1152.
Popp, D. (2000a), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices”, mimeo University of Kansas.
Popp, D. (2000b), "The Effect of New Technology on Energy Consumption", mimeo University
of Kansas.
Porter, M.E. and C. van der Linde (1995), "Toward a New Conception of the EnvironmentCompetitiveness Relationship", Journal of Economic Perspectives 9:97-118.
Purvis, A. and J. Outlaw (1995), "What We Know About Technological Innovation to Achieve
Environmental Compliance: Policy Issues for an Industrializing Animal Agriculture
Sector", American Journal of Agricultural Economics 77:1237-1243.
Reinganum, J. (1982), “A Dynamic Game of R&D: Patent Protection and Competitive
Behavior”, Econometrica 50:671-688.
Reinganum, J. (1989), “The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development and Diffusion”, in:
R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 1 (NorthHolland, Amsterdam) 850-908.
Reinhardt, F.L. (2000), Down to Earth: Applying Business Principles to Environmental
Management (Harvard Business School Press, Boston).
Reppelin-Hill, V. (1999), "Trade and Environment: An Empirical Analysis of the Technology
Effect in the Steel Industry", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
38:283-301.
Requate, T. (1998), “Incentives to Innovate under Emission Taxes and Tradeable Permits”,
European Journal of Political Economy 14:139-65.
Romer, P. (2000), “Should the Government Subsidize Supply or Demand for Scientists and
Engineers”, Innovation Policy and the Economy, forthcoming.

76

Romer, P.M. (1990), “Endogenous Technical Change”, Journal of Political Economy 98:S71S102.
Romer, P.M. (1994), “The Origins of Endogenous Growth”, Journal of Economic Perspectives
8:3-22.
Rose, N. and P. Joskow (1990), “The Diffusion of New Technologies: Evidence from the
Electric Utility Industry”, Rand Journal of Economics 21:354-373.
Rosenberg, N. (1982), Inside the Black Box (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.).
Rosenberg, N. (1990), “Why Do Firms Do Basic Research (with their own money)?”, Research
Policy 19:165-174.
Ross, M. (1990), “Capital Budgeting Practices of Twelve Large Manufacturers”, in: P. Cooley,
ed., Advances in Business Financial Management (Dryden Press, Chicago) 157-170.
Ruderman, H., M.D. Levine, and J.E. McMahon (1987),. “The Behavior of the Market for
Energy Efficiency in Residential Appliances Including Heating and Cooling Equipment”,
The Energy Journal 8:101-123.
Ruttan, V.W. (1997), “Induced Innovation, Evolutionary Theory and Path Dependence: Sources
of Technical Change”, Economic Journal 107:1520-1529.
Ruttan, V.W. (2000), “Technology, Resources and Environment” in: Ruttan, V.W. ed.,
Technology, Growth and Environment: An Induced Innovation Perspective (University
of Minnesota: St. Paul, MN).
Sanstad, A., C. Blumstein and S. Stoft (1995), “How high are option values in energy-efficiency
investments”, Energy Policy 23:739-743.
Scherer, F. (1986), Innovation and Growth, Schumpeterian Perspectives (The MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA).
Scherer, F.M. and D. Harhoff (2000), “Technology Policy for a World of Skew-Distributed
Outcomes”, Research Policy 29:559-566.
Scherer, F., D. Harhoff, and J. Kukies (2000), “Uncertainty and the size distribution of rewards
from technological innovation”, Journal of Evolutionary Economics 10: 175-200.
Schmalensee, R. (1994), “The Costs of Environmental Protection”, in: M.B. Kotowski, ed.,
Balancing Economic Growth and Environmental Goals (American Council for Capital
Formation, Center for Policy Research, Washington, D.C.) 55-75.
Schmookler, J. (1966), Invention and Economic Growth (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA).
Schumpeter, J. (1942), Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (Harper, New York).
Shama, A. (1983), “Energy Conservation in U.S. Buildings, Solving the High Potential/Low
Adoption Paradox from a Behavioral Perspective”, Energy Policy 11:148-168.
Sharp, J.A. and D.H.R. Price (1990), “Experience Curve Models in the Electricity Supply
Industry”, International Journal of Forecasting 6:531-540.
Simon, H.A. (1947), Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-making Processes in
Administrative Organization (Macmillan Company, New York).
Solow, R.M. (1957), “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 39:312-320.
Spence, A.M. (1981), “The Learning Curve and Competition”, Bell Journal of Economics 12:4970.
Spence, A.M. (1984), “Cost Reduction, Competition and Industry Performance,” Econometrica
52(1): 101-121.

77

Stavins, R.N. (1998), “What Have We Learned from the Grand Policy Experiment: Lessons
from SO2 Allowance Trading”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(3):69-88.
Stewart, R.B (1981), “Regulation, Innovation, and Administrative Law: A Conceptual
Framework”, California Law Review 69:1256-1270.
Stoneman, P. (1983), The Economic Analysis of Technological Change (Oxford University
Press, Oxford, U.K.)
Stoneman, P. (1987), The Economic Analysis of Technology Policy (Oxford University Press,
Oxford, U.K.).
Sunding, D. and D. Zilberman (2000), “The Agricultural Innovation Process: Research and
Technology Adoption in a Changing Agricultural Industry”, in: B. Gardner and G.C.
Rausser, eds., Handbook of Agricultural and Resource Economics (North-Holland,
Amsterdam), forthcoming.
Sutton, J. (1998), Technology and Market Structure (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Thirtle, C.G. and V.W. Ruttan (1987), “The Role of Demand and Supply in the Generation and
Diffusion of Technical Change”, Fundamentals of Pure and Applied Economics, vol. 21.
(Harwood Academic Publishers, New York).
Tirole, J. (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Trajtenberg, M. (1990), Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT Scanners
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA).
Trajtenberg, M (2000), “R&D Policy in Israel: An Overview and Reassessment,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7930.
Ulph, A. and D. Ulph (1996), “Trade, Strategic Innovation and Strategic Environmental Policy—
A General Analysis”, in: C. Carraro et al., eds., Environmental Policy and Market
Structure (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht) 181-208.
Ulph, D. (1998), "Environmental Policy and Technological Innovation," forthcoming in: C.
Carraro and D. Siniscalaco, eds., Frontiers of Environmental Economics (Edward Elgar,
Cheltenhsam, U.K.).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2000), Multifactor Productivity Trends, 1998 (U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, Washington DC (http://www.bls.gov/news.release/prod3.toc.htm)).
Weitzman, M.L. (1974), “Prices vs. Quantities”, Review of Economic Studies 41:477-491.
Weyant, J.P. (1993), “Costs of Reducing Global Carbon Emissions”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7: 27-46.
Wilcox, J. (1984), “Automobile Fuel Efficiency: Measurement and Explanation”, Economic
Inquiry 22:375–385.
Winter, S.G., Y.M. Kaniovski and G. Dosi (2000), “Modeling Industrial Dynamics with
Innovative Entrants”, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 11:255-293.
Yaisawarng, S. and J.D. Klein (1994), “The Effects of Sulfur Dioxide Controls on Productivity
Change in the U.S. Electric Power Industry”, Review of Economics & Statistics 76:44760.
Yelle, L.E. (1979), “The Learning Curve: Historical Review and Comprehensive Survey”,
Decision Sciences 10:302-328.
Zerbe, R.O. (1970), "Theoretical Efficiency in Pollution Control", Western Economic Journal
8:364-376.
Zimmerman, M.B. (1982), “Learning Effects and the Commercialization of New Energy
Technologies: The Case of Nuclear Power”, Bell Journal of Economics 13:297-310.

78

