                                    




                                 
                                 


                                             


                                            !"#$%&%
                                   '((#)**+++, *#"#-*+$%&%


                                      
                                       ./0/ "--"1'2-((- 32
                                         "4,56    /7.8&
                                             1( ,7///




                   
  

  ! "# "   $   %     "  %
&          %   " %"  
(#(-(24(""",--(4"(- ('(2-(  1'        

 !"# $%&%
1( ,7///
  8

                                               

'-#"#-('-9-1  41-'(- 4(' (1"4 5- -1'     1' 1,"-5
  5352" ,(- "5 1  4(1 + ! (#( -(24(" 3"",- -(4"(- "-
+'(5 "3"-  5352":-#11 1"2-" 1(-  !"- " 2-("(5 2- 1 
# ;4(( -(24( -1'      (1'""1(9 2#-5(""1(5,('
-(24("11 5( "4,"1! 25651(1 4#2(+'(-25-(4"(  ('
 3"(2""9('3 -1'    "(+'1'5352"-1'"(','"3 
-# -( ('-(24(654 -("(('"(('--(24('"-(-"(-(4#"1( ('("-( 
 4''-1'    ( 1  #11"(  ,2-(---"- ;"45



<#"(4( 1  41-"5         5 +-  1'       
1(  3-(
1( 6/&0==
"5
!>#1( 52
                                       1. INTRODUCTION

       Instrumental variables (IV) estimation provides strategies to solve the identification

problem that arises when individual’s choice of educational attainment is related to their

potential earnings (Card 1999). These strategies often rely upon observing individuals

influenced to acquire more schooling through some rule or incentive, which typically affect

schooling decisions of a subgroup of the population. If the return to education is not constant

across individuals, then equally valid identification strategies relying on different subgroups may

generate different results when returns differ across groups.

       It is extremely useful to have information on the composition of the subgroup affected by

an instrumental variable for the purposes of applying results in new contexts. Consider assessing

the likely impact of tuition subsidies, such as the tax expenditures discussed in the 2000 U.S.

Presidential campaign. Some IV results, such as those based on college proximity as an

instrument (Card 1995b), are likely to be more relevant than results based on other IV strategies,

such as compulsory schooling laws (Angrist and Krueger 1991). As with a subsidy, college

proximity can lower the cost of attending college. We might expect those who face particularly

high borrowing costs to be more sensitive to costs lowered by college proximity. If college

proximity is actually inducing college attendance, then we would expect the largest effects to

occur between years 12 and 16 of schooling. The population and the decision process affected by

a tuition subsidy are likely to be more similar to those affected by college proximity than those

affected by compulsory schooling laws. To the extent that these factors are systematically related

to individual differences in returns to schooling, college proximity may incorporate these same

interactions and have more external validity for forecasting future effects of tuition subsidies

(Meyer 1995).


                                                 1
       This paper uses data on covariates to show who is actually affected by the college

proximity instrument, and at what level of education. This type of analysis can enhance our

confidence that an instrumental variable and a proposed policy affect schooling decisions through

the same mechanisms.

       To summarize the organization of this paper, Section 2 reviews a simple model of

schooling choice that provides the framework for interpretation of empirical results. Section 3

replicates previous work using college proximity to study the returns of schooling. Section 4

links the theoretical model of schooling choice to recent econometric work on the interpretation

of IV estimates as a weighted average of causal effects for particular subgroups of the population,

and computes these weights for the college proximity example. Section 5 examines the impact

of the college proximity instrument at different levels of schooling. Section 6 discusses the

sensitivity of results to use of different age groups. Section 7 examines the robustness of this

general identification strategy using more recent data. Section 8 concludes.



                            2. A MODEL OF SCHOOLING CHOICE

       Much of the literature on returns to schooling has been concerned with “ability bias” (e.g.

Griliches, 1977). The following discussion of a simple human capital model is an attempt to

clarify what it is that I hope to estimate, and to categorize the types of biases that may complicate

interpretation of the results. In a canonical model of schooling choice, individuals will invest in

schooling until the point at which the marginal change in present discounted value of future

income from an additional year of schooling is equal to the intertemporal rate of substitution.

Below, I adapt a version of this model of Becker’s supply and demand model (1975), based on

Card (1995a).


                                                  2
       Individuals earnings are a function of schooling, yi = gi(s). Following the literature (e.g.

Willis 1986), this model uses the utility function U(y,s) = log(yi) - φi(s), based on an individual

maximizing the present discounted value of income, discounting the future at a constant rate, and

earning nothing while in school. The optimal level of schooling is determined implicitly by the

first order condition, when the marginal benefit of schooling is equal to the marginal cost.

Equation (1) establishes notation for the marginal benefits (bi) that influence an individual's

optimal schooling choice, parameterizing them as functions of observable characteristics, X, and

unobservable components, η1.

                                      
                                    gi (s)
                                              bi  Xiπ1  η1i                                    (1)
                                    gi(s)

       Equation (2) does the same for marginal costs. I have set up the model to suggest that

instrumental variables in Z are available that affect schooling through the discount rate (e.g.

capacity to pay for schooling) and not the marginal benefit.


                          
                         φi (s)  r i  ks ;          ri  Xiπ2  Ziγ2i  η2i                     (2)


The assumption in (2) of marginal cost with an individual specific discount rate (ri) and a

component that is increasing at a constant positive rate (k) in the amount of schooling seems

plausible, for example, when individuals can finance education first internally from family

savings, then from federally subsidized sources, and finally from private sources. The parameter

γi2 is a random coefficient to allow for individual differences in response to the instrument.

       Equating (1) and (2) and substituting parameterizations of observables results in an

explicit equation (3) for an individual’s optimal schooling, si, where S is observed years of

schooling. The instrument is assumed not to decrease schooling (γi3  0).


                                                  3
                                 b i  ri
                                             s i  Si  Xiπ3  Ziγ3i  η3i                     (3)
                                    k

Integrating (1) and substituting (where Y is the observed log wage) results in the equation for

earnings in (4), where ρi is a random coefficient.

                si     
                     g i (s)
                               ds  log(yi)  ai  b isi  Y i  Xiβ  S iρi  Ci               (4)
                m g i(s)
                 0




       There are two types of “ability” in this model. First, individual differences in earnings

capacity that do not interact with education are embodied in the individual specific earnings

equation intercept ai. If ai is independent of the instrument variable affecting the level of

schooling through the discount rate, then the instrument satisfies the exclusion restriction

(Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996). Specifically, I assume Z is independent of η3i and Ci,

conditional on X. This model provides theoretical motivation for two stage least squares

estimation (2SLS), in which the first stage is estimated by (3) and the second stage by (4).

       The second type of ability is the marginal benefit to a year of schooling captured in bi,

which varies across individuals. Note that (4) is allowed to be linear in the endogenous

schooling variable (as in Wooldridge 1997, Ashenfelter and Rouse 1998), and not quadratic (as

in Card 1995a, Heckman and Vytlacil 1998) because bi in (1) is modeled as invariant to

schooling level. The 2SLS point estimate of the schooling coefficient is a weighted average of

the heterogeneous marginal benefits for those whose schooling choice are affected by the

instrument, conditional on X. The monotoncity implied in (3) when γi3  0 allows results from

IV estimates to be interpreted as an average causal response (Angrist and Imbens 1995), similar

to the local average treatment effect derived for instrumenting a binary endogenous regressor


                                                       4
(Imbens and Angrist 1994). The weights imposed by 2SLS estimation are discussed in detail in

sections 4 and 5.



                         3. REPLICATION OF PREVIOUS RESULTS

       To provide background on this application, I replicate estimates reported by Card (1995b)

on the return to schooling for those affected by college proximity. Card utilizes data from the

original young men's cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey (NLSYM66), which began with

youth aged 14-24 in 1966. Data on hourly wages and highest grade completed are taken from the

1976 wave. Card notes that proximity to two year colleges seems to have little impact on

educational attainment. Perhaps only four year colleges have the visibility to influence schooling

decisions, but it remains unclear why marginal consumers would not be influenced by proximity

to two year colleges. Nevertheless this replication uses Card’s instrumental variable, an indicator

for whether or not there was a four year college in the local labor market (defined as the

residential county) in 1966.

       In Table I, I present a sample of results from Card (1995b) which I have replicated

exactly. IV estimates of the return to schooling range from .094 to .132. Card’s estimates

include the traditional quadratic in potential experience (with age-squared as an additional

excluded instrument), which complicates interpretation of the IV estimate for schooling in

principle. As shown column 4, omitting this control has no substantive impact on the estimates.

To simplify for the remainder of this paper, I use only a linear control for potential experience

and instrument by age, so that the IV estimate of ρ in (4) effectively includes an additive constant

from the potential experience coefficient.




                                                 5
       There are of course several reasons why college proximity may not be a good instrument.

Observably equivalent families may have different unobserved taste for education, and choose to

live different distances from a college. Also, wages in labor markets for those who grew up near

a college may simply reflect unobserved geographic wage premia, rather than difference in wages

due to schooling. Card (1995b) shows that these estimates are not particularly sensitive to

alternative strategies to control for local labor market conditions.



                      4. CHARACTERIZING THE AFFECTED GROUPS

       With these replicated estimates as a frame of reference, this section presents new

quantitative evidence characterizing the group affected by this instrumental variable. These

estimates cannot be generalized to the larger population without additional assumptions--such as

a constant marginal benefit of education across individuals. Without such an assumption, the

external validity of the estimates depends upon the precision with which the affected subgroup

can be characterized and on the policy interest generated by that group.

       As a point of departure in attempting to characterize the affected group, Card (1995b)

speculates that the effect of college proximity is more important for children of less wealthy

households. He constructs an index of family background (predicted education from a linear

regression of years of schooling on region and background characteristics, estimated on the

sample that did not have a college nearby). I replicate this index and then define four quartiles

based on it. Information on parental education provides the most significant set of variables

predicting the index used to construct family background quartiles.

       To see the differences in the underlying components used to create the background

quartiles, I show descriptive statistics of selected characteristics in Table 2. In the lowest


                                                  6
quartile, none of individuals report that either their mother or father graduated from high school.

In the highest quartile, 97% of mothers are high school graduates, as are 84% of fathers. The

presence of college in the 1966 county does vary somewhat across quartiles, from 59% for the

lowest to 73% for the highest quartile. While this difference is much less dramatic than that of

other characteristics of these individuals, I focus this analysis on differences in education and

wages by college proximity conditional on having the same background characteristics. Card

(1995b) reports that unconditional average education difference by college proximity is larger for

the lowest background quartile (1.1 years) than the other quartiles (.2 to .4 years), which is

suggestive of the important differences by quartile, but does not directly translate into the weight

received by that group in IV estimation of the return to schooling

       The IV estimate can be interpreted as a weighted average of the causal effect of a year of

schooling within a subgroup (Card 1995a), as in equation (5). For a population subgroup Q, let

∆Yq = E(Y|Z=1,Q) - E(Y|Z=0,Q) be the impact on earnings; let ∆Sq = E(S|Z=1,Q) - E(S|Z=0,Q)

be the impact on schooling; let ρq = E[ρi | Q] be the average return to schooling; let wq = P(Q) be

weights. If the effect of the instrument on schooling is conditionally mean independent of the

return, E[γi ρi | Q] = E[γi | Q] E[ρi | Q], then the effect of the instrument on earnings within each

subgroup is the product of the impact on educational attainment and the return to that education

(∆Yq = ∆Sq ρq).

                                                       Σwq∆Y q       Σwq∆S qρq
                         E[ Y |Z1]  E[ Y |Z0]
                                                      q
                                                                    q
                                                                                                    (5)
                         E[ S |Z1]  E[ S |Z0]       Σwq∆Sq         Σwq∆Sq
                                                       q                 q




       In this application using geographic proximity to college, however, the instrument is only

valid conditional on X, and the main effect of X is controlled for using linear regression.


                                                   7
Consider the case where Q is a discrete indicator for family background quartile, so Q takes on

four values. Let P(Z|X,Q) be the conditional probability of growing up with college-in-county.

The instrumental variables estimate controlling for X and Q imposes weighting from the

regression proportional to the conditional variance of Z, P(Z|X,Q)(1-P(Z|X,Q)), as shown by

Angrist (1998). To focus on differences by Q while controlling for X, let λq|x = E[P(Z|X,Q)(1-

P(Z|X,Q)) | Q]. Note that if the instrument were independent of X and Q, then λq|x would be a

constant. With college proximity as the instrument, the IV estimates are also affected by the

impact of the instrument on schooling conditional on X within each quartile. Let ∆Sq|x =

E[E(S|Z=1,X,Q) - E(S|Z=0,X,Q) | Q]. The overall weight received by each quartile using 2SLS

is ωq|x = (wq λq|x ∆Sq|x)/(/q wq λq|x ∆Sq|x).

        Estimates of ωq|x and its components are shown in Table 3. Column 1 is the sample

proportion in each quartile. In column 2, λq|x for each quartile is estimated using linear regression

including X and Q to estimate P(Z|X,Q), and then the expectation is taken over the empirical

distribution function of X for each value of Q. Linear regression is used to approximate full

nonparametric conditioning in estimation of P(Z|X,Q) used by Angrist (1998). In order to

correspond most directly to the 2SLS estimation in Table 1, ∆Sq|x is also computed using linear

regression, controlling for X while estimating the coefficients on interactions between Z and Q.

These conditional estimates of the impact of the instrument on schooling are somewhat lower

than Card’s unconditional estimates.

        Column 4 contains the weight ωq|x that would be used to form a weighted average of the

marginal return to schooling for that group for those affected by the instrument, across the four

quartiles. This calculation provides direct evidence that the lowest background quartile receives

53% of the weight in the overall IV estimate, and the highest two groups receive only 23% of the


                                                 8
weight. If the average marginal benefit of schooling were higher for the lowest background

quartile, this would be also consistent with the large estimates of return to schooling using

distance as an instrument.

       These IV estimates will represent the average marginal benefit from an additional year of

education for the subgroup affected by the college proximity instrument . This subgroup turns out

to be of policy interest both because it is composed largely of children from disadvantaged

families, and because it represents individuals “on the margin” whose schooling decisions are

affected by small changes in education costs.

       Unfortunately, the sample size is too small to obtain reliable estimates of each ρq itself.

In an attempt to increase estimation efficiency, I have incorporated additional years of panel data

from 1976-1980 for individuals. However, I find that the effect on the precision of estimates of

the return to schooling is negligible after accounting for the covariance structure of individual

wages over time.



                     5. CHARACTERIZING THE RESPONSE FUNCTION

       In addition to affecting a particular group as in Section 4, an instrumental variable may

affect different transitions between levels of schooling. For example, college proximity may

have the greatest impact on the transition from twelfth grade to the first year of college if it is

affecting liquidity-constrained individuals. The response function traces out the impact of the

instrument at each level of schooling, providing a richer description of the process through which

the instrument influences behavior which can be useful for assessing external validity and

relating IV estimates to proposed policy initiatives.




                                                   9
       This response function can be estimated from the cumulative distribution functions

(CDFs) of schooling at different values of the instrument. The difference in the CDFs is

equivalent to the fraction of the population who received at least one more year of schooling due

to the instrument. The CDF difference at each level of schooling is shown by Angrist and

Imbens (1995) to integrate to the average difference in schooling caused by the instrument and to

be proportional to the Average Causal Response (ACR) weighting function used by IV

estimation. The average marginal benefit of a year of schooling for the group affected by the

instrument can then be interpreted as the weighted average of per-unit changes in schooling.

       Figure 1 shows the difference in the CDFs with a 95% pointwise confidence interval.

The CDF difference for each schooling level j is estimated conditional on X and then integrated

over the empirical distribution function of X, E[P(Sj|Z=1,X) - P(Sj|Z=0,X)], where j is the

number of years of schooling, X represents background characteristics, and Z=1 when a college

is nearby. Note that the ACR weighting function is derived for nonparametric conditioning; I

approximate using linear probability models for each integer schooling level conditioning on age,

location and background.

       The response function indicates that the college proximity instrument does indeed have

larger effects for individuals who were caused to attend at least some college. At 13 years of

schooling, I interpret the estimates in Figure 1 to indicate that 7% of individuals with similar

demographics were induced to obtain 13 or more years of schooling due to college proximity,

when they would have obtained 12 or fewer years of schooling without a college nearby. Note

that the CDF difference captures the number of person-years of additional schooling, so an

individual who was induced to complete 13 years of schooling by college proximity but who

would have otherwise only finished tenth grade contributes to the CDF difference at 11, 12 and


                                                 10
13 years of schooling. This multi-year effect of the instrument rationalizes at least part of the

positive CDF difference over the range of 9 to 12 years of schooling. The significant difference

in CDFs at grade 10 implies that some individuals were induced to receive four additional years

of schooling by college proximity, or that the anticipation of college kept potential dropouts in

high school for one or two extra years even if they did not eventually attend college.

       To identify an average causal effect using IV when marginal benefits of schooling vary

across individuals, Angrist and Imbens (1995) show that an instrument must affect all individuals

in a monotonic manner. In this case, college proximity should not decrease educational

attainment for any individuals. This assumption has the testable implication that the difference

in the cumulative distribution functions of schooling for the two values of a binary instrument

should not be negative, which is satisfied in Figure 1.

       The model of schooling choice in Section 2 has an additional simple prediction that the

density of the weighting function should be greater over lower years of schooling for individuals

from families with higher discount rates. This prediction is derived from (6), which shows that

the covariance of discount rates and optimal schooling is nonpositive in this model.

                                                     σbr  σr2
                                   Cov(ri , s i)                 0                            (6)
                                                          k

For higher discount rates, schooling will be lower regardless of the distribution of ability, unless

discount rates and ability are perfectly positively correlated. Thus, on average I can expect that a

group with a high discount rate will be induced by college proximity to increase their education

from a lower initial level (under the model’s assumption that proximity affects all discount rates

equally). For example, proximity to college will tend to cause high discount rate individuals to

graduate from high school and attend some college when they might otherwise have dropped out


                                                 11
of high school, while proximity will tend to cause low discount rate individuals who would have

attended college anyway to increase the number of years they attend college.

       Assuming that disadvantaged backgrounds have less capacity to pay for schooling --

higher ri in equation (2) -- I use background quartile as a proxy for the discount rate. The

prediction that lower quartiles, or higher ri, will be affected at lower ranges of the response

function is verified in Figure 2, where I compute the CDF difference by background quartile,

estimated using linear regression and including a full set of quartile main effects and interactions

with the college proximity instrument. There appears to be substantial response in the two lower

background quartiles from those who otherwise would not have attended college. The response

for the upper two quartiles is concentrated among those who would have attended at least some

college, but attend additional years due to college proximity. In assessing the statistical

variability, a simple rule of thumb for Figure 2 is that point estimates greater than .05 can be

distinguished from zero at a p-value of .05.

       Within the lowest background quartile, 13% received 13 or more years of schooling in

Figure 2 when a college was nearby in 1966, while comparable members of that quartile who did

not have a college nearby completed twelve years of schooling or less. There also appears to be

some effect of inducing 9th-12th graders to graduate high school and attend some college. One

interpretation is that the schooling levels of those in the lowest quartile differ for reasons that

have nothing to do with college proximity itself, which would cast doubt on the validity of the

instrument. This behavior could be consistent, however, with the role of college proximity in

affecting schooling choices. For instance, individuals may be forward looking but have

imperfect foresight (e.g. college proximity caused a potential tenth grade dropout to complete

eleventh grade in anticipation of being able to afford to go to college, but this individual had to


                                                  12
quit high school and start working after an unexpected death in the family). Alternatively,

college proximity may simply have had large effects on these individuals (e.g. causing a potential

tenth grade dropout to attend at least some college).

       Overall, these patterns suggest that for the least wealthy, being near a college helps

motivate individuals to stay in school longer and makes it more affordable to at least try out

college. For individuals from moderately wealthy families, college proximity allows individuals

to complete additional years of college.



                               6. SENSITIVITY OF ESTIMATION

       While Sections 4 and 5 focused largely on the interpretation of the external validity of

existing estimates, an important aspect in interpreting IV estimates is investigation of internal

validity -- examining the sensitivity of estimates to violations of key identifying assumptions.

One important issue in these data is that college proximity is constructed based on residential

location at the time of first interview in 1966. At that time, older sample members (say, ages 20-

24) may have relocated to a new county precisely in order to complete their postsecondary

education. Card (1995b) notes this possibility, and presents estimates based only on sample

members ages 14-19 in 1966, shown in the fourth column of Table 1. For these younger sample

members, the estimated return to schooling is somewhat lower than the estimate for the full

sample. Although imprecisely estimated, this is consistent with an upward bias in the

coefficient induced by endogenous location of older sample members.

       A more direct test of differences in the effect of the distance instrument by age examines

the additional schooling obtained by members of different age groups. The results in Table 4

show that individuals ages 14-19 in 1966 received about 0.26 additional years of schooling when


                                                 13
a college was nearby in 1966 (conditional on age, past location, and background), while those

ages 20-24 in 1966 appear to have received 0.66 additional years of schooling when a college is

nearby. The significantly higher schooling level of the older group suggests that this group

contains some individuals with higher education who moved to a local area that has a college,

and that the college proximity variable is not a legitimate instrument for this group.

       For those ages 18-19, it is not entirely clear whether address information was based on

location of household at screening or address at first interview, where college students may have

been temporarily away from their permanent residence at the time of the interview. (Center for

Human Resources Research 1994, p. 228). The results in Table 2 suggest that any effect of this

phenomenon is not overwhelmingly strong, as the effect of college proximity for those between

ages 14-17 those ages 18-19 is very similar and well within sampling error.



                             7. A COMPARISON OF 1976 TO 1989

       To further assess the robustness of the college proximity identification strategy, this

section analyses data virtually identical to that in the NLSYM66 described above, but collected

thirteen years later. I use a cohort of 3213 young men surveyed in the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY79). I matched the confidential county level geocode information on

residential location at age 14 to data on the location of four-year colleges (National Center for

Education Statistics, 1978). The age range is restricted to those 14-19 in 1979, for comparability

with the preferred NLSYM66 sample based on the analysis in section 6.

       In Table 5, I show the first stage estimates of the effect of college proximity on the

educational attainment of men ages 24-29. Using specifications similar to Table 3, I interact the

College-In-County indicator with background quartile. For the NLSYM66, column 1 shows that


                                                 14
restricting the sample to 24-29 year olds leads to results across quartiles substantively similar to

the results for ages 24-34. The response function for this group corresponding to Figure 2 is also

similar. As a type of specification check for omitted variable bias, the results in columns 2 also

show that the strong effect in the NLSYM66 is attenuated only slightly (a decrease from 1.04 to

.96) when additional family background controls are included for availability of print media,

immigrant status, and family size – even though these variables are jointly very significant. The

corresponding returns to schooling IV estimate is .131 (.064).

       For the NLSY79, column 3 in the first row of Table 5 shows that the lowest background

quartile has the largest interaction, but the effect of college proximity on educational attainment

is less than half as large in the NLSY79 as in the NLSYM66. Moreover, the effect is nearly cut

in half again in column 4 with additional background controls; in a test of the joint statistical

significance of the four college-in-county interactions, I accept the null hypothesis of no

difference from zero among quartiles (p-value .11). Other recent research using the NLSY79 has

come to the same substantive conclusion about these interactions (Cameron and Taber 2000).

For the overall first stage relationship, the indicator for college-in-county is only associated with

0.08 years of additional schooling in the NLSY79 (with a standard error of .08), which is

statistically insignificant and about one-third the magnitude of the first stage relationship

reported in for the NLSYM66 cohort in Section 3. As a consequence, the corresponding IV

estimate of the return to schooling is extremely imprecise, with a standard error of 0.46 (and a

point estimate of 0.44) using 1989 hourly wage data in the NLSY79.

       Is this decline over time in the effect of college-in-county on educational attainment to be

expected? Recent work shows that the market for higher education has become geographically

more integrated. Hoxby (1997) presents evidence on several factors that may have led to this


                                                 15
integration between 1960s and the 1980s, including the deregulation of the airline and

telecommunications industries (reducing the transportation and communication costs of attending

college further from home), and tuition reciprocity among states’ public college systems. Earlier

innovations gradually took hold and also helped integrate the market, such as standardized

admissions testing and financial need analysis, and the information exchange system initiated by

the National Merit Scholarship program. While the costs of going away to college appear to

have decreased in absolute terms, they also seem to have decreased even more in relative terms.

Travel, communication, and room & board costs are have become a relatively smaller share of

the cost of college as tuition costs have risen faster over time (Kane 1999). Students have also

become much more likely to apply to out-of-state colleges over time (Hoxby 1997). This may be

related to a type of network effect, where it is more feasible to conceive of going away to college

if one knows others who are doing so. In general, this evidence is consistent with a reduction

over time in the importance of proximity as an inducement for college attendance.



                                        8. CONCLUSION

       In this paper I offer an interpretation of an IV estimate of the return to schooling as a

weighted average of causal effects, using the example of college proximity as an instrumental

variable. I replicate earlier work in which Card (1995b) concludes that the returns to education

are about 10-14% for individuals whose schooling is affected by the instrumental variable of

distance to college, as opposed to a typical OLS estimate of 8%.

       One of the most important questions raised by this instrumental variable is its external

validity: what subgroups of the population do these estimates tell us about? I find that most of

the individuals affected were from more disadvantaged family backgrounds, particularly with


                                                 16
lower parental education. I quantify the weights implicit in the IV estimates, and show that 53%

of the weight is on the lowest family background quartile, and only 23% is on the top two

quartiles. Also, using family background quartiles as a proxy for discount rate differences, my

results show that proximity to college tends to cause high discount rate individuals to graduate

from high school and attend some college, while proximity tends to cause low discount rate

individuals to increase the number of years they attend college.

        A second important question for interpretation is the internal validity of this instrumental

variable: does it identify a causal effect? The evidence here is mixed. Two rationalizable but

puzzling facts are that proximity to a two year college has no effect on schooling and that the

presence of a college nearby appears to affect the educational attainment of some individuals

who would otherwise have only completed ninth or tenth grade. However, restricting the age

range to a more valid subset and introducing additional background controls does not

substantively change the original results using the NLSYM66 (in Card 1995b), and the reduced

impact of the instrument in more recent data is consistent with increasing geographic integration

of the higher education market.

        Although analysis of the internal validity of this particular application suggests that

estimates of the returns to education using college proximity as an instrument should be viewed

with some caution, the synthesis of modeling and methodology used to examine the external

validity is generally applicable to future studies of schooling using instrumental variables to

identify causal effects.




                                                 17
                                   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

       I thank John Abowd, Josh Angrist, Sue Dynarski, Matt Eichner, Jerry Hausman, Bo

Honoré, Caroline Hoxby, Guido Imbens, George Jakubson, Larry Kahn, Larry Katz, Whitney

Newey, Steve Pischke, Ceci Rouse, Chris Taber, and John Tyler for helpful comments, and

David Card both for comments and for providing data from his research. I gratefully

acknowledge support during this research from a National Science Foundation Graduate

Fellowship and from the National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                        REFERENCES

Angrist, J. D. (1998), “Estimating the Labor Market Impact of Voluntary Military Service Using
   Social Security Data on Military Applicants,” Econometrica, 66:2, 249-288.
Angrist, J. D., and Imbens, G. W. (1995), “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of Average
   Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity,” Journal of the American
   Statistical Association, 90, 431-442.
Angrist, J. D., Imbens, G. W, and Rubin, D. B. (1996), “Identification of Causal Effects Using
   Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91, 444-455.
Angrist, J. D., and Krueger, A. B. (1991), “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
   Schooling and Earnings,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 979-1014.
Ashenfelter, O. C., and Rouse, C. E. (1998), “Income, Schooling, and Ability: Evidence from a
   New Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 253-284.
Becker, G. S. (1975), Human Capital. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Center for Human Resources Research, (1994), “NLS User's Guide,” Columbus: Ohio State
   University.
Cameron, S., and Taber, C. R. (2000) “Borrowing Constraints and the Returns to Schooling,”
   NBER Working Paper No. 7761.
Card, D. E. (1995a), “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited,” Research in Labor
   Economics, 14, 23-48.
----- (1995b), “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Returns to
     Schooling,” in Aspects of Labour Market Behaviour: Essays in Honor of John Vanderkamp,
     eds. L. N. Christofides et al. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 201-221.




                                               18
----- (1999), “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics,
     Volume 3A, eds. O. C. Ashenfelter and D. E. Card. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1801-1863.
Griliches, Z. (1977), “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems.”
    Econometrica, 45, 1-22.
Heckman, J. J., and Vytlacil, E. J. (1998) “Instrumental Variables Methods for the Correlated
   Random Coefficient Model,” Journal of Human Resources, 33:4, 974-1002.
Hoxby, C. M. (1997) “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education Explains
   College Tuition,” NBER Working Paper No. 6323.
Imbens, G. W., and Angrist, J. D. (1994) “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
   Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, 62, 467-476.
Kane, T. J. (1999), The Price of Admission, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Meyer, B. D. (1995), “Natural and Quasi-experiments in Economics,” Journal of Business and
  Economic Statistics, 13:2, 151-161.
National Center for Education Statistics, (1978), ICPSR 7647: Higher Education Institutional
   Characteristics, 1977, Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
   Research.
Willis, R. J. (1986), “Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital
   Earnings Functions,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1, eds. O. C. Ashenfelter
   and R. Layard, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 525-602.
Wooldridge, J. M. (1997), “On two stage least squares estimation of the average treatment
  effect in a random coefficients model,” Economic Letters, 56, 129-133.




                                               19
           Table 1. Replicated IV Estimates of Returns to Schooling.



Estimation technique              OLS           IV       IV          IV
                                  (1)           (2)      (3)         (4)


Schooling coefficient              .073          .132     .094        .133
                                  (.003)        (.049)   (.064)      (.049)

Quadratic Experience              yes           yes      yes         no

Sample (Age in 1966)              14-24         14-24    14-19       14-24

N = number of observations        3010          3010     2037       3010

Card (1995b): Table-col/row       T2-c2         T3-c5B    T4-r7        –


NOTE: Regression of log hourly wage in 1976 on years of schooling, with
standard errors in parentheses. All specifications also include Experience, Race,
Original Location, Current Location, and Background. Experience = Age -
Schooling - 6. In columns 1-3, schooling, experience, and experience squared are
treated as endogenous, with an indicator for college in county, age, and age-
squared as excluded instruments; the quadratic in experience (and age) is omitted
in column 4. Race is an indicator for black. Original Location variables are
indicators for nine regions of residence in 1966 and an indicator of residence in an
SMSA in 1966. Current Location variables are an indicator for living in an
SMSA in 1976, and for living the Southern U.S in1976. Family Background
variables are highest grade attained by mother and by father and 12 indicators:
residence with both natural parents at age 14, residence with mother only at age
14, missing mother's and missing father's education, and eight interactions of
parental education. The sample includes all observations with reporting highest
grade completed in 1976. Replicating Card’s sample exactly requires including
only observations with wages between $1 and $30 per hour. 49 additional
observations were excluded for whom the interview month was missing in 1966
(D. Card, personal communication, April 20, 1995). This appears to have been an
attempt to omit those not interviewed, however those 49 individuals were actually
interviewed even though the interview month is not recorded in the data.




                                           20
     Table 2. Probability of Characteristics by Family Background Quartile


 Quartile                              Lowest        3rd        2nd      Highest


 Mother High School Graduate                 0       .05        .55        .97


 Father High School Graduate                 0       .06        .31         .84


 Lived with Both Parents at Age 14       .54         .73        .86        .93


 Race is Not Black                       .41         .67        .88        .96


 Lived in SMSA at Age 14                 .46         .64        .70        .74


 College in County in 1966               .59         .67        .71        .73


NOTE: Background Quartile is computed as follows. Following Card (1995b), a
predicted value is estimated from a regression of schooling on indicators for age
and race as well as original location and background variables defined in Table 1
for the sample of 1163 observations with no college in their county in 1966. The
25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the predicted values from this sample were used
to group all 3010 observations with valid wage and education data into four
quartiles. Each background quartiles includes one quarter of the observations with
no college in their 1966 county, 239-240 observations per quartile. There are 339
observations that do have a college in county in the lowest quartile, 483 in the
third quartile, 593 in the second quartile, and 638 in the highest quartile. Those
with missing parental education are coded as not reporting that parent was a high
school graduate, since both groups go on to have low educational attainment.




                                        21
     Table 3. Decomposition of IV weighting by Family Background Quartile



 Q                      wq              λq|x           ∆Sq|x           ωq|x
                        (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)


Lowest quartile        .19             .18              .93            .53
                                                       (.18)

3rd quartile           .24             .16              .35            .23
                                                       (.18)

2nd quartile           .28             .15              .20            .14
                                                       (.19)

Highest quartile       .29             .15              .13            .09
                                                       (.20)


NOTE: wq = P(Q). λq|x = E[P(Z|X,Q)(1-P(Z|X,Q)) | Q]. ∆Sq|x = E[E(S|Z=1,X,Q) -
E(S|Z=0,X,Q) | Q]. ωq|x = (wq λq|x ∆Sq|x)/(/q wq λq|x ∆Sq|x). λq|x, Sq|x, are computed
linear regression as described in the text. X includes age, region and background
characteristics (defined in Table 1). Since background quartile is positively
correlated with college in county, this implies that there is a larger share of data in
the upper quartiles with a college in their county in 1966, as is shown in column 1.
This rule differs from Card’s original formulation of equal size quartiles based on
the overall population with valid education data, and was adopted to improve
estimation efficiency by ensuring that the upper quartiles do not include only a
small number of observations with no college in county. Using Card’s definition,
the point estimates for the specification in column 3 are .87 (lowest), .16 (3rd), .39
(2nd), and .02 (highest).




                                          22
           Table 4. Difference in Highest Grade Completed at age 25
               by College Proximity in 1966 for Five Age groups



Age in 1966:             14-15       16-17      18-19      20-21      22-24

Interaction of Age        .25         .24        .29        .66        .65
and College Proximity    (.18)       (.18)      (.21)      (.25)      (.21)


NOTE: Additional regressors are 11 indicators for Age, as well as Race, Original
Location and Background as defined in Table 1. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                       23
               Table 5. Regression of Highest Grade Completed on
        Interaction of College-In-County (CIC) with Background Quartile
                       and Other Covariates, Men ages 24-29
                                       NLSYM66 in 1976              NLSY79 in 1989

                                         (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)

 CIC * Lowest quartile                  1.04         .96             .47         .28
                                        (.24)       (.24)           (.16)       (.15)
 CIC * 3rd quartile                      .48         .42            -.06        -.10
                                        (.22)       (.22)           (.16)       (.15)
 CIC * 2nd quartile                      .27         .19             .08         .03
                                        (.21)       (.20)           (.15)       (.15)
 CIC * Highest quartile                 -.09        -.04            -.21        -.29
                                        (.19)       (.19)           (.16)       (.16)
 Age, Race                                x           x               x           x
 Original Location                        x           x               x           x
 Background                               x           x               x           x
 Background Quartile                      x           x               x           x
 Print Media                                          x                           x
 Immigrant/Family Size                                x                           x
 R-squared                               .26         .31             .27         .31
 F-stat [p-value] of                    5.79        4.98            2.80        1.87
  CIC * quartile interactions           [.00]       [.00]           [.02]       [.11]

NOTE: Age, Race, Original Location and Background are defined as in Table 1.
Original Location for NLSY79 is region at age 14, and residence in an urban area at age
14. Background quartile is computed as Table 2. Print media includes indicators for
presence at age 14 of magazines, of newspapers, and a library card. Immigrant/Family
Size includes indicators for immigrant status and 2-3, 4-5, 6-8, and 9+ siblings. F-
statistic is for the joint significance of the CIC by quartile interactions in rows 1-4.
Sample sizes are 2037 (NLSYM66) and 3213 (NLSY79). Standard errors are in
parentheses.




                                           24
25
26
