                                 ()$*& )+))+




                                     
                            


                                             !
                                             "#$ %
                                            %&    


                                          $ '  ,--.
                                  //000%  /  /0,--.


                       *(1)1*2)**3)+)
                                4-5-3  "6"
                                   % #73-849,
                                     6 % 8---




                
             
       !        "#     
$!% & #!'$                 
 (    &')* '#'+,-,.//"      0 
             1       
'  '" !2&1       ' 1 !3#"   2
   4       0       $
           &  ' )    ' 
 1      0 !2&& #! !2&' 1 !3#"   

567778  9* $    23 20"'  
 4  4   0  :  4  " 
  05 0"   
        
       
 !" #$% &" $ &'                      
()% *  +,,-
. & /,,,
)0

                                                    $%#%
                          
                                    
           !         " #         
  $                 !%                          
     &                 '  (               )   *
'()*! *  +,    -                       ,-.!    /001% 
                           $     
         )   *                                        -
  )             
       %  &   ,-.                              2  & 
           $          $ 
            )  * +    
                                 3   *   
                                                         
                                                            
          4       &     ,-.
    &                                      
                    4 
                5            &5                 
                                         &              
    &                                &


67 8$                            ,-                             7  9  
(    :                         (      :                    ).(
*3                                      *3                                    /;11'  
3   *0110<                     3   *0110<                    '  *01=1;
 .>:)                                      ?                            ? 
$?  
1.   Introduction

        The passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act

(PRWORA) in 1996 provided the most radical reform of the U.S. cash assistance, welfare sys-

tem in the last 60 years. In particular, the legislation directs states to reorient their welfare pro-

grams toward encouraging earnings, and not cash assistance, as the means for disadvantaged

parents to provide for their children. To encourage this “work rather than welfare” objective,

families under PRWORA are limited to 5 years of federally-funded cash-aid, states are obliged

to require adult family members to engage in some type of work after two years of aid, and the

full funding of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block grant is subject to

the states’ meeting stringent work participation requirements for adults in assistance units. This

combination of time limits and participation requirements have placed increasing pressure on

states to devise strategies and programs that get low-income households out of welfare and into

jobs.

        The focus on work in this most recent effort to reform the U.S. welfare system is not new.

Beginning in the 1960s, the federal government—through the Work Incentives (WIN) program

and its successor program, the Job Opportunity and Basic Skills (JOBS) program begun in

1988—has supported employment and training programs in an effort to increase the employment

rates and skill levels of welfare recipients. What has changed in the most recent welfare legisla-

tion is the emphasis on getting recipients into jobs quickly rather than allowing for the more de-

liberate acquisition of basic and vocational skills in state “welfare-to-work” programs. To

achieve the federal government’s objective, states have increasingly relied on “work-first,”

“quick-job-entry,” or “labor-force-attachment” (LFA) strategies that aim to quickly move wel-

fare recipients into unsubsidized employment through the provision of job search training and




                                                  1
assistance. Such programs are in contrast to programs that emphasize “human-capital develop-

ment” (HCD), through more expensive and longer duration basic skills and vocational training

programs.1

           Although the movement of states, as well as the federal government, away from basic

skills and vocational training programs and towards programs that encourage quick entry into

jobs has been motivated by several factors, one important impetus has come from the findings of

several recent experimental evaluations of various state welfare-to-work programs. One of the

earliest and most influential of these studies is the evaluation of California’s Greater Avenues to

Independence (GAIN) program conducted by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corpora-

tion (MDRC) in the late 1980s and early 1990s. In this evaluation, welfare recipients in six Cali-

fornia counties were randomly assigned to either a “treatment” group that was to receive services

in a county based and designed “welfare-to-work” program, or to a “control” group to which

these services were denied. Counties were given considerable discretion in the types of recipients

they selected, as well as in the way they designed their programs. Thus, in effect, the MDRC

study was an evaluation of six separate programs, each with its own distinct population and each

with a within-site random-assignment design.

           The largest effects on participants were found for Riverside County’s GAIN program.

Among female heads on AFDC at the time of their enrollment in GAIN, Riverside’s program

boosted annual employment rates and earnings by 39% and 63%, respectively, over the first

three years after randomization compared to those of non-participants and reduced annual

AFDC/TANF participation rates by 8%.2 In contrast to the programs run in the other analysis


1
 See Friedlander, Greenberg, and Robins (1995) and LaLonde (1997) for more on government-sponsored training
programs in the U.S.
2
    See estimates for the AFDC-FG (female-headed) in Table 5 below.



                                                        2
counties that emphasized human capital acquisition (usually involving longer periods of basic

education and training), Riverside emphasized a tightly focused job search program (known as

“Job Club”) and maintained a consistent message “that employment is central and should be

sought expeditiously and that opportunities to obtain low-paying jobs should not be turned

down.”3

          The “work-first” approach of Riverside, which received national (and international) ac-

claim for its success,4 has become the standard-bearer and model for welfare-to-work programs

not only for California but also for the rest of the nation.5 The emphasis in the work-first ap-

proach on placing people into jobs quickly, even if at low initial wages, reflects a view that the

workplace is where welfare recipients can best acquire their work habits and skills. However,

there are several reasons why the findings from MDRC’s evaluation of Riverside’s GAIN pro-

gram do not necessarily imply that the work-first strategy is more effective than the human-

capital strategy for increasing the self-sufficiency and reducing the welfare dependence of recipi-

ents.

          The first issue concerns the timeframe over which the effects of these types of programs

are typically measured. As noted above, the MDRC has published estimates of GAIN impacts

only for the first three years after random assignment to treatment. As a general matter, extrapo-

lating from short run estimates of the impacts of social programs to what will happen in the

longer run can be misleading, as Couch (1992) and Friedlander and Burtless (1995) have noted.

More importantly for the case at hand, reliance on short-run estimates of program effects will

3
    Hogan (1995).
4
  For example, the Riverside GAIN program was awarded the Harvard Kennedy School of Government’s “Innova-
tions in American Government Award” in 1996.
5
  Based on these evaluations of the GAIN programs, the Wilson administration in California pushed to have all of
the state’s counties adopt the Riverside work-first approach in its GAIN programs, culminating in the 1995 GAIN
reforms (AB 1371).



                                                       3
tend to understate effectiveness of human capital development programs relative to those that

emphasize early labor force entry and attachment, simply because the human-capital develop-

ment programs are more time-intensive treatments and typically take longer to complete relative

to work-first programs. Work-first programs typically take only a few weeks for participants to

complete and such programs concentrate on getting workers into jobs as soon as possible. As

such, there is a strong presumption that, relative to long-term results, short-term evaluations will

favor work-first programs over human-capital development ones.6 Estimates of program effects

over a longer post-enrollment period are needed before one can accurately assess relative long-

run benefits of these alternative welfare-to-work strategies.

         The second reason for caution in inferring the relative effectiveness of alternative training

strategies relates to the design of the GAIN evaluation. We want to compare the outcomes of two

different treatments, namely, HCD and LFA. To do so, ideally, the experiment would have ran-

domly assigned individuals in the same location to the two programs or to a control group. In-

stead, AFDC assistance units within a county were randomly assigned either to receive the ser-

vices of the county’s particular implementation of GAIN or to be denied these services. As

MDRC made clear in its reports on this evaluation, this experimental design does not allow one

to draw inferences about the differential impact of alternative programs—e.g., work-first versus

human-capital—that vary between counties with the same level of rigor that apply to the within-

county gross impacts of a county-specific program relative to no program. This is because pro-

gram effects may he heterogeneous across individuals and programs in different counties may

have selected different mixes of participants. Alternatively, program effects may vary with eco-


6
  A similar point is made by Mincer (1974) in his model of schooling decisions. Therein, Mincer notes that at early
ages the earnings of individuals who choose additional schooling will be lower than those who choose to go to work
at early ages, simply because attending school inhibits going to work, even if all alternative activities yield the same
present value of lifetime earnings.



                                                           4
nomic conditions and these conditions may vary across the counties. Moreover, even randomiza-

tion over the three types of treatments considered in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation—namely

HCD, LFA and no services—would only allow one to assess the efficacy of a program within a

particular site. The ability to assess the policy question of interest—whether future implementa-

tions of welfare-to-work programs should follow a work-first or human capital development

strategy—will still depend on the credibility of extrapolating results from site to other.

        In this paper we address both of these concerns. To address whether estimates of the

GAIN impacts based on only three years of data are indicative of the longer run gains from

GAIN programs, we present estimates of the impacts using nine years of post-enrollment data on

the employment, earnings and welfare participation of the members of the experimental and con-

trol groups in four urban counties used in the MDRC evaluation of the California GAIN program

(Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego counties).7 Our estimates of longer-run im-

pacts exploit the within-county random assignment design of the original MDRC evaluation and,

therefore, maintain the credibility ascribed to such a design for the gross impacts of each of

GAIN programs implemented in these counties for the populations they served.

        To address the second issue—generalizing the findings from one county to another

county and comparing the effects of HCD and LFA strategies—the paper also provides estimates

of the differential impacts of the work-first strategy implemented in Riverside county relative to

the more human-capital oriented programs used in the other three counties at the time of random

assignment in the original MDRC evaluation. In principle, the ideal way of estimating such dif-

ferential impacts within a county would be to randomly assign subjects from each of the counties

to one of three arms: (a) work-first, (b) human-capital treatments, or (c) a control group that re-

7
 We omit the two rural counties included in the original MDRC evaluation, (Butte and Tulare), because these rural
economies are quite different from the four urban counties.



                                                       5
ceives neither bundle of services. Currently, data for such an experiment does not exist, at least

not one with data on long-term post-enrollment outcomes.8 Furthermore, implementing such a

design is difficult in practice, especially when a particular treatment entails sending and main-

taining an overarching orientation, or “message.” For example, it has been strongly suggested

that an essential feature of the Riverside GAIN program was the pervasiveness of their “mes-

sage” that all program participants, even those with skill deficits, should strive to get a job

quickly, regardless of its compensation (e.g. Corbett, 1994/95). Evaluation designs with multiple

treatments, in which one or more treatments attempt to maintain such programmatic “messages”

or “orientations” would appear to be nearly impossible to implement within a single bureaucracy

or agency or on a sufficient scale.

           To estimate the differential impacts of alternative programs, we instead make use of sta-

tistical matching and regression adjustments based on the personal characteristics, past welfare,

and earnings histories of welfare recipients in the four counties in an attempt to adjust for across-

county differences in GAIN participants. While one cannot claim, a priori, that such adjustments

eliminate these across-county differences in the participant populations, we exploit the availabil-

ity of data on control groups denied all GAIN services in each of the counties to assess the qual-

ity and credibility of these adjustments. As a result of the random assignment of welfare recipi-

ents eligible for GAIN services in each county, the control groups reflect, on average, each

county’s participant pool in the absence of receiving the GAIN treatments available in each of

the counties. Thus, we perform statistical tests of whether our adjustments eliminate across-

county differences, on average, in county post-enrollment outcomes for controls.9 If our regres-


8
 We note that MDRC is conducting such an evaluation in three counties in the U.S. in their National Evaluation of
Welfare-to-Work Strategies. To date, results for two years of post-enrollment outcomes have been released. See
Hamilton, et al. (1997).
9
    Dehejia (2000) discusses the related question whether data from different sites can be pooled conditional on co-



                                                          6
sion adjustments are sufficient, there should be no remaining differences between the outcomes

of control group members, who received no GAIN services, across the counties. We note that the

strategy of adjustment, including matching, and validating these methods by using data for ex-

perimentally-generated control groups is similar to the strategies used by Lalonde (1986),

Heckman and Hotz (1989), Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd (1997, 1998a, 1998b), Dehejia and

Wahba (1999), and Hotz, Imbens and Mortimer (1999).

            We then use the estimated models to address the question of differential impacts of alter-

native programs. The models estimate the effect of treatment for a vector of observed character-

istics. We use the predictions of the model to estimate the effect of applying the treatment in

Riverside County to the treated population in the other three counties. Given the 9-year post-en-

rollment data on outcomes that we have, we can assess both the short- and longer-run differential

impacts of these two types of treatment strategies for the various county-specific treatment popu-

lations. These predicted effects for two programs, for a given population, can then be compared

to assess the differential effects of types of services (treatments) used in the respective programs.

We show that these matching estimates differ—sometimes substantially—from the simple com-

parison of the net treatment effects in each county, suggesting that effect heterogeneity is sub-

stantively important.

            The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief de-

scription of California’s GAIN program and the original MDRC evaluation. We begin by show-

ing that the populations selected (i.e., who were subject to randomization) were very different

across the counties; Riverside, and to a lesser extent, San Diego, chose to enroll in their GAIN

programs nearly all cases, the other counties choosing to enroll in their GAIN program only long



variates.



                                                    7
term welfare recipients who are potentially the most difficult to serve. Thus, if there is treatment

heterogeneity, it is likely to affect our comparison of program effects across counties. In Section

3, we present within-county experimental estimates of the gross impacts of the county-specific

GAIN programs on the employment, earnings, and welfare participation during the 9-year post-

enrollment period. In Section 4, we provide a more detailed discussion of our strategy for esti-

mating the differential impacts of the Riverside GAIN program relative to the GAIN programs

used in Alameda, Los Angeles, San Diego counties and present estimates for the same outcomes

and follow-up period as analyzed in Section 3. Finally, we offer some conclusions about the im-

plications of our findings in Section 5.

2.   The GAIN Program, the MDRC Evaluation and GAIN Evaluation Counties

        In this section we provide a brief description of the structure of the GAIN program and

how it was implemented in the four urban counties we consider in this paper. We also describe

the structure of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation.

        The GAIN program began in California in 1986 and, in 1989, became the state’s official

Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) Program, authorized by the Family Support

Act, the nation’s attempt to reform the welfare system prior to PRWORA. The GAIN program

represented a compromise between two groups in the State’s legislature with different visions of

how to reform the welfare system. One group favored the “work-first” approach, i.e., use of a

relatively short-term program of mandatory job search, followed by unpaid work experience for

participants who did not find jobs. The other group favored the “human capital” approach, i.e., a

program providing a broader range of services designed to develop the skills of welfare recipi-

ents.

        In crafting the GAIN legislation, these two groups compromised on a program that con-




                                                 8
tained work-first as well as basic skills and education components in what became known as the

GAIN Program Model.10 The GAIN model consisted of the following sequence of steps. At the

time of initial (or continuing) determination of eligibility for welfare, county staff also deter-

mined whether the head of a welfare household was subject to GAIN11 and, if so, registered her

(usually, although sometimes him) for GAIN. (Staff also offered to register adults on welfare

who were exempted but wished to volunteer for the program.) A county’s GAIN registrant was

required to attend an orientation meeting to learn about the county’s particular GAIN program

and their obligations under this program. Each registrant was administered a screening test to

measure a registrant’s basic reading and math skills. (The same test was used in each of the

counties.) Based on their score on this test and whether she had a high school diploma or a GED,

she was sent to one of two service tracks. A registrants with a low test score and who did not

have a high school diploma or GED was deemed “in need of basic education” and was to be

routed through a sequence of services that included access to Adult Basic Education (ABE) or

English as a Second Language (ESL) programs. Those not judged to be in need of basic educa-

tion were to bypass these basic education services. A registrant, in either group, was then to be

channeled into job search activities in an attempt to get her employed. If the registrant did not

find a job, they were to be provided access to vocational, on-the-job training and work experi-

ence activities, in an attempt to enhance a registrant’s human capital and, thus, to improve their

chances of securing a job.

           While the GAIN legislation set out a clear set of goals for the program and the above

model for the delivery of services, it also gave California’s 58 counties substantial discretion and


10
     See Riccio and Friedlander (1992) for a more complete description of this model.
11
  Heads of households on welfare were mandated to register for GAIN, except for female heads with children under
the age of 6. See Riccio, et al. (1989) for a more complete description of the criteria for mandated participation



                                                           9
flexibility in designing their programs. In particular, counties had discretion over the types of

welfare recipients they registered for their GAIN programs and the relative weight they placed

on quick labor market entry versus skill development.12 County GAIN programs differed along

both of these dimensions. With respect to the types of welfare recipients registered for GAIN,

some counties, like Riverside and San Diego, operated “universal” programs in that all welfare

applicants and recipients were registered for GAIN, while others, like Alameda and Los Angeles,

registered mostly long-term welfare recipients, who presumably were more difficult to serve.

           MDRC conducted a randomized evaluation of the impacts and cost-effectiveness of the

GAIN program in six research counties (Alameda, Butte, Los Angeles, Riverside, San Diego,

and Tulare). From the latter part of 1988 to the middle of 1990, each county chose whom to reg-

ister for GAIN. MDRC then randomly assigned some of these registrants to an experimental

group, which was eligible to receive GAIN services and subject to its participation mandates, and

the remainder of these registrants to a control group, whose members were not eligible for GAIN

services or mandates but could seek (on their own initiative) alternative services in their commu-

nities. Note that because the counties followed different practices with respect to choosing regis-

trants, both the experimental and control populations will vary across the research counties. The

controls were embargoed from any GAIN services from the date of their random assignment un-

til June 30, 1993.13 MDRC collected data on both experimental and control group members in

each of the research counties, including some background and demographic characteristics and

on a set of outcomes after random assignment. (Most of these data were obtained from state and

county administrative data systems.) They also monitored the operations of the programs in each


12
     See Riccio and Friedlander (1992), chapter 1.
13
   For a period of two years following the lifting of this embargo, control group members were not required to par-
ticipate in GAIN but could if they asked to enroll.



                                                        10
of the six research counties. MDRC issued a series of reports on program operation14 and on the

impacts of GAIN programs in these counties over the three- to five-year post random assignment

period.15

           Descriptive statistics and sample sizes for the participants in the MDRC evaluation in the

four analysis counties (Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego) are provided in Table

1. Separate statistics are provided for GAIN registrants who were members of female-headed

households on AFDC at the time of random assignment (AFDC-FG cases) and two-parent

households on AFDC (AFDC-U cases). The statistics in Table 1 will be discussed below. We

note that our samples for three of the four counties (all but Los Angeles) are slightly smaller than

the original samples used by MDRC due to our inability to find records for some sample mem-

bers in California’s Unemployment Insurance Base Wage system16 or because we were missing

information on the educational attainment of the sample member. The number of cases lost in

these three counties is very small, never larger than 1.8% of the total sample,17 and does not ap-

pear to differ by experimental status. Finally, note that in most of the counties and especially for

AFDC-FG cases, a much larger fraction of cases were assigned to the experimental group than to

the control group.

           As noted above, there are differences in what types of AFDC cases were registered for

GAIN. For the four counties we analyze, the programs in Riverside and San Diego counties

sought to register all welfare cases in GAIN while the programs in Alameda and Los Angeles



14
     See Wallace and Long (1987), Riccio, et al. (1989) and Riccio and Friedlander (1992).
15
     See Riccio and Friedlander (1992), Riccio, et al. (1994) and Freedman, et al. (1996).
16
     The California Economic Development Department (EDD) administers the State’s UI system.
17
   The losses from the original MDRC samples were as follows: Alameda: 0.6% for AFDC-FGs and 6.0% for
AFDC-Us; Los Angeles: 0.02% for AFDC-FGs and 0.0% for AFDC-Us; Riverside: 1.1% for AFDC-FGs and 1.8%
for AFDC-Us; San Diego: 1.1% for AFDC-FGs and 1.0% for AFDC-Us.



                                                           11
counties focused on long-term welfare recipients.18 The consequences of these differences in se-

lection criteria can be seen in Table 1. Panel A of Table 1 displays the characteristics of the

AFDC-FG cases, i.e., households with a single adult (usually a female) on welfare, while Panel

B provides comparable information for AFDC-U cases, i.e., households with a married couple.

In Alameda and Los Angeles, over 95% of the cases had been on welfare a year prior to random

assignment; in San Diego and Riverside, fewer (for some cells much fewer) than 65 percent had

been.

        These differences in selection criteria also contributed to substantial differences in the

employment histories and individual characteristics of the registrant populations across these

four counties. As shown in the two Panels of Table 1, the registrants in Alameda and Los Ange-

les counties had, on average, much lower levels of earnings prior to random assignment relative

to those in Riverside and San Diego. These differences in past income across counties are most

dramatic for AFDC-U cases, where the average past earnings of GAIN registrants in Riverside

and San Diego counties were between 5 and 7 times greater than those for Alameda and Los An-

geles registrants. Furthermore, the registrants in Alameda and Los Angeles were, on average,

older, had lower levels of educational attainment, and were more likely to be assessed as “in

need of basic education” when they entered the GAIN program than the average registrants in

Riverside and San Diego. The differences in characteristics of GAIN registrants displayed in the

two panels of Table 1 also suggest the possibility of differences in the overall low-income and

welfare-prone populations that reside in each of these counties.

        The across-county differences in earnings, labor force and welfare participation rates for

GAIN registrants also may have resulted from differences in the labor market conditions pre-

18
  For example, Alameda County, which began its GAIN program in the third quarter of 1989, began by registering
cases that had been receiving AFDC since 1989, subsequently registering more recent recipients. The GAIN pro-



                                                     12
vailing at the time of random assignment. In Table 2, we present data on the labor market condi-

tions in the four counties for the years during which GAIN registrants were enrolled into the

MDRC GAIN Evaluation. While it is unclear the extent to which these differences in labor mar-

ket conditions can account for the across-county differences in earnings, employment and wel-

fare participation of GAIN registrants noted in Table 1, the diversity in the labor markets of these

counties is quite apparent. Table 2 reveals noticeable differences in the structure and state of the

labor markets in these counties around the enrollment period. For example, both Alameda and

Los Angeles Counties had higher shares of employment in the manufacturing sector than did ei-

ther Riverside or San Diego Counties. Around the time of the enrollment into the GAIN Evalua-

tion, employment in Riverside County was growing at a much higher rate (7.4 to 8.5%) than was

the case in any of the other three counties.

        There also were marked differences in the policies and practices that were followed in

these counties. Senior leadership in the four counties had very different views about what ser-

vices to provide to welfare recipients and the likely cost-effectiveness of those services. The

GAIN legislation provided the counties with enough discretion to allow them to allocate re-

sources consistent with those views thus leading to very different programs. In particular, coun-

ties differed in the emphasis placed on work-first versus human capital and skill development in

their GAIN programs. Riverside’s program stood apart from other counties in degree to which

staff emphasized moving registrants into the labor market quickly. This difference in Riverside’s

work-first orientation is reflected in the distribution of program activities over the first three

years of GAIN’s operation (see Table 3). (The shaded quarters in this—and the next—table show

the quarters in which the random assignment of registrants into the MDRC experimental evalua-



gram in Los Angeles County initially only registered those cases that had been on welfare for 3 consecutive years.



                                                        13
tion were conducted for each of the four counties.)

           The activities in the table are organized into groups, one representing job search-related

activities, another consisting of basic skills and educational activities, and a third including ac-

tivities which provided registrants with direct work experience. Clearly, Riverside disproportion-

ately channeled its registrants into job search activities relative to basic skills activities. (None of

the county programs made extensive use of work-experience activities in the early stages of their

operation.) Riverside’s emphasis on job search activities stands in contrast to the other three

counties, especially Alameda and Los Angeles, where registrants were much more likely to be in

basic skills activities in any given month.

           The data in Table 3 are consistent with other indicators of Riverside’s emphasis on get-

ting GAIN registrants quickly into jobs. For example, Riverside staff required that their regis-

trants that were enrolled in basic skills programs continue to participate in Job Club and other job

search activities. In a survey of program staff conducted by MDRC at the time of its evaluation,

95% of case managers in Riverside rated getting registrants into jobs quickly as their highest

goal while fewer than 20% of managers in the other research counties gave a similar response.19

In the same survey, 69% of Riverside case managers indicated that they would advise a welfare

mother offered a low-paying job to take it rather than wait for a better opportunity, while only

23% of their counterparts in Alameda county indicated they would give this advice.

           Overall, MDRC concluded, “What is perhaps most distinctive about Riverside’s program,

though, is not that its registrants participated somewhat less in education and training, but that

the staff’s emphasis on jobs pervaded their interactions with registrants throughout the program”

(Riccio and Friedlander, 1992, p. 58). Riverside County’s GAIN staff were instructed to com-


19
     See Table 3.1 in Riccio and Friedlander (1992) for the results of this survey.



                                                             14
municate a strong “message” to all registrants, including those in education and training activi-

ties, that gaining employment was central, that it should be sought expeditiously, and that jobs

should not be turned down even if they were low-paying. In contrast, program staff in the other

research counties placed less emphasis on getting registrants into a job quickly. For example,

Alameda’s GAIN managers and staff “believed strongly in ‘human capital’ development and,

within the overall constraints imposed by the GAIN model’s service sequences, its staff encour-

aged registrants to be selective about the jobs they accepted and to take advantages of GAIN’s

education and training to prepare for higher-paying jobs.”20

            A final indicator of the differences in the way Riverside’s GAIN program operated, rela-

tive to the programs in the other counties, can be seen in Table 4. This table displays the average

monthly GAIN enrollments, by county, as a percentage of each county’s AFDC caseload. Com-

pared to the programs in Alameda and Los Angeles, Riverside consistently provided GAIN ser-

vices to more of its caseload. This pattern for these three counties is consistent with the fact that

the latter two counties enrolled more of their registrants in basic skills and education programs

compared to those focused on job search. The former programs are, on average, much more ex-

pensive, on a per case basis, compared to the latter activities. We note from Table 4 that San

Diego actually enrolled an even higher proportion of its AFDC caseload in GAIN activities than

any other county, including Riverside. This reflected the fact that San Diego officially “enrolled”

a large number (and percentage) of its AFDC participants in GAIN even though most of these

registrants did not participate in any activities. Rather, they remained in a queue, waiting until

slots in services, provided by an outside contractor, became available.

            All of the evidence provided above clearly suggests that the prevailing “treatment” in


20
     See Riccio, et al. (1994), p. xxv.



                                                   15
Riverside County’s GAIN program—both in terms of way it distributed its registrants across ac-

tivities and in the pervasive message it provided to them—was one that had a “work-first” ori-

entation, while the other county programs we consider in this paper, especially the Alameda and

Los Angeles programs, disproportionately provided their registrants with a human capital, skill

development oriented treatment.

3.   Estimating County-Specific Effects of GAIN Programs

       In this section we discuss the experimental estimates of the impacts of GAIN services and

mandates to which GAIN registrants were subject during the early 1990s on their employment,

earnings and welfare participation for up to nine years after random assignment. While well

known, we briefly characterize the properties of experimental estimators of such impacts in an-

ticipation of our discussion of the estimation of the differential effects of work-first versus hu-

man capital development treatments in Section 4. We then present the estimates of the short- and

long-run impacts for each of the four counties using the MDRC GAIN Evaluation samples.

3.1 Identifying Within-County Treatment Effects

       To help fix ideas, we define the following notation. Let D denote an indicator of the

county (and its GAIN program), where d ∈ {A,L,R,S} for the four counties in our study. Random

samples, of size, Nd, are drawn from the GAIN program registrants in each county d and let i de-

note a household in these samples. Let t denote the period (year) after a household has been ran-

domly assigned. Let T denote the treatment indicator for the treatments under the MDRC GAIN

evaluation, where T ∈ {0, w, h}, where 0 denotes no GAIN services, w denotes the work-first

oriented treatment and h denotes the human-capital development treatment. Let Yit(k) denote the

potential outcomes for household i in t periods after their (random) assignment to treatment k, so

that Yit(0) is the potential outcome associated for the no-treatment case, Yit(w) is the potential



                                                16
outcome associated with the work-first treatment and Yit(h) is the potential outcome for the hu-

man-capital development treatment as of period t. Finally, let Xi denote a vector of background

characteristics and pre-treatment variables for household i.

       Access to experimental data allows us to estimate the average gross treatment effect

(AGTE) of treatment k on those treated, which is defined to be

                                                                           
                    = t (k ) º E Yit (k ) - Yit (0) Ti = k = E D it (k ) Ti = k ,                 (1)


where ∆it(k) (≡ Yit(0) – Yit(k)) is household i’s gain as of period t from treatment k relative to re-

ceiving no GAIN services. The conditional (on X) version of this treatment effect is given by,

                             = t (k x) º E ( D it (k )) Ti = k , X i = x) ,                       (2)

for all k ∈ {w,h}. As noted above, the design of the MDRC GAIN Evaluation was to randomly

assign GAIN registrants in each County d to either the prevailing treatment in that county, Ti = kd

or to a control group that received no services, Ti = 0. This design implies that

                                       Yit (T ) ^ Ti Di = d ,                                   (C-1)

where z ^ y denotes that z is (statistically) independent of y, where in (C-1) the independence is

conditional on the county of residence (Di = d). Note that (C-1) implies that

                                                     
                     E Yit (0) Ti = k , Di = d = E Yit (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ,                   (C-1′)

i.e., the mean value of Y(0) for those who receive treatment k in County d is equal to the mean

value of the outcomes as of period t for control group members in that same county. Note that

the latter is typically unobserved by the econometrician while the latter is observable with data

from an experiment with random assignment of treatments. MDRC’s evaluation design guaran-

tees that treatment received by individual i is independent of that unit’s potential outcomes, for

all i within a particular County d. Given (C-1) (or (C-1′)), the difference between average out-



                                                       17
comes for treatment group members (receiving kd) in County d and average outcomes for the

control group, also in County d and receiving treatment 0, identifies the AGTE for that county’s

registrant population. That is

                 = td (kd ) = E (Yit (kd ) Ti = k , Di = d ) - E (Yit (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ) ,      (3)

where αtd(kd) denotes the AGTE for County d, for all d ∈ {A,L,R,S}.

          As discussed in Section 2, GAIN registrants were randomly assigned to either receive

some subsequently-determined set of GAIN services or no services at all, where the services the

“experimental” subjects received were based on the GAIN model and the types of services a par-

ticular county emphasized. Recall that Riverside’s GAIN program emphasized work-first treat-

ments (T = w), the GAIN programs in Alameda and Los Angeles Counties emphasized human-

capital development treatments (T = h), while San Diego’s GAIN program was a mixture of

these two types of programs. Moreover, we do not have data on precisely what set of services

each GAIN experimental subject actually received. Therefore, in the next section we present es-

timates of the gross effects of receiving any set of services versus no services for each of the

counties instead of estimates of specific sets of treatments. In this sense, we are approximating

the AGTE for the “prevailing” treatment that was used in a particular county in place of a more-

specific set (or sequence) of services actually received. That is, we use differences in the sample

means of outcomes between experimentals ( Yt (kd ) ) and controls ( Yt (0) ) to estimate (3) for each

county.

3.2 Long-Run Estimates of County-Specific GAIN Impacts

          Estimates for AFDC-FG cases are presented in Table 5 and the corresponding estimates

for AFDC-U cases are presented in Table 6. We provide estimates for six different outcomes: (1)

ever employed during year; (2) number of quarters worked per year; (3) annual labor market



                                                         18
earnings; (4) whether a GAIN registrant’s earnings exceeded the income of a full-time worker

earning the minimum wage; (5) whether the registrant received AFDC/TANF benefits during the

year; and (6) the number of quarters in the calendar year that she received AFDC/TANF bene-

fits.21,22 For each of these outcomes we have nine years of post-random assignment data. We av-

erage them over three-year periods to reduce the number of entries in tables that follow. MDRC

has published estimates of similar outcomes for 3 years post random assignment and 5-year post-

random assignment results were released in a working paper.23 (The estimates presented in Ta-

bles 4 and 5 for the first five post random assignment years do not correspond exactly to the es-

timates produced by MDRC, due to relatively minor differences in samples used (see discussion

above) and, more importantly, the use of a different “dating” convention in forming post-random

assignment years.24)

         Our access to data on outcomes for six additional years after random assignment allows

us to assess the longer-term consequences of being exposed to the GAIN programs in the four

21
   The employment and earnings outcomes were constructed with data from the State’s UI Base Wage files provided
by the California Employment Development Department (EDD). These data contain quarterly reports from employ-
ers on whether individuals were employed in a UI-covered job and their wage earnings for that job. These quarterly
data were organized into four-quarter “years” from the quarter of enrollment in the MDRC GAIN evaluation. The
“Ever Employed in Year” outcome was defined to be = 1 if the individual had positive earnings in at least one quar-
ter during that year and = 0 otherwise. The “Annual Earnings” outcome was the sum of the four-quarter UI-covered
earnings recorded for an individual in the Base Wage file. All income variables were converted to 1999 dollars using
cost-of-living deflators. Finally, the indicator variable for whether an individual’s UI-covered earnings exceeded that
the earnings from working full-time (2,000 hours per year) at the prevailing Federal minimum wage rate ($5.15 per
hour).
22
  The AFDC/TANF variables were constructed using data from the California statewide Medi-Cal Eligibility Data
System (MEDS) files, which contain monthly information on whether an individual received AFDC (before 1998)
or TANF (starting in 1998) benefits in California during a month. These monthly data were organized into 3-month
“quarters” from the quarter of enrollment in the MDRC GAIN evaluation and then organized into “years” since en-
rollment, as was done with the employment and earnings data. The “Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year”
variable was defined to be = 1 if the individual received AFDC or TANF benefits in at least one month during that
year and = 0 otherwise.
23
  See Riccio, et al. (1994) for 3-year impact estimates and Freedman, et al. (1996) for estimates based on five years
of follow-up data.
24
   In their analysis, MDRC defined the first year of post-random assignment to be quarters 2 through 5, year two as
quarters 6 through 9, etc. In our analysis, we define year one as quarters 1 through 4, year two as quarters 5 through
8, etc. This difference in definitions results in relatively minor differences between our years 1 through 5 estimates



                                                         19
counties we consider. As noted in the Introduction, analyzing the longer-term consequences of

GAIN is important for several reasons. By analyzing the effects of these county-level programs

over a longer follow-up period, one is better able to assess the duration or permanence of the im-

pacts found in the previous 3-year and 5-year analyses. Furthermore, analyzing impacts over a

nine-year period allows us to better assess the extent to which there are differences in the tempo-

ral pattern of the returns to the quick-job-entry versus skill development training strategies used

by the different counties in their GAIN programs. This issue is potentially important, as noted

above, because the longer training periods of the HCD approach imply that effects are likely to

be negative in the short-term (during the training period and shortly thereafter). On the other

hand, the skills developed might have longer lasting effects than the primarily motivational LFA

approach. (We note that the ranking of the strategies also depends upon the how one “discounts”

the future benefits as well as on the relative costs of each.)

        We first consider the long-term impacts of the four GAIN programs for AFDC-FG cases

presented in Table 5. Consider first the impacts on employment. Regardless of whether one uses

annual employment rates or the number of quarters employed in a year, one finds that the im-

pacts of Riverside’s program are consistently larger, and statistically significant, relative to the

effects for the other three counties over the first three-year period after random assignment. Over

the first three years, the GAIN registrants in Riverside had annual employment rates that were,

on average, 13.6 percentage points (39%) higher than members of the control group and worked

0.43 more quarters per year (48%) higher than did control group members. The employment im-

pacts of the GAIN programs in the GAIN programs of the other three counties are considerably

lower than those for Riverside and often are not statistically significant. This relative success of



relative to those produced by MDRC.



                                                  20
the Riverside program in improving the employment outcomes of GAIN registrants illustrates

why this program, and its work-first orientation, has been heralded nationally as a model wel-

fare-to-work program.

        In the longer run, however, the employment impacts of the Riverside GAIN program di-

minish in magnitude and statistical significance. In years 4 through 6 after random assignment,

Riverside’s GAIN registrants experience a 6.9 percentage point annual average gain in annual

rates of employment (down from 13.6 percentage points) and 0.25 quarters worked (down from

0.43 quarters) over their control group counterparts. For years 7 through 9, the Riverside GAIN

registrants have an average annual gain of only 1.5 percentage points in annual rates of employ-

ment and 0.08 quarters worked per year relative to the control group and these latter impacts es-

timates are no longer significantly different from zero.25 The employment effects of the GAIN

programs in Alameda and San Diego also decline in magnitude and statistical significance and

the impacts attributable to GAIN in these counties remain substantially smaller than those for

Riverside. However, the GAIN impacts on the two measures of annual employment for the Los

Angeles program grow in magnitude in years 4 through 9 relative to those in the first three years.

Recall from Table 1 that the GAIN program in Los Angeles concentrated its services on long-

term welfare recipients at the time our sample members were randomly assigned and, from Table

4, that this program, at that time, was oriented toward the providing its registrants with basic

education and skill development programs. On average, the annual employment rates of the

GAIN registrants in Los Angeles are 3.3 (3.8) percentage points greater per year and the number

of quarters worked per year is 0.10 (1.3) larger than the corresponding averages for control group

members in years 4 through 6 (years 7 through 9) after random assignment. These later-year im-

25
   We also note that the average employment rates and quarters worked per year for experimentals in Riverside con-
sistently decline in magnitude over the nine-year. This is in contrast to the other 3 counties, where comparable out-



                                                        21
pacts impact estimates for Los Angeles are all statistically significant and are larger than found

for any of the other three county programs, including Riverside’s.

        It is possible that the larger impacts of GAIN on employment effects found in Los Ange-

les County over the latter three years of our post-enrollment data may be the result of changes in

that County’s GAIN program that were initiated in 1995. (These changes were in effect during

years 6 through 9 of our analysis period.) In 1995, Los Angeles County re-oriented its GAIN

program toward a “work-first” or “job-first” program, adopting a program model similar to that

used in Riverside. All members of our sample that continued to reside in Los Angeles County

and remained on welfare—as well as all other GAIN-mandated adults in the County’s pro-

gram—would have been eligible for this new program during years 6 through 9. Moreover, re-

cent evidence from a random-assignment evaluation of the 2-year post-enrollment impacts of

Los Angeles’s re-oriented GAIN program indicate that it had positive employment effects on

AFDC-FG adults, similar to the initial effects found for the Riverside program.26 Consistent with

the possible impacts of Los Angeles’s reoriented program is the fact that the employment rates

and quarters worked for both experimental and control group members in our sample increased

in years 6 through 9, relative to earlier years. While we cannot rule out this explanation for the

larger employment effects in Los Angeles, we find little evidence that the change in the Los An-

geles GAIN program had noticeable affects on the other outcomes (earnings and welfare partici-

pation) in years 6 through 9. It would also be difficult to explain in this interpretation why the

gain in the later years is larger for the experimental group than the control group. (More on this

below.)


comes for experimentals in each of the other three counties increased over the nine-year follow-up period.
26
 Freedman, et al. (1999, 2000) provide the official results from MDRC’s evaluation of Los Angeles Job-First
GAIN program.



                                                        22
       The impacts of GAIN programs on earnings and our indicator of poverty for AFDC-FG

households are displayed in Table 5. As with the impacts on employment, we find that the differ-

ences in earnings and in the incidence of earnings being greater than our “threshold” for pov-

erty—namely, that a sample member’s annual earnings exceeded the income generated by work-

ing full time at the minimum wage—between experimentals and controls tends to decline in both

Riverside and San Diego over the nine-year follow-up period. In the case of Riverside, annual

earnings gains go from an average of $1,416 per year in the first three years to an annual average

of $411 over the last three years. The comparable averages for San Diego are $616 and $446, re-

spectively. Nonetheless, we note that the impacts on earnings in Riverside are sizeable and re-

main so, even six to nine years after individuals were randomly assigned in that county. With re-

spect to the effects of the GAIN programs in Alameda and Los Angeles counties on earnings and

our poverty measure, our estimates of three-year averages over the nine-year period are seldom

statistically significant, although we do find that the magnitude of the impacts almost always in-

crease in years 4 through 9 relative to those for years 1 through 3.

       We also present, in Table 5, estimates of the impacts of the GAIN programs on welfare

participation over the nine years after random assignment for AFDC-FG GAIN registrants. As is

clear from the estimates in this panel, the GAIN participants in each of the counties consistently

have lower rates and quarters of welfare participation than their control group counterparts over

the nine-year period and these differences are statistically significant in many of the years after

random assignment, including the latter four years. Clearly, the welfare reductions are largest for

Riverside, with GAIN registrants who averaged a 5.8 percentage point average annual lower rate

of AFDC/TANF participation than the control group in the first three years after random assign-

ment and a 4.8 (3.2) percentage point differential in years 4 through 6 (years 7 through 9). While




                                                 23
the welfare reductions attributable to the GAIN program in San Diego are smaller in magnitude

than in Riverside, the effects for this county also are statistically significant in almost every year.

Finally, while the GAIN registrants in Alameda and Los Angeles GAIN programs also experi-

enced evidence of welfare reductions, the effects in these two counties tended to be smaller in

magnitude and less reliably estimated, especially in the last two years of the follow-up period.

           In Table 6, we present the corresponding estimates of long-term impacts for the GAIN

registrants for the AFDC-U cases in Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego counties.

There are several notable differences in the findings for two-parent AFDC households compared

to those found for single-parent (and largely female-headed) AFDC households recorded in Ta-

ble 5. With respect to the impacts on employment, most of the gains for GAIN registrants in each

of these counties, at least the ones that are precisely estimated, occur in the first six years after

random assignment. Second, the GAIN program in Los Angeles, rather than those in Riverside

or San Diego counties, shows the largest impacts during the first six years after random assign-

ment,27 although the impacts in this county fall off markedly after 7 and 9 years after random as-

signment. Turning next to the GAIN impacts on earnings and poverty for AFDC-U households

in Table 6, we find that virtually none of the annual impact estimates are precisely estimated for

any of the years. It is notable, however, that the impacts on earnings for GAIN registrants in

Alameda county are substantially larger in years 4 through 9—an average impact of $654 per

year in years 4 through 6 and $935 in 7 through 9—relative to those for the first three years—an

average impact of $54 per year—although none of these estimates are statistically significant at

conventional levels of significance.

           Finally, the results in Table 6 for welfare participation show that, for AFDC-U, the most


27
     Freedman, et al. (1996) note this in their 5-Year GAIN Impact Analysis working paper.



                                                          24
persistent reductions in welfare over the nine years following random assignment occur for the

GAIN participants in Alameda and Los Angeles counties, the two counties that emphasized basic

education and skill development in their programs. Moreover, the reductions in welfare depend-

ence actually improve over time for these two counties. For example, the GAIN registrants in

Alameda had, on average, a 6.9 percentage point lower rate of participation in AFDC/TANF than

their control group counterparts in the first three years after random assignment and a 17.2 (13.9)

percentage point lower rate in years 4 through 6 (years 6 through 9). While the reductions for

GAIN registrants are lower in Los Angeles County, they do “improve” from a 2.7 percentage

point reduction in the first three years to an average reduction of 5.0 and 3.3 percentage points

per year in years 4 through 6 and 7 through 9, respectively.

       In summary, our examination of the long-term experimental estimates of the impacts of

the GAIN programs in these four counties indicate some noticeable differences between experi-

mental effects in the years immediately following random assignment (years 1 through 3) com-

pared to experimental effects at longer intervals after randomization (years 7 through 9). Fur-

thermore, the results on the longer run impacts of GAIN are less supportive of the view that the

Riverside GAIN program dominates those in the other counties we analyze. However, drawing

the latter conclusion, while tempting, is subject to the flaw that was noted in the Introduction,

namely, that the experimental design does not support conclusions about the differential effects

of programs based solely on evidence from within-county random assignment evaluations. In the

next section, we discuss an econometric strategy to get at these differential effects and discuss

how to validate its reliability, using data for the within-county control groups.

4.   Identifying the Differential Effects of GAIN Programs

       In this section, we discuss how to estimate, or identify, the differential effects of treat-



                                                 25
ments. As noted above, the results from the MDRC GAIN Evaluation have been interpreted as

suggesting that the work-first oriented program used in Riverside County is relatively more ef-

fective than the human-capital development programs used in the other counties, especially

Alameda and Los Angeles Counties. Implicitly, the MDRC GAIN results have been interpreted

as if they answered the following question: What would the average outcome have been for par-

ticipants in, say, Los Angeles, had they been subject to the program as implemented in River-

side? Clearly, answering this question is of crucial important to the administrators in these coun-

ties and the rest of the nation for deciding which welfare-to-work model to implement.

       To answer this question, one needs to determine the differential effects of the work-first

oriented treatment used in Riverside relative to the human-capital oriented treatments in the other

counties. As we have suggested in the Introduction, the within-county experimental design em-

ployed in the GAIN Evaluation does not immediately lend itself to estimating differential effects.

The within-site experimental design used in the MDRC GAIN evaluation only allows compari-

sons of average sites against an average of alternative sites, rather than a comparison of two spe-

cific sites against each other, as we attempt to do here. Randomization of treatments across sites

would be required to obtain experimental estimates of the differential effects of these treatments.

Without randomization over sites the problems in comparing program results in different loca-

tions are similar to, although distinct from, those in justifying a causal interpretation of treat-

ment-control differences in non-experimental evaluations. Below, we characterize more pre-

cisely why this is so.

       In an effort to obtain estimates of differential impacts using data on cross-county com-

parisons, we outline how matching, or regression-adjustment, estimation methods could be used

to estimate the differential effects of alternative program treatments, such as work-first versus




                                                26
human-capital development ones and the conditions required for one to use such methods with

the four-county data available in the MDRC Evaluation. While such methods are inherently more

controversial than those from a properly designed experiment in which different treatments are

randomly assigned to subjects from a particular, population, recent studies by Dehejia and Wa-

hba (1999), and Heckman, Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1997, 1998a) suggest such adjustments

with sufficiently detailed observable characteristics may lead to credible non-experimental esti-

mates of average gross treatment effects (AGTEs). Herein, we examine whether the effectiveness

of these methods extend to estimating the differential effects of alternative treatments. In our as-

sessment, we discuss how one can use the data on the experimentally-generated control groups

for these four counties to validate, in part, these conditions for use of regression-adjustment and

matching methods.

       Recalling the discussion in Section 3.1, we now consider the identification of differential

treatment effects. Adopting the notation used in that section, we first define the average differ-

ential treatment effect (ADTE) of treatment k relative to treatment k′ as,

                      C t (k , k ¢) º E Yit (k ) - Yit (k ¢) = E  D it (k ) - D it (k ¢) ,       (4)

where the second equality in (4) follows from the definition of ∆it(j). The conditional analogue of

(4) is given by

                                                                    
            C t (k , k ¢ x) º E Yit (k ) - Yit (k ¢) X i = x = E D it (k ) - D it (k ¢) X i = x ,   (5)

for k and k′ ∈ {w,h}, k ≠ k′.

       There are at least two reasons why data from the MDRC GAIN county-specific experi-

mental evaluations do not necessarily allow us to identify ADTEs. First, as noted above, the

treatments received by households varied by their county of residence, with Riverside’s GAIN

program emphasizing work-first treatments (T = w) while the programs in Alameda and Los An-



                                                             27
geles Counties emphasized human-capital development treatments (T = h).28 More formally, this

implies that

                                                     Ti ⊥ Di .                                    (C-2)

In an extreme, we might consider Ti is a deterministic function of Di, i.e.,

                            Pr(Ti = kd Di = d ) = 1 and Pr(Ti = kd′ ′ Di = d ) = 0,               (C-2′)

for all kd , kd¢¢ ¹ 0 . This characterization of the dependence between T and D seems reasonable

since, as noted above, Riverside’s entire GAIN program was work-first oriented while the GAIN

programs in Alameda and Los Angeles Counties were oriented toward human capital develop-

ment, at least over the periods of enrollment in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation. Throughout the

remainder of this paper we will assume that condition (C-2′) holds. Second, the populations—

and their potential incomes, Yt(k)—may differ across counties, i.e.,

                                                  Yit (k ) ⊥ Di ,                                    (6)

for all k ∈ {0, w, h}. As a consequence, there is no guarantee that the average differences in out-

comes for treatments kd and kd¢ ¢ , specific to two counties d and d′, respectively, will identify the

ADTE for these two treatments. To see this, we write the potential outcome associated with

treatment k that is received in County d as follows:

                                           Y (kd ) = Yitd (0) + ∆ itd (k ) ,                         (7)

where both Yitd (0) and ∆ itd (k ) are county-specific and are treated as random variables. From the

available data, one can identify the differences in mean outcomes for those receiving treatments

kd and kd′ ′ ,

                        (                             )       (                             )
                      E Yitd (kd ) Ti = kd , Di = d − E Yitd ′ (kd′ ′ ) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ ,

28
     San Diego’s GAIN program was a mixture of these two types of programs.



                                                              28
across Counties d and d′. Using the characterization of the outcomes associated with these treat-

ments in (7), it follows that

      E (Yit (kd ) Ti = kd , Di = d ) − E (Yit (kd′ ′ ) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ )
            = E (Yitd (0) + ∆itd (kd ) Ti = kd , Di = d ) − E (Yitd ′ (0) + ∆ itd ′ (kd′ ′ ) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ )
                                                                                                                         (8)
               {
            = E ( ∆ itd (kd ) Ti = kd , Di = d ) − E ( ∆ itd ′ (kd′ ′ ) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ ) }
                   {
              + E (Yitd (0) Ti = kd , Di = d ) − E (Yitd ′ (0) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ ) .    }
In general, the expression in (8) is not equal to (4), the ADTE for treatments k and k′. Their

equality requires that the following two additional conditions hold:

                         (                            )       (
                       E Yitd (0) Ti = kd , Di = d − E Yitd ′ (0) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ = 0 , )                        (A-1)

for all d, d′ and t i.e., there is no difference in the no-treatment outcomes across counties d and

d′, and

                                               (          )
                                            E ∆ itd (k ) = E ( ∆it (k ) ) ,                                            (A-2)

for all d and t, i.e., the expected gross treatment effect of treatment k does not vary with the

county of residence d.

          The within-county experimental design employed in MDRC’s evaluation of the GAIN

programs in its analysis counties does not guarantee that conditions (A-1) and (A-2) hold. More-

over, the descriptions of the GAIN registrants and programs across the four counties presented in

Section 2 do not lend support to either of these conditions. Recall the pre-enrollment differences

in earnings, labor force participation and welfare receipt between the GAIN registrants in River-

side relative to those in Alameda or Los Angeles Counties and the differences in personal char-

acteristics (Table 1) and the differences in labor market conditions across counties at the time of

enrollment into the MDRC GAIN evaluation (Table 2). These differences suggest that (A-1) will

not hold, i.e., that there are differences in the populations, and thus, the Yit(0)s, across counties,



                                                                  29
irrespective of county differences in GAIN programs. Condition (A-2) stipulates that the gross

gains for the same treatment must be the same in all counties. If the average gross gain from a

treatment, such as human capital development, depends on a registrant’s educational attainment

and language skills and there are differences in the distribution of these initial skills in the regis-

trant population differ across counties, Condition (A-2) will be violated. Alternatively, if the ef-

fectiveness of a particular treatment, such as work-first treatments, depends on economic condi-

tions, i.e., the availability of jobs in a labor market, Condition (A-2) would be violated. Again,

the differences in educational backgrounds of registrants and labor market conditions across the

four counties in the MDRC GAIN Evaluation discussed in Section 2 suggest that (A-2) is

unlikely to hold in our data.

        To deal with the lack of credibility in maintaining (A-1) and (A-2) for the GAIN evalua-

tion data, we consider the use of matching and/or regression-adjustment methods.29 Such meth-

ods are predicated on the availability of a sufficiently rich set of observable background charac-

teristics and outcome histories for GAIN registrants and measures of labor market conditions that

can be used to adjust for the differences across counties so that conditional versions of (A-1) and

(A-2) hold. More precisely, while (A-1) and (A-2) need not hold, suppose that the following

conditional versions of them do:

                  (                                                                    )
                E (Yitd (0) Ti = k , Di = d ) − E (Yitd ′ (0) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ ) X i = 0        (A-1′)

and

                                   (                                    )
                                E E ( ∆itd (k ) ) − E ( ∆ itd ′ (k ) ) X i = 0 ,                     (A-2′)

for all k ∈ {w, h}. Assumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′) are sufficient to justify the use of non-paramet-


29
  See Rubin (1979) and Heckman, LaLonde and Smith (1999) for discussions of these methods and the conditions
that support them.



                                                           30
ric methods and, in certain cases, parametric regression techniques to identify the ADTEs in (4)

and (5).30 By matching individuals in one county with comparable individuals (based on X) in the

other, one can eliminate both the population differences that exist in the absence of any treat-

ments as well as the county-specific factors that lead to differences in gross gains associated with

a particular treatment across counties.

        As with any non-experimental methodology, maintaining assumptions like (A-1′) and (A-

2′) are inherently controversial, because their validity typically cannot be ensured or verified.

Note, however, that in our case the validity of (A-1′) can be examined empirically, given that we

have data on controls from the within-county experiments conducted by MDRC. In particular,

Condition (C-1′), implies that

                         (                          )        (
                       E Yitd (0) Ti = kd , Di = d = E Yitd (0) Ti = 0, Di = d    )                         (C-1′)

for all d and, thus, that the mean outcomes for control group members in each county is a con-

sistent estimator of E (Yitd (0) Ti = kd , Di = d ) . (Note that this result holds for observable sub-

groups of the GAIN registrant populations as well. As a result, we can test whether Assumption

(A-1′) holds in our data. (A similar test for Assumption (A-2′) cannot be performed. Thus, this

assumption will need to be maintained. However, in our view, maintaining it is much less con-

troversial so long as (A-1) holds.) Furthermore, it follows from (C-1′) and (8) that one can use

the data on expected outcomes for control group members in counties d and d′ to identify ADTE

for the treatments, kd and kd¢ ¢ used in these two counties, so long as Assumption (A-2′) holds.


30
  Stronger forms of these conditions are often invoked in the matching literature. In particular, in place of (A-1′)
and (A-2′), the following conditional independence assumptions are often used:
                                              Yit (0) ^ Di X i                                               (A-1′′)
and
                                             D it ( k ) ^ Di X i .                                           (A-2′′)




                                                           31
More formally, (C-1′) and (8) imply that

                                                            (
                é E (Yit (kd ) Ti = kd , Di = d ) − E Yitd (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ù
                ë                                                                     ) û
                                                                          (                         )
                      − éë E (Yit (kd′ ′ ) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′ ) − E Yitd ′ (0) Ti = 0, Di = d ′ ùû
                                                                                                               (9)
                         (   d
                             it                         )       (    d′
                   = E ∆ (kd ) Ti = kd , Di = d − E ∆ (kd′ ′ ) Ti = kd′ ′ , Di = d ′
                                                                     it                         )
                   = γ t (k , k ′).

Thus, the availability of the within-county experimental data implies an alternative way of iden-

tifying the ADTEs for these two treatments so long as (A-2) holds.

        In the empirical analysis that follows, we make use of parametric regression methods,

rather than non-parametric matching techniques, to condition on the X’s as suggested by as-

sumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′).31 We focus on contrasting the effects of the Riverside work-first

oriented program relative to those for the more human-capital development oriented programs in

each of the other three counties (Alameda, Riverside, and San Diego). For one of these contrasts,

let Ri = 1 denote a registrant being enrolled in Riverside’s program and 0 for those residing in the

comparison county. Let Ti be defined here as equal to one if the registrant was in the experimen-

tal group in a particular county and equal to zero otherwise. Below, we present estimates for two

alternative regression specifications. In the first, we use data only on experimental subjects (Ti =

1) from Riverside and a comparison county to estimate the following regression model:

                                      Yit = > 0t + >1t Ri + > 2¢t X i + A it ,                                (10)

where εit is a stochastic disturbance assumed to have mean zero. The coefficient on the Riverside

dummy (β1t) measures the effect of the program in Riverside relative to the program in the com-

parison county (Los Angeles, Alameda, or San Diego) on outcome Y as of period t. The estimate


For our purposes, we only require the conditional mean independence assumptions in (A-1′) and (A-2′).
31
   While not presented herein, we also used non-parametric matching techniques, controlling for the same set of X’s
listed above, to estimate the differential treatment effects between Riverside and the various comparison counties.




                                                                32
of this coefficient provides a consistent estimator of γt in (4) if assumptions (A-1′) and (A-2′)

hold. In estimating this linear regression function, we include in Xi personal characteristics (indi-

cator for female, indicators for five levels of education, Hispanic, black, an indicator for having

one child, an indicator for having children under the age of five), past earnings and labor force

participation indicators (for quarters one to ten prior to randomization), indicator for past receipt

of welfare and the amounts of AFDC benefits received (for quarters one to four prior to ran-

domization), for the head of household each household, as well as variables describing individual

labor market histories at the time of random assignment. We refer to the estimates of β1t below

as the “regression-adjusted difference in means for experimentals.” We also present estimates β1t

for a variant of (10) that does not include the Xi in order to depict the consequences of control-

ling for these observables. Below, we refer to the estimates for this variant as the “unadjusted

difference in means for experimentals.”

           Estimating the specification in (10) (that includes X) with data for members of the experi-

mental groups from Riverside and a comparison county presumes that both conditions (A-1′) and

(A-2′) holds. As noted above, the availability of county-specific controls groups that were deter-

mined by random assignment, allows us scope for testing the validity of (A-1′). To test this as-

sumption, we estimate the specification in (10) using data for members of the controls groups of

Riverside and the comparison county. Given this data on control groups, condition (A-1′) implies

that β1t = 0 in (10). That is, if our regression-adjustment method is successful, there should there-

fore be no difference in average outcomes of individuals in the control groups between the sites

and the estimate for β1 should be close to zero, both substantively and statistically.32 Below, we



The estimates, especially the inferences drawn, are quite similar to the regression-based estimates reported below.
32
     For other examples of evaluating procedures by applying them to groups for whom the effects are known (typi-



                                                         33
present estimates of β1t for the various outcomes of control group members for each of the Riv-

erside-comparison County contrasts for specifications of (10) that include and do not include X.

The resulting estimates of β1t that do not control for X are referred to as “unadjusted difference in

means for controls” and those that do are labeled as “regression-adjusted difference in means for

controls.”

        Failure to reject the null hypothesis that β1t = 0 for outcomes of the controls groups in

Riverside and a comparison county even though the null is not true, i.e., a Type II error may be

committed in testing β1t = 0. To guard against the consequences of this type of error while, at the

same time, exploiting the availability of data on randomly generated control groups within each

of the counties, we also present estimates for two “difference-in-differences” estimators. The

first is the sample analogue of (9), i.e., the difference-in-differences of the mean outcomes for

experimentals and controls for Riverside and the comparison county. This estimate corresponds

to the coefficient, β3t, in the following regression:

                               Yit = b 0t + b1t Ri + b 2tTi + b !t RiTi +n it .                         (11)

This estimator is a consistent estimator for the ADTE for the treatments used in these two coun-

ties so long as condition (A-2) holds. We refer to the estimates for this estimator in the tables be-

low as the “unadjusted difference-in-differences.” We also present a difference-in-difference es-

timator of the ADTEs that controls for X, i.e.,

                    Yit = b 0t + b1t Ri + b 2tTi + b !t RiTi + b 4¢t X i + b 5¢t X iTi +n it ,          (12)

where the β3t corresponds to γt. Below, we refer to estimates of β3t as the “regression adjusted

difference-in-differences” estimates.



cally zero, as in this case), see Lalonde (1986), Heckman and Hotz (1989), Rosenbaum (1995), Hotz, Imbens and
Mortimer (1999).



                                                            34
       Because the latter difference-in-differences estimator in (12) (β3t) exploits the experimen-

tal data on control groups and only relies on condition (A-2) holding, it is arguably a more credi-

ble non-experimental estimator of the differential effects of the alternative treatments used in

Riverside and the comparison counties. In essence, this estimator eliminates the additive differ-

ences between Riverside and the other sites (via the control group outcomes) as well as adjusts

for the observable Xs. It should be kept in mind, however, that if the differences in average out-

comes for controls between Riverside and Los Angeles (or Alameda or San Diego) are elimi-

nated by adjusting for pre-randomization variables—that is, if the coefficient on the Riverside

dummy is close to zero in the control regression—the trainee-only estimates should be close to

the difference-in-differences estimates (but the former estimated more precisely than the latter).

If, on the other hand, the control estimates are far from zero, one might be concerned that there is

some important unobserved effect on outcomes or that the differences between Riverside and the

other sites are not necessarily additive, and the difference-in-differences estimates would be less

credible. The second concern with the difference-in-differences estimates is that the statistical

significance levels may be affected by the relative scarcity of the control groups. For example, in

Riverside there are 4,358 trainees, but only 1,025 controls. If we can successfully control for

cross-county differences in the control group, then we may prefer the adjusted difference for the

trainees in a bias/variance tradeoff similar to the one concerning the decision to include addi-

tional controls with limited explanatory power in a linear regression framework.

5.   Estimates of Differential Effects of GAIN Programs

       In this section, we present estimates of the differential effects of the GAIN programs run

in Riverside County, relative to those in Alameda, Los Angeles and San Diego counties. Results

for AFDC-FG cases are presented in Table 7 and those for AFDC-U cases in Table 8. The Ap-



                                                35
pendix presents results separately for the in need of basic education and not in need of basic edu-

cation groups. In what follows, we discuss the estimates for sets of differential effects, namely

Riverside vs. Alameda, Riverside vs. Los Angeles, and Riverside vs. San Diego.

5.1 Riverside versus Alameda

       The results in the left set of columns in Table 7 presents the results for the Riverside-Ala-

meda comparison for the AFDC-FG group. The first set of results presents estimates for the dif-

ferences between Riverside and Alameda for yearly employment indicators. The simple differ-

ence in outcomes for trainees averaged over the first three post-randomization years shows that

18.2% more trainees in Riverside are employed than trainees in Alameda. However, even the dif-

ference between Riverside and Alameda for controls, 7.3% is significantly different from zero (at

the 1% level). Consistent with the descriptive results on differences in the enrolled population

across counties, this suggests that the populations enrolled in GAIN differed, so simply compar-

ing outcomes for the trainees is not appropriate. The difference-in-differences estimate, equal to

the difference between the trainee and control differences is 10.9%.

       Allowing for heterogeneity, we include covariates in the levels and as interactions with

the treatment effects to estimate the net effect of the Riverside GAIN program relative to the

Alameda. Adjusting for covariates, the estimated differences between Riverside and Alameda

averaged over the first three years changes to 16.0% for trainees and 3.7% for controls. Note that

the difference between Riverside and Alameda for controls is halved, and is no longer signifi-

cantly different from zero even at the 10% level. The point estimate of the net effect of Riverside

relative to Alameda increases from 10.9% to 12.3%.

       For the other two time periods, years 4-6 and years 7-9, the differences between trainees

in Riverside and Alameda are substantial, and many cases significantly different from zero. Ad-




                                                36
justing for pre-randomization differences does not affect these estimates much. For the controls

some of the raw differences between Riverside and Alameda are large and significant, but ad-

justing for pre-randomization differences makes these differences substantially smaller and

largely insignificant. Unlike the first three years, the adjusted difference-in-difference estimates

are not significantly different from zero in the last six years. The estimated net effect declines

from 12.3% for the first three years to 5.2% for years 4-6 and -0.4% for years 7-9.

        For the second outcome, the number of quarters employed in a year, the same pattern

emerges. The raw differences for control are often significantly different from zero, but adjusting

for pre-randomization characteristics eliminates a substantial part of these differences and ren-

ders them largely insignificant. The trainee differences remain robust to adjusting for covariates.

The difference-in-differences estimates follow the same pattern of significant and positive effects

in the first three-year period (0.43), going down in years 4-6 (to 0.24 years) and becoming nega-

tive in years 7-9 (-0.01).

        The third outcome is total yearly earnings. The general pattern is repeated again. Control

differences between Riverside and Alameda are substantial and significant before adjusting for

covariates, but much smaller and all insignificant after adjustment. For the three time periods the

unadjusted differences are $403, $-141, and $-1,032, which reduces after adjusting for covariates

to $107, $88 and $-185. Again the trainee differences are more robust. In this case the pattern of

initial positive relative effects for Riverside followed by later negative relative effects is re-

peated, but now the negative effects in the final years are significant at the 5% level. The differ-

ence-in-differences estimates decline sharply, from $876 in the first period, to $210 in the sec-

ond, and -$911 in the third three-year period.

        For the fourth outcome, the indicator for earnings above the full-time minimum wage




                                                 37
level, the story is again similar, but the effects are now imprecisely estimated. There are differ-

ences for the unadjusted controls, but adjusting them for pre-randomization differences makes

them smaller and insignificant. Differences between trainees remain, with the program in River-

side in early years significantly more successful than in Alameda in the early years. In the later

years, there is a reversal—Alameda’s outcomes are better, and in the last three years the differ-

ences for the trainees are significantly different from zero.

       The story for positive annual AFDC/TANF receipt is different. Here raw differences are

very large and significant for controls, and adjustment for covariates does not entirely eliminate

them, although it makes these differences smaller and considerably less significant. In contrast to

the earnings measures, the differences between Riverside and Alameda for trainees are not robust

to adjusting for covariates. In a typical three-year period the raw difference is on the order of

15% lower participation in Riverside, but after adjusting this is reduced to about 8% lower par-

ticipation. Difference-in-difference estimates still follow the same pattern of the earnings results

of an early advantage for Riverside (a bigger reduction in AFDC participation rates) followed by

sharp decline, with the effects in later years close to zero. It should be kept in mind here that, in

contrast to the earnings data, where we have ten quarters of pre-randomization outcomes includ-

ing both the binary indicators and the amount, we have for AFDC/TANF receipt only the binary

indicator, but not the amount, and only for four pre-randomization quarters. Perhaps, just as to

adjust for employment and earnings, we need detailed histories of employment and earnings, to

successfully adjust for AFDC/TANF receipt we would need detailed histories of receipt and

payment amounts.

       For the last outcome, the number of quarters with positive AFDC receipt the story is

similar to that for annual AFDC receipt. Control differences are largely but not completely




                                                 38
eliminated by adjusting for covariates (they remain significantly different from zero). The differ-

ence-in-differences estimates are, other than in the first three-year period, all small and not sig-

nificantly different from zero.

5.2 Riverside versus Los Angeles

       Next we discuss the Riverside versus Los Angeles comparison. Starting again with the

annual employment indicators, we find that there are substantial differences between controls in

Riverside and Los Angeles, ranging from 4.7% to 10.9%, and which are significant at the 1%

level in all three time-periods. Adjusting for pre-randomization differences lowers the adjusted

difference between controls across the two counties, now ranging from 0.7 to 4.4%, and signifi-

cant at the 5% level in only one period. In contrast, the trainee differences are significant both

before and after adjustment. It is interesting to note that in years 7-9 the unadjusted estimate for

the trainee differences suggests a significantly higher employment rate in Riverside, whereas the

adjusted estimate suggests a significantly lower employment. The adjusted difference-in-differ-

ences estimates suggest a pattern similar to that in the Riverside-Alameda comparisons: initial

differences are large and in favor of Riverside, followed by a substantial and steady decline,

leading to relatively employment rates that are higher in Los Angeles than in Riverside, although

not significantly so.

       The second outcome, the number of quarters employed each year follows the same pat-

tern. There are highly significant differences between controls in Riverside and Los Angeles

prior to adjustment (significant at the 1% level in two of the periods), but these differences are

much smaller and insignificant after adjustment (none significant at the 10% level). For trainee

differences we again find that the beneficial effect of the Riverside program relative to Los An-

geles disappears after six years and turns into a significant comparative advantage for Los An-




                                                39
geles. Difference-in-difference estimates are positive and significant in early years and negative

but not significant in later years.

        For the level of earnings the pattern repeats. Raw control differences are largely elimi-

nated by adjustment for pre-randomization variables, whereas for trainees the adjustment shows

in later years significant advantages for the Los Angeles program in contrast to the early benefits

of the Riverside program. For the final earnings-based measure, an indicator for earnings above

the full-time minimum wage level the raw differences for the controls are already small and

largely insignificant; the regression adjustments make them even smaller and less significant, but

also eliminate a substantial part of the differences for trainees.

        For the two AFDC outcomes the results for the Riverside-LA comparison are somewhat

different from those for the Riverside-Alameda comparison. As before, we do find large differ-

ence in unadjusted differences for the control groups. However, the least squares adjustment

eliminates virtually all of the differences. Whereas the raw differences for annual AFDC partici-

pation range from -12.8% to -7.2% significantly different from zero at the 1% level in all three

periods, after adjusting the differences range from -2.8% to 0.3%, none significant even at the

10% level. The difference-in-difference estimates suggest a significantly bigger decrease in Riv-

erside than Los Angeles in the early years, with an insignificant effect in later years. For the

number of quarters spent on AFDC the story is similar. The raw differences for controls range

from -0.56 to -0.31, all significant at the 1% level, and the adjusted differences range from -0.16

to -0.07, with two significantly different from zero at the 10% level.

5.3 Riverside versus San Diego

        Finally we discuss the Riverside versus San Diego comparisons. Here we have more dif-

ficulty eliminating the differences between average control outcomes than in the other com-




                                                  40
parisons. This is somewhat surprising given that before adjustment, the population in San Diego

looks more comparable to that in Riverside than the other two counties. Adjustment does make

the differences smaller, but some do remain significantly different from zero.

        However, for the two employment measures the general pattern of the coefficients is

similar to that for the other two comparisons. The difference-in-differences estimates are much

larger in the first few years but then decline and they are not significantly different from zero in

the later years. Unlike in the comparisons with Alameda and Los Angeles the differences are

never negative, always suggesting a benefit from attending the training in Riverside relative to

San Diego.

        For earnings the raw differences between controls is large and significant. Furthermore,

the difference is not removed by adjusting for covariates. The difference-in-differences estimates

are all positive after adjusting for covariates.

        The two AFDC outcomes follow an interesting pattern. The raw differences for controls

are all small and insignificant. This does not change if we adjust for pre-randomization variables.

However, for the trainees the adjustment does make a considerable difference. The size of the

difference and the significance goes up substantially. This is true both for annual AFDC receipts

and for the number of quarters with positive AFDC receipts. For example, for the number of

quarters with positive AFDC receipts the raw differences for trainees range from -0.15 to -0.07.

After adjusting for pre-randomization differences the range is -0.30 to -0.19. The difference-in-

difference estimates are also negative in all three periods for both outcomes after adjusting, and

are often highly significant.

5.4 Conclusions from Cross-County Comparisons

        Generally we find that there are substantial and significant differences in raw averages




                                                   41
between sites, for all three comparisons, and all six outcomes over the three three-year periods

post-randomization. Adjusting for a rich set of pre-randomization variables reduces and in most

cases essentially eliminates these differences for the control groups. Exceptions are the

AFDC/TANF receipts in Alameda County and some of the earnings outcomes in San Diego

County where substantial differences from Riverside County remain even after least squares ad-

justment.

        The ability for most comparisons and outcomes to adjust away the differences for con-

trols suggests that the adjusted differences for trainees (and the adjusted difference-in-differences

estimates which therefore are close to the trainee differences) can be interpreted as estimates of

the causal effect of the Riverside County program versus the three others. Generally we find sub-

stantial positive effects of the Riverside County program (increasing employment rates and earn-

ings, and lowering AFDC receipts) in the first three years post-randomization; the period covered

by the MDRC evaluations. The effects, however, taper off and sometimes becoming significantly

negative in the last two three-year periods in Alameda County and Los Angeles County. This in-

terpretation is consistent with the effects of job search assistance being shorter lived than the ef-

fects of basic skills training, although without individual level data on the nature of the training it

is difficult to further investigate this interpretation. It is also largely consistent with the interpre-

tation that after the embargo ended, the control groups received training. This seems particularly

likely in Riverside County were the program was nearly universal in the period after randomiza-

tion ended; but less likely in the other three counties were the GAIN programs appear to have

been smaller and the commitment to universal participation enrollment was weaker. We note,

however, that such delayed treatment for the controls would not explain the sign change in the

Riverside-LA and Riverside-Alameda comparisons found for employment and earnings out-




                                                   42
comes.

         The results underline the important, but discomforting, conclusion that short-term evalua-

tion of training programs can be misleading. The relative ranking of programs is not stable over

time. Simple extrapolations of early results to later results do not appear to be possible. The rela-

tion of short-term results to longer-term results appears to vary with program content in ways

consistent with a priori expectations. Thus, despite the demands of policy makers for quick re-

sults with which to design new legislation and programs, there may be no substitute for long-

term and costly follow-up, and thus for program design-evaluation-redesign cycles lasting a dec-

ade or more. Conventional follow-up periods of three, or even five, years may simply be too

short.

         Finally, let us return to the Riverside versus Alameda comparisons for AFDC receipt that

was one of the most problematic comparisons. For these outcomes, adjusting for pre-randomiza-

tion differences did not eliminate differences for the controls. For the Riverside-LA and River-

side-San Diego comparisons covariance adjustment was adequate. To gain some insight into

these difficulties, consider the fraction on AFDC in each of the last four quarters prior to ran-

domization. In Riverside these fractions are 63%, 64%, 65%, and 77% in chronological order.

For San Diego these fractions are 57%, 59%, 60% and 71%, very comparable to the Riverside

numbers. For Los Angeles the fractions are 98%, 99%, 99%, and 99%, much higher than in Riv-

erside and San Diego. Finally, in Alameda the numbers are 97%, 97%, 97%, and 98%, again

much higher than in Riverside and San Diego. These differences between Riverside and San

Diego on the one hand, and Los Angeles and Alameda on the other hand, reflect the focus of the

GAIN program in the latter two counties on long-term AFDC recipients. This focus was a result

of insufficient funds to enroll all eligibles given the high per case cost of the their HCD strategy.




                                                 43
This difference in selection rules in turn is reflected in the large raw differences post-randomiza-

tion between Riverside and both Los Angeles and Alameda. These differences are in fact largest

between Riverside and Alameda, and the adjustment for four quarters of pre-randomization

AFDC indicators does not appear to be sufficient to eliminate them, although it does reduce them

substantially.

6.   Conclusions

       In this paper we analyze data from the GAIN experimental evaluations of job training

programs. Whereas previous researchers have had only five years of post-randomization out-

comes available, we have observations on nine years of earnings and welfare receipts after ran-

domization. This allows us to explore the long-term effects of these programs. We find that the

early superiority of the Riverside program with its stress on job search assistance rather than ba-

sic skills training is lessened over time. In the later years the programs in counties, such as Ala-

meda and Los Angeles, are doing as well as, or even slightly better, than Riverside.

       We also make a case that credible comparisons can be made between the countries. Al-

though such comparisons cannot be justified by the randomization alone, we exploit the presence

of control groups to validate such comparisons between trainees. We find that in the early years

the program in Riverside did indeed lead to better outcomes, although the relative benefits of the

Riverside program do disappear over time. Our analyses show the importance of having detailed

characteristics of the individuals even in randomized experiments. The results presented here are

also encouraging for the ability of non-experimental methods to reproduce the results of experi-

mental results, if enough detailed information on individual characteristics (e.g., histories of em-

ployment, earnings, and welfare receipt) is available.




                                                44
                                         References

Corbett, T. (1994/95), “Changing the Culture of Welfare,” Focus 16:2, Winter 1994/1995.

Couch, Kenneth A. (1992), “New Evidence on the Long-Term Effects of Employment Training
      Programs.” Journal of Labor Economics. 10(4):380-388.

Dehejia, R. (2000), “Was There a Riverside Miracle: A Framework for Evaluating Multi-site
       Programs,” Department of Economics, Columbia University.

Dehejia, R., and S. Wahba (1999), “Causal Effects in Non-Experimental Studies: Re-Evaluating
       the Evaluation of Training Programs,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
       Vol. 94, No. 448, pp. 1053-1062.

Freedman, S., D. Friedlander, W. Lin, and A. Schweder (1996), “The GAIN Evaluation: Five-
      Year Impacts on Employment, Earnings, and AFDC Receipt,” Working Paper 96.1,
      MDRC, July.

Freedman, S., M. Mitchell, and D. Navarro (1999), The Los Angeles Jobs-First GAIN Evalua-
      tion: First-Year Findings on Participation Patterns and Impacts, Manpower Demonstra-
      tion Research Corporation, June.

Freedman, S., J.T. Knab, L.A. Gennetian, and D. Navarro (2000), The Los Angeles Jobs-First
      GAIN Evaluation: Final Report on a Work First Program in a Major Urban Center,
      Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, June.

Friedlander, Daniel and Gary Burtless (1995). Five Years After : The Long-Term Effects of Wel-
       fare-To-Work Programs. New York: Russell Sage.

Friedlander, D., D. Greenberg, and P. Robins (1997), “Evaluating Government Training Pro-
       grams for the Economically Disadvantaged,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35:4, (De-
       cember), 1809-1855.

Heckman, J. and V. J. Hotz (1989), “Choosing Among Alternative Nonexperimental Methods
     for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of Manpower Training,” Journal
     of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 84, No. 408, pp. 862-880.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1997), “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation Esti-
     mator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Program,” Review of Economic Studies,
     64, 605-654.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1998a), “Matching as an Econometric Evaluation Esti-
     mator,” Review of Economic Studies, 65, 261-294.

Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, J. Smith, and P. Todd (1998b), “Characterizing Selection Bias Using
     Experimental Data,” Econometrica, 66, 1017-1098.

Heckman, J., R. LaLonde and J. Smith (1999), “The Economics and Econometrics of Active La-



                                             45
       bor Market Programs,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, V. 3A, Ashenfelter and Card
       (eds.), New York: Elsevier Science.

Heckman, J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998), “General-Equilibrium Treatment Effects: A
     Study of Tuition Policy,” American Economic Review, 88(2), May 1998, pages 381-86.

Hogan, L. (1995), “Jobs, Not JOBS: What It Takes to Put Welfare Recipients to Work,” Policy
      Briefing, Democratic Leadership Council, July 17, 1995.

Hotz, V. J., G. Imbens, and J. Mortimer (1999), “Predicting the Efficacy of Future Training Pro-
       grams Using Past Experiences,” NBER Working Paper No. T0238, April 1999.

LaLonde, R. (1986), “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with Ex-
      perimental Data,” American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 4, pp. 604-620.

LaLonde, R. (1995), “The Promise of Public Sector-Sponsored Training Programs,” Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 149-168.

Mincer, J., (1974), Education, Experience, and Earnings, New York: Columbia University Press.

Riccio, J., B. Goldman, G. Hamilton, K. Martinson, and A. Orenstein (1989), GAIN: Early Im-
       plementation Experiences and Lessons, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation,
       April.

Riccio, J. and D. Friedlander (1992), GAIN: Program Strategies, Participation Patterns, and
       First-Year Impacts in Six Counties, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Riccio, J., D. Friedlander, and S. Freedman (1994), GAIN: Benefits, Costs, and Three-Year Im-
       pacts of a Welfare-to-Work Program, Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

Rosenbaum, P. (1987), “The Role of a Second Control Group in an Observational Study,” Sta-
      tistical Science (with discussion), Vol 2, No. 3, 292-316.

Rosenbaum, P., and D. Rubin, (1983), “Assessing Sensitivity to an Unobserved Binary Covariate
      in an Observational Study with Binary Outcomes,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
      ety, Series B, 45, 212-218.

Rubin, D. (1977), “Assignment to a Treatment Group on the Basis of a Covariate,” Journal of
       Educational Statistics, 2, 1-26.

Rubin, D. (1979), “Using Multivariate Matched Sampling and Regression Adjustment to Control
       Bias in Observational Studies,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74:318-
       328.




                                              46
                          Table 1: Background Characteristics and Pre-Randomization Histories
                                           of GAIN Evaluation Participants

                                                  Panel A: AFDC-FG Cases

                                                   Alameda             Los Angeles           Riverside            San Diego
                 Variable                     Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.
Age                                            34.72       8.62      38.52       8.43     33.64        8.20    33.80       8.59
White                                            0.18      0.38        0.12      0.32       0.52       0.50      0.43      0.49
Hispanic                                         0.08      0.26        0.32      0.47       0.27       0.45      0.25      0.44
Black                                            0.70      0.46        0.45      0.50       0.16       0.36      0.23      0.42
Other Ethnic Groups                              0.04      0.20        0.11      0.31       0.05       0.22      0.09      0.29
Female-Head                                      0.95      0.22        0.94      0.24       0.88       0.33      0.84      0.37
One Child                                        0.42      0.49        0.33      0.47       0.39       0.49      0.43      0.50
More than One Child                              0.57      0.50        0.67      0.47       0.58       0.49      0.53      0.50
Child 0 to 5 Years                               0.31      0.46        0.10      0.30       0.16       0.37      0.13      0.34
Highest Grade Completed                        11.18       2.52        9.54      3.55     10.67        2.54    10.66       3.04
In Need of Basic Education                       0.65      0.48        0.81      0.40       0.60       0.49      0.56      0.50
Earnings 1 Qtr. before Rand. Assign.1           $213      $852        $221      $875       $453     $1,405      $587    $1,485
Earnings 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.1          $264    $1,018        $216      $866       $613     $1,602      $808    $1,879
Earnings 8 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.1          $220    $1,008        $181      $796       $726     $1,839      $827    $1,958
Employed 1 Qtr. Before Rand. Assign.             0.14      0.34        0.12      0.33       0.22       0.41      0.27      0.44
Employed 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.            0.14      0.34        0.13      0.33       0.25       0.43      0.29      0.45
Employed 8 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.            0.13      0.33        0.11      0.32       0.27       0.44      0.28      0.45
AFDC Benefits 1 Qtr. Before Rand. Assign.1    $2,498      $687      $2,477      $876     $1,616     $1,416    $1,585    $1,234
AFDC Benefits 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.1   $2,477      $748      $2,564      $910     $1,395     $1,432    $1,425    $1,310
On AFDC 1 Qtr. Before Rand. Assign.              0.99      0.08        0.96      0.20       0.69       0.46      0.75      0.43
On AFDC 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.             0.98      0.15        0.96      0.20       0.56       0.50      0.62      0.49
Number of Experimental Observations              597                 2,995                4,405                6,978
Number of Control Observations                   601                 1,400                1,040                1,154
Total Number of Observations                   1,198                 4,395                5,445                8,132
1
 In 1999$.




                                                               47
                                                     Table 1: (Continued)

                                                   Panel B: AFDC-U Cases

                                                   Alameda             Los Angeles           Riverside            San Diego
                   Variable                   Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.
Age                                            40.08       9.07      42.03       9.02     32.30        8.67    33.50       9.20
White                                            0.17      0.38        0.11      0.32       0.44       0.50      0.37      0.48
Hispanic                                         0.09      0.29        0.22      0.42       0.32       0.47      0.27      0.44
Black                                            0.18      0.38        0.04      0.20       0.08       0.28      0.10      0.30
Other Ethnic Groups                              0.56      0.50        0.62      0.49       0.16       0.37      0.26      0.44
Female-Head                                      0.21      0.41        0.04      0.20       0.14       0.34      0.09      0.28
One Child                                        0.12      0.33        0.08      0.27       0.23       0.42      0.24      0.43
More than One Child                              0.87      0.34        0.92      0.27       0.77       0.42      0.75      0.44
Child 0 to 5 Years                               0.53      0.50        0.50      0.50       0.74       0.44      0.73      0.44
Highest Grade Completed                          8.13      4.51        7.25      3.94     10.05        3.15    10.05       3.42
In Need of Basic Education                       0.80      0.40        0.92      0.27       0.66       0.47      0.63      0.48
Earnings 1 Qtr. before Rand. Assign.1           $231      $996        $295      $772       $947     $1,987      $986    $1,931
Earnings 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.1          $155      $608        $279      $651     $1,449     $2,583    $1,333    $2,456
Earnings 8 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.1          $169      $607        $231      $575     $1,567     $2,817    $1,397    $2,670
Employed 1 Qtr. Before Rand. Assign.             0.11      0.32        0.21      0.41       0.36       0.48      0.38      0.49
Employed 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.            0.08      0.27        0.21      0.41       0.40       0.49      0.41      0.49
Employed 8 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.            0.12      0.33        0.20      0.40       0.40       0.49      0.39      0.49
AFDC Benefits 1 Qtr. Before Rand. Assign.1    $3,498      $897      $3,305    $1,094     $1,284     $1,606    $1,712    $1,539
AFDC Benefits 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.1   $3,531      $887      $3,411    $1,062       $982     $1,512    $1,422    $1,597
On AFDC 1 Qtr. Before Rand. Assign.              0.99      0.08        0.98      0.15       0.54       0.50      0.69      0.46
On AFDC 4 Qtrs. Before Rand. Assign.             0.99      0.08        0.98      0.15       0.36       0.48      0.51      0.50
Number of Experimental Observations                89                  735                1,568                2,405
Number of Control Observations                     82                  723                  713                  835
Total Number of Observations                     171                 1,458                2,281                3,240
1
 In 1999$.




                                                               48
    Table 2: Annual Labor Market Conditions by County, 1989-901

                                      Los
     Year          Alameda                           Riverside        San Diego
                                     Angeles
Annual Unemployment Rate
   1988         4.8%          5.2%          6.5%                         4.3%
   1989         4.4%          5.5%          6.8%                         3.9%
   1990         3.9%          5.9%          6.3%                         4.7%
Annual Employment Growth Rates
   1988         2.1%          0.9%          7.4%                         2.0%
   1989         2.1%          1.6%          7.4%                         3.5%
   1990         4.7%          4.0%          8.5%                         6.0%
Annual Real Wage Income per Worker
   1988        $21,661       $23,070      $17,328                       $18,820
   1989        $21,569       $22,833      $17,453                       $18,817
   1990        $21,752       $22,957      $17,775                       $18,919
Annual Growth Rates in Real Wage Income per Worker
   1988         0.4%          1.0%         -0.7%                         0.0%
   1989        -0.8%         -0.5%         -1.8%                        -0.5%
   1990        -0.4%         -1.1%          1.0%                         0.1%
Share of Employment in Manufacturing
   1988         0.112         0.165         0.083                        0.097
   1989         0.113         0.172         0.086                        0.098
   1990         0.113         0.176         0.088                        0.096
Share of Employment in Service Sector
   1988         0.293         0.333         0.279                        0.289
   1989         0.283         0.326         0.273                        0.279
   1990         0.282         0.324         0.275                        0.279
Share of Employment in Public Administration
   1988         0.191         0.107         0.155                        0.227
   1989         0.193         0.107         0.156                        0.228
   1990         0.193         0.106         0.157                        0.230
1
 Shaded entries denote years in which random assignment was conducted in various
counties.




                                        49
        Table 3: Distribution of Average Monthly Participation in Various GAIN Activities1,2

                                                                                                                     Supported
         Job Club & All Other                     Basic
                                                                 Vocational                                           Work &
Yr.:Qtr. Job Search Job Search                  Education                             OJT            PREP*
                                                                  Training                                          Transitional
          Activities Activities                 Program
                                                                                                                    Employment
Alameda
1988:Q3           0%               0%                0%               100%             0%               0%                   0%
1988:Q4           0%               0%                0%               100%             0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q1          21%               0%               53%                26%             0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q2          34%               2%               37%                27%             0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q3          35%               2%               36%               27%              0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q4          33%               9%               44%               12%              0%               0%                   0%
1990:Q1          29%               5%               44%               22%              0%               0%                   0%
1990:Q2          45%               3%               38%               13%              1%               0%                   0%
1990:Q3          24%               4%               32%                37%             0%               4%                   0%
1990:Q4          19%               5%               38%                32%             0%               6%                   0%
Los Angeles
1988:Q3          N/A               N/A              N/A               N/A             N/A              N/A               N/A
1988:Q4           0%               0%                8%               92%             0%               0%                0%
1989:Q1          14%               0%               72%               14%             0%               0%                0%
1989:Q2          23%               1%               61%               15%             0%               0%                0%
1989:Q3          22%               2%               68%               8%              0%               0%                0%
1989:Q4          23%               4%               65%               8%              0%               0%                0%
1990:Q1          19%               7%               63%               12%             0%               0%                0%
1990:Q2          16%               5%               64%               15%             0%               0%                0%
1990:Q3          29%               6%               49%               15%             0%               0%                0%
1990:Q4          15%               3%               58%               24%             0%               0%                0%
Riverside
1988:Q3          51%               9%               21%               20%              0%               0%                   0%
1988:Q4          62%               7%               20%               10%              0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q1          56%               3%               26%               14%              0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q2          63%               5%               20%               12%              0%               0%                   0%
1989:Q3          64%               3%               19%               14%              1%               0%                   0%
1989:Q4          45%               2%               32%               21%              0%               0%                   0%
1990:Q1          52%               3%               23%               22%              0%               0%                   0%
1990:Q2          52%               1%               24%               23%              0%               0%                   0%
1990:Q3          61%               3%               19%               17%              0%               0%                   0%
1990:Q4          55%               4%               22%               19%              0%               0%                   0%
San Diego
1988:Q3          41%               1%               28%               28%              1%               2%                   0%
1988:Q4          45%               1%               30%               22%              1%               2%                   0%
1989:Q1          41%               1%               30%               24%              2%               2%                   0%
1989:Q2          42%               2%               31%               21%              2%               2%                   0%
1989:Q3          28%               5%               42%               23%              1%               2%                   0%
1989:Q4          30%               6%               27%               28%              4%               5%                   0%
1990:Q1          34%               8%               33%               21%              2%               3%                   0%
1990:Q2          31%               6%               41%               15%              2%               4%                   0%
1990:Q3          25%               8%               38%               22%              2%               5%                   0%
1990:Q4          27%               7%               36%               19%              3%               8%                   0%
1
 PREP stands for “Pre-Employment Preparation. This was California’s form of Workfare, i.e., it was unpaid work experience.
2
 Shaded entries denote quarters in which random assignment was conducted in the various counties.



                                                                 50
Table 4: Average per Month Enrollment in GAIN as Percentage of Total AFDC Enrollment*
                                 [Source: GAIN25 Data]

               Yr.:Qtr.       Alameda       Los Angeles     Riverside      San Diego
               1988:Q3           0%             N/A           18%            32%
               1988:Q4           0%             0%            21%            35%
               1989:Q1           3%             2%            25%            40%
               1989:Q2           5%             5%            26%            44%
               1989:Q3           8%             7%            28%            46%
               1989:Q4         10%              7%            33%            40%
               1990:Q1         11%              6%            39%            48%
               1990:Q2         10%              6%            40%            45%
               1990:Q3           7%             5%            39%            43%
               1990:Q4           8%             8%            39%            47%
             *Shaded entries denote quarters in which random assignment was conducted in
              the various counties.




                                                 51
                                                 Table 5: Experimental Estimates of Annual Impacts of GAIN,
                                                            Cases Enrolled in GAIN as AFDC-FG
                                                                        Full Sample
                          Alameda                                    Los Angeles                                    Riverside                                      San Diego
 Yrs. Experi-                            Experi-                           Experi-                           Experi-
                                 % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-
 after mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference
                                 ference                           ference                           ference                           ference
Enroll.
Ever Employed in Year (%)
 1-3   30.8    28.1    2.7                    10%        26.1      24.5        1.7          7%       49.0       35.3      13.6***       39%       45.1          40.8    4.3***    11%
 4-6   37.0    34.7    2.3                     7%        29.2      25.8        3.3***      13%       40.4       33.5       6.9***       21%       40.8          38.2    2.6*       7%
 7-9   45.3    45.3    0.0                     0%        36.9      33.1        3.8***      11%       39.3       37.8       1.5           4%       41.0          40.9    0.1        0%
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
 1-3    0.80   0.75   0.05      7%                        0.71      0.67       0.04     5%             1.33      0.90      0.43*** 48%              1.25         1.09   0.15*** 14%
 4-6    1.12   1.02   0.10     10%                        0.87      0.77       0.10** 13%              1.23      0.98      0.25*** 25%              1.26         1.17   0.09*    8%
 7-9    1.47   1.42   0.05      3%                        1.16      1.03       0.13*** 13%             1.23      1.15      0.08     7%              1.32         1.28   0.04     3%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
 1-3 $2,333 $1,849 $484                       26%      $1,843 $1,849           -$6           0%     $3,668 $2,253 $1,416*** 63%                  $3,781 $3,165          $616*** 19%
 4-6 $4,069 $3,342 $727                       22%      $2,615 $2,493          $122           5%     $4,363 $3,201 $1,162*** 36%                  $4,849 $4,315          $534*   12%
 7-9 $5,871 $5,206 $665                       13%      $3,689 $3,386          $302           9%     $4,585 $4,174 $411      10%                  $5,394 $4,948          $446     9%
Earnings above Full-Time Min. Wage (%)
 1-3     6.6    5.4    1.2     21%      5.4                         5.7       -0.2          -4%      10.4        6.2       4.2***       69%       11.4           9.6    1.8**     19%
 4-6    12.6   10.8    1.8     17%      8.8                         8.5        0.3           4%      14.4       10.0       4.4***       44%       16.0          14.2    1.8*      12%
 7-9    19.4   17.1    2.3     13%     11.8                        11.2        0.6           5%      15.1       13.7       1.4          10%       17.8          15.9    1.9*      12%
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
 1-3    86.0   87.6  -1.6     -2%     85.1   87.6                             -2.5***       -3%      71.7       77.5       -5.8***      -8%       73.9          76.5    -2.5***   -3%
 4-6    56.3   63.2  -6.9*** -11%     53.7   57.4                             -3.7**        -6%      39.8       44.6       -4.8***     -11%       41.3          44.5    -3.2**    -7%
 7-9    37.2   39.8  -2.6     -6%     33.4   35.6                             -2.2          -6%      25.3       28.5       -3.2**      -11%       26.2          28.9    -2.7**    -9%
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
 1-3    3.14   3.33 -0.18*** -5%      3.13                          3.30      -0.17***      -5%        2.39      2.71      -0.32*** -12%            2.54         2.68   -0.15*** -6%
 4-6    2.05   2.37 -0.33*** -14%     1.92                          2.12      -0.20***      -9%        1.34      1.56      -0.22*** -14%            1.44         1.57   -0.13**  -8%
 7-9    1.32   1.38 -0.06       -4%   1.18                          1.28      -0.10*        -8%        0.83      0.97      -0.14*** -14%            0.90         0.99   -0.09** -10%
NOTES: * denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.




                                                                                             52
                                                  Table 6: Experimental Estimates of Annual Impacts of GAIN,
                                                              Cases Enrolled in GAIN as AFDC-U
                                                                         Full Sample
                          Alameda                                    Los Angeles                                    Riverside                                      San Diego
 Yrs. Experi-                            Experi-                           Experi-                           Experi-
                                 % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-
 after mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference
                                 ference                           ference                           ference                           ference
Enroll.
Ever Employed in Year (%)
 1-3   31.1    19.5   11.6**                   59%       38.6      28.8        9.8***       34%      53.2       44.7       8.5***        19%      51.6          46.0     5.6***    12%
 4-6   28.8    21.1    7.7                     36%       37.0      28.9        8.1***       28%      40.7       36.3       4.4**         12%      42.2          40.8     1.3        3%
 7-9   35.6    32.1    3.5                     11%       38.3      38.2        0.1           0%      36.5       36.4       0.1            0%      41.1          42.2    -1.1       -3%
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
 1-3    0.80   0.62   0.18     29%                        1.19       0.91      0.28***      30%        1.42      1.17       0.25***      21%        1.46         1.30    0.17***   13%
 4-6    0.93   0.64   0.29     45%                        1.20       0.90      0.30***      34%        1.17      1.05       0.13**       12%        1.29         1.26    0.03       2%
 7-9    1.08   1.00   0.08      8%                        1.28       1.25      0.02          2%        1.11      1.12      -0.01         -1%        1.31         1.33   -0.02      -2%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
 1-3 $1,496 $1,442      $54                     4%     $1,932 $1,638          $294          18% $4,672 $3,736              $937***       25% $4,654 $4,270               $384       9%
 4-6 $2,837 $2,182 $654                        30%     $2,316 $1,970          $347          18% $4,398 $3,857              $541          14% $4,792 $4,757                $35       1%
 7-9 $4,139 $3,205 $935                        29%     $2,950 $3,132         -$182          -6% $4,365 $4,322               $43           1% $5,420 $5,542              -$123      -2%
Earnings above Full-Time Min. Wage (%)
 1-3     3.7    4.1    -0.3     -8%    2.9                          2.9        0.0           2%      14.0       10.8       3.2***        30%      14.0          12.5     1.5       12%
 4-6     8.6    7.3     1.3     18%    4.8                          4.1        0.7          16%      14.6       12.4       2.1           17%      14.9          14.8     0.1        1%
 7-9    12.0    8.9     3.0     34%    7.1                          7.2       -0.1          -2%      15.1       14.9       0.2            1%      16.6          16.9    -0.3       -2%
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
 1-3    81.3   88.2  -6.9*    -8% 86.1       88.8                             -2.7**        -3%      64.2       67.9       -3.7**        -5%      69.3          74.1    -4.8***    -7%
 4-6    49.1   66.3 -17.2**  -26% 58.5       63.6                             -5.0**        -8%      36.0       38.1       -2.1          -6%      40.0          43.9    -3.8**     -9%
 7-9    30.0   43.9 -13.9**  -32% 42.4       45.7                             -3.3          -7%      24.3       25.3       -1.0          -4%      26.7          29.2    -2.5       -9%
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
 1-3    3.03   3.33 -0.30       -9%   3.21                          3.36      -0.16***      -5%        2.02      2.26      -0.24*** -11%            2.30         2.54   -0.24*** -9%
 4-6    1.75   2.48 -0.72*** -29%     2.20                          2.42      -0.22**       -9%        1.19      1.31      -0.12*    -9%            1.39         1.55   -0.17** -11%
 7-9    1.09   1.56 -0.47*     -30%   1.59                          1.71      -0.12         -7%        0.80      0.84      -0.05     -6%            0.92         1.03   -0.11*   -10%
NOTES: * denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.




                                                                                             53
                          Table 7: Differences Between Riverside and Other Counties in Annual Impacts of GAIN
                                                       Cases Enrolled as AFDC-FG
                                                               Full Sample
                                    Riverside – Alameda                Riverside - Los Angeles                          Riverside - San Diego
                         Yrs. Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference
                        Since in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in
                        Enroll   Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences
Ever Employed in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    18.2***       7.3***  10.9***    22.8***   10.9***   12.0***                                          3.8***         -5.5***         9.3***
       4-6      3.3*       -1.3       4.6      11.2***    7.6***     3.5*                                          -0.5            -4.8***         4.3**
       7-9     -6.0***     -7.4***    1.5        2.4**    4.7***    -2.3                                           -1.7**          -3.1*           1.4
Regression




       1-3    16.0***       3.7     12.3***    15.1***    4.4**    10.7***                                          7.2***          0.7            6.5***
 Adjusted




       4-6      2.6        -2.6       5.2        5.4***   1.4        4.0                                            1.9*           -5.3**          7.2***
       7-9     -5.5***     -5.2*     -0.4       -3.3**    0.7       -4.0                                           -1.5            -3.7            2.1
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
           Unadjusted




       1-3      0.53***     0.15**    0.38***    0.62***  0.22***    0.40***                                        0.08***        -0.20***        0.28***
       4-6      0.10       -0.04      0.14       0.36***  0.21***    0.15**                                        -0.04           -0.19***        0.16**
       7-9     -0.24***    -0.27***   0.04       0.07**   0.12*     -0.05                                          -0.09***        -0.13*          0.04
Regression




       1-3      0.43***     0.00      0.43***    0.39***  0.01       0.38***                                        0.20***        -0.05           0.25***
 Adjusted




       4-6      0.09       -0.15      0.24*      0.18*** -0.01       0.19**                                         0.06*          -0.22***        0.28***
       7-9     -0.20***    -0.20*    -0.01      -0.11**  -0.04      -0.07                                          -0.07*          -0.18**         0.11
Annual Earnings (1999$)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 $1,335***       $403      $931** $1,825***     $403*   $1,422***                                       -$113      -$912***  $799***
       4-6     $294       -$141      $435     $1,748***   $709** $1,040***                                        -$486*** -$1,114***  $628
       7-9 -$1,285*** -$1,032**     -$254       $896***   $788**    $109                                          -$809*** -$774*       -$35
Regression




       1-3     $983***     $107      $876**     $892*** -$272     $1,164***                                        $533*** -$521*     $1,054***
 Adjusted




       4-6     $298          $88     $210       $696***   -$21      $717                                           $244    -$1,110** $1,354***
       7-9 -$1,096**      -$185     -$911      -$309       -$8     -$301                                          -$352    -$1,040**   $688
Annual Earnings above FT-Min Wage Earnings (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3      3.8***      0.7       3.1**      4.9***   0.5        4.5***                                        -1.0**          -3.4***         2.4**
       4-6      1.7        -0.8       2.6        5.6***   1.5        4.0***                                        -1.6***         -4.2***         2.6*
       7-9     -4.4***     -3.5**    -0.9        3.3***   2.4*       0.8                                           -2.7***         -2.3           -0.5
Regression




       1-3      2.8***      0.0       2.8        1.6**   -1.6        3.2**                                          1.2**          -2.2*           3.4**
 Adjusted




       4-6      2.3        -1.0       3.2        2.3***  -1.3        3.6**                                          0.9            -3.7**          4.6***
       7-9     -3.8**      -1.8      -2.0       -0.4     -0.9        0.4                                           -1.4*           -2.7            1.3
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 -14.3***      -10.2***    -4.2**   -13.5*** -10.1***     -3.4**                                         -2.3***          1.0           -3.3**
       4-6 -16.4***      -18.6***     2.1     -13.8*** -12.8***     -1.1                                           -1.4*            0.1           -1.6
       7-9 -12.0***      -11.4***    -0.6       -8.1***  -7.2***    -0.9                                           -0.9            -0.4           -0.5
Regression




       1-3     -6.0***     -0.8      -5.2**     -5.1***   0.3       -5.4***                                        -6.0***         -0.6           -5.3***
 Adjusted




       4-6     -7.6***     -7.7**     0.1       -7.2***  -2.4       -4.8*                                          -6.3***         -0.4           -5.9**
       7-9     -4.7**      -5.3*      0.6       -3.8***  -2.8       -1.0                                           -4.5***         -0.4           -4.0*
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
           Unadjusted




       1-3     -0.75***    -0.62*** -0.14       -0.74*** -0.59*** -0.15**                                          -0.15***         0.02          -0.17***
       4-6     -0.71***    -0.82***   0.11      -0.58*** -0.56*** -0.02                                            -0.10***        -0.01          -0.09
       7-9     -0.49***    -0.41*** -0.08       -0.35*** -0.31*** -0.04                                            -0.07**         -0.02          -0.05
       1-3
Regression




               -0.39***    -0.17*    -0.22**    -0.33*** -0.07      -0.26***                                       -0.30***        -0.04          -0.27***
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.38***    -0.40***   0.02      -0.34*** -0.16*     -0.18*                                         -0.28***        -0.04          -0.24***
       7-9     -0.23***    -0.19*    -0.04      -0.19*** -0.14*     -0.04                                          -0.19***        -0.01          -0.17**
* denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.

                                                                             54
                          Table 8: Differences Between Riverside and Other Counties in Annual Impacts of GAIN
                                                       Cases Enrolled as AFDC-U
                                                               Full Sample
                                    Riverside – Alameda                Riverside - Los Angeles                          Riverside - San Diego
                         Yrs. Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference
                        Since in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in
                        Enroll   Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences
Ever Employed in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    22.1***     25.2***      -3.1      14.6***                           15.9***         -1.3             1.6            -1.3            2.9
       4-6    11.8***     15.1***      -3.3        3.7*                             7.4***         -3.7            -1.5            -4.6**          3.1
       7-9      0.9         4.3        -3.4       -1.8                             -1.8             0.0            -4.6***         -5.8***         1.2
Regression




       1-3      3.1         5.3        -2.3        1.9                              3.7            -1.8             6.0***          0.6            5.4*
 Adjusted




       4-6     -3.7         1.7        -5.4       -6.7**                           -2.6            -4.1             0.6            -3.8            4.4
       7-9 -10.5**         -5.2        -5.4     -13.0***                           -4.7            -8.3*           -5.2***         -9.1***         3.9
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
           Unadjusted




       1-3      0.62***     0.55***     0.07       0.24***                           0.26***       -0.03           -0.04           -0.12*          0.08
       4-6      0.25        0.41**     -0.16      -0.03                              0.15*         -0.17*          -0.12**         -0.21***        0.10
       7-9      0.03        0.12       -0.09      -0.17**                           -0.14*         -0.03           -0.20***        -0.21***        0.01
Regression




       1-3      0.07        0.10       -0.03      -0.08                              0.05          -0.13            0.12**         -0.03           0.15
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.21        0.03       -0.25      -0.33***                          -0.11          -0.22           -0.04           -0.19*          0.14
       7-9     -0.32*      -0.13       -0.19      -0.50***                          -0.18          -0.33*          -0.22***        -0.35***        0.13
Annual Earnings (1999$)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 $3,176*** $2,294***         $883     $2,741***                         $2,098***         $643            $18      -$534                 $552
       4-6 $1,561*      $1,675*       -$114     $2,081***                         $1,887***         $194          -$394      -$900**               $506
       7-9     $226     $1,117        -$891     $1,416***                         $1,190***         $226        -$1,054*** -$1,220***              $166
Regression




       1-3     $900        $322        $577       $511                             -$101            $611           $573**    -$310                 $883*
 Adjusted




       4-6    -$612        $527     -$1,139      -$465                             -$102           -$363           -$26      -$786                 $760
       7-9 -$1,653*       -$398     -$1,255    -$1,232**                           -$636           -$596        -$1,284*** -$1,760***              $476
Annual Earnings above FT-Min Wage Earnings (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    10.3***       6.7**       3.6      11.1***                             7.9***         3.2**           0.0            -1.7            1.7
       4-6      6.0*        5.1         0.9        9.8***                            8.3***         1.5            -0.3            -2.3            2.0
       7-9      3.1         6.0        -2.8        8.0***                            7.7***         0.3            -1.5            -2.0            0.6
Regression




       1-3      1.7         1.6         0.1        2.8*                             -0.3            3.1             1.5            -1.8            3.3
 Adjusted




       4-6     -2.3         0.2        -2.5        0.6                              -0.3            1.0             0.6            -3.8*           4.4*
       7-9     -2.9        -1.1        -1.8       -1.4                              -1.4            0.0            -3.0**          -4.6**          1.6
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 -17.1***      -20.3***       3.3     -21.9***                          -20.9***         -1.0            -5.1***         -6.2***         1.2
       4-6 -13.1***      -28.1***     15.1**    -22.5***                          -25.4***          2.9            -4.0***         -5.7**          1.7
       7-9     -5.7      -18.6***     12.9**    -18.2***                          -20.4***          2.3            -2.4*           -3.9*           1.5
Regression




       1-3     -5.5        -3.4        -2.1       -8.6***                          -0.7            -7.9**          -6.0***         -7.1***         1.0
 Adjusted




       4-6     -1.5      -13.0**      11.6        -9.3***                          -4.5            -4.8            -4.0**          -5.0*           1.0
       7-9      3.2        -9.5*      12.8*       -8.7***                          -6.7*           -2.0            -1.2            -0.3           -0.9
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
           Unadjusted




       1-3     -1.01***    -1.07***     0.06      -1.19***                          -1.11***       -0.08           -0.29***        -0.29***        0.00
       4-6     -0.56***    -1.16***     0.60**    -1.01***                          -1.11***        0.10           -0.19***        -0.24***        0.05
       7-9     -0.30*      -0.72***     0.42*     -0.79***                          -0.86***        0.07           -0.13***        -0.18**         0.06
       1-3
Regression




               -0.34**     -0.17       -0.17      -0.43***                          -0.06          -0.37**         -0.29***        -0.26***       -0.03
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.05       -0.58***     0.53*     -0.43***                          -0.30*         -0.13           -0.17***        -0.22**         0.05
       7-9      0.08       -0.36*       0.45*     -0.39***                          -0.33**        -0.06           -0.07           -0.04          -0.03
* denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.

                                                                             55
                                                                                    APPENDIX
                                              Table A1: Experimental Estimates of Annual Impacts of GAIN,
                                                          Cases Enrolled in GAIN as AFDC-FG
                                                        Panel A: “In Need of Basic Education” Subsample
                         Alameda                                  Los Angeles                                   Riverside                                  San Diego
 Yrs. Experi-                            Experi-                           Experi-                           Experi-
                                 % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-
 after mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference
                                 ference                           ference                           ference                           ference
Enroll.
Ever Employed in Year (%)
 1-3   26.3    23.9     2.4                  10%       23.8     22.4        1.3          6%       43.3      32.5      10.8***      33%       38.4      35.6       2.8           8%
 4-6   30.9    29.4     1.5                   5%       27.0     23.5        3.5***      15%       34.8      28.6       6.2***      22%       34.4      33.6       0.8           2%
 7-9   39.7    41.1    -1.4                  -4%       34.6     31.3        3.3**       11%       34.3      32.9       1.4          4%       36.2      37.0      -0.9          -2%
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
 1-3    0.64   0.60   0.04      6%                      0.63      0.60      0.03         4%        1.13      0.79      0.34*** 43%            1.02      0.93      0.09          9%
 4-6    0.91   0.83   0.08     10%                      0.80      0.70      0.10**      14%        1.02      0.77      0.25*** 33%            1.02      0.99      0.03          3%
 7-9    1.27   1.26   0.01      0%                      1.08      0.97      0.12**      12%        1.04      0.95      0.09     9%            1.12      1.10      0.02          2%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
 1-3 $1,666 $1,402 $264                      19%     $1,469 $1,506         -$37         -2%     $2,753 $1,581 $1,172*** 74%                 $2,523 $2,284         $239        10%
 4-6 $2,718 $2,261 $458                      20%     $2,144 $2,086          $59          3%     $3,073 $1,925 $1,148*** 60%                 $3,025 $2,932          $93         3%
 7-9 $4,095 $3,802 $293                       8%     $3,089 $2,874         $215          7%     $3,124 $2,806 $318      11%                 $3,447 $3,318         $129         4%
Earnings above Full-Time Min. Wage (%)
 1-3     3.8    4.1    -0.4     -9%    4.0                        4.6      -0.5        -12%        7.0       3.5       3.5***      99%        6.8       6.3       0.5          9%
 4-6     7.6    7.4     0.2      2%    6.9                        7.1      -0.2         -3%        9.9       5.3       4.6***      87%        9.7       9.5       0.3          3%
 7-9    14.1   13.1     0.9      7%    9.8                        9.7       0.1          1%       10.2       8.5       1.7         20%       11.6      10.0       1.6         16%
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
 1-3    87.4   88.4  -1.0     -1%     86.0   88.0                          -2.0**       -2%       72.8      78.5      -5.6***      -7%       76.3      79.4      -3.1**       -4%
 4-6    58.8   64.3  -5.5*    -9%     54.9   58.3                          -3.4**       -6%       42.4      48.6      -6.2***     -13%       46.5      50.9      -4.4**       -9%
 7-9    38.6   42.2  -3.6     -8%     33.9   36.4                          -2.5         -7%       27.2      31.1      -3.9**      -13%       30.2      33.5      -3.3*       -10%
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
 1-3    3.19   3.36 -0.17**     -5%   3.18                        3.32     -0.14***     -4%        2.45      2.74     -0.29*** -11%           2.67      2.85     -0.19***      -6%
 4-6    2.14   2.43 -0.29** -12%      1.97                        2.16     -0.20***     -9%        1.44      1.69     -0.25*** -15%           1.65      1.80     -0.16**       -9%
 7-9    1.38   1.49 -0.11       -7%   1.20                        1.31     -0.11*       -8%        0.90      1.06     -0.17** -16%            1.05      1.16     -0.11         -9%
NOTES: * denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.
       Italicized entries indicate means that are significantly different from those for the “Not In Need of Basic Education” subsample, at significance levels at or lower than 10%
       level.

                                                                                         56
                                                                            Table A1: (Continued)
                                                     Panel B: “Not In Need of Basic Education” Subsample
                         Alameda                                   Los Angeles                                  Riverside                                   San Diego
 Yrs. Experi-                            Experi-                           Experi-                           Experi-
                                 % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-
 after mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference
                                 ference                           ference                           ference                           ference
Enroll.
Ever Employed in Year (%)
 1-3   39.1    35.9    3.2                    9%       35.9      32.8       3.1           9%      57.5      39.4      18.1***       46%       53.8      47.1       6.7***       14%
 4-6   48.4    44.8    3.6                    8%       38.2      35.5       2.6           7%      48.7      40.5       8.2***       20%       49.2      43.9       5.3**        12%
 7-9   55.8    53.1    2.6                    5%       46.3      40.6       5.7*         14%      47.0      45.0       1.9           4%       47.4      45.7       1.7           4%
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
 1-3    1.11   1.03   0.08      8%                      1.04      0.95      0.08          9%        1.63      1.05      0.58*** 55%            1.54      1.29      0.25*** 19%
 4-6    1.52   1.38   0.13     10%                      1.18      1.07      0.11         10%        1.55      1.30      0.25*** 19%            1.57      1.40      0.18** 13%
 7-9    1.84   1.73   0.12      7%                      1.49      1.31      0.19         14%        1.53      1.44      0.09     6%            1.59      1.50      0.09     6%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
 1-3 $3,581 $2,701      $880                 33%      $3,400 $3,274         $126          4%     $5,056 $3,236 $1,820*** 56%                 $5,406 $4,238 $1,168*** 28%
 4-6 $6,595 $5,400 $1,195                    22%      $4,569 $4,181         $389          9%     $6,321 $5,070 $1,251** 25%                  $7,206 $6,002 $1,204** 20%
 7-9 $9,192 $7,877 $1,315                    17%      $6,183 $5,512         $671         12%     $6,802 $6,178   $624    10%                 $7,910 $6,935   $975* 14%
Earnings above Full-Time Min. Wage (%)
 1-3    11.9    7.9    4.0*    50%     11.2                      10.2       1.1          11%      15.5      10.0        5.5***      55%       17.4      13.7       3.7***       27%
 4-6    22.0   17.2    4.7     27%     16.7                      14.1       2.6          18%      21.1      16.9        4.2**       25%       24.0      20.0       4.0**        20%
 7-9    29.5   24.8    4.7     19%     20.2                      17.6       2.5          14%      22.5      21.2        1.2          6%       25.8      23.1       2.6          11%
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
 1-3    83.3   86.2  -2.8     -3%     81.6   85.8                          -4.2**        -5%      69.9      76.0       -6.1***       -8%      70.9      72.9      -2.0          -3%
 4-6    51.6   61.2  -9.6** -16%      48.7   53.7                          -5.0          -9%      35.9      38.9       -2.9          -8%      34.5      36.7      -2.2          -6%
 7-9    34.6   35.3  -0.7     -2%     31.4   32.6                          -1.2          -4%      22.3      24.6       -2.2          -9%      21.0      23.2      -2.2         -10%
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
 1-3    3.05   3.25 -0.20*      -6%   2.93                        3.22     -0.29*** -9%             2.29      2.65     -0.36*** -14%           2.37      2.48     -0.11*        -5%
 4-6    1.87   2.27 -0.40** -17%      1.73                        1.95     -0.22*   -11%            1.20      1.36     -0.17*   -12%           1.17      1.28     -0.11         -8%
 7-9    1.21   1.17    0.03      3%   1.09                        1.15     -0.07     -6%            0.72      0.83     -0.11    -13%           0.70      0.78     -0.09        -11%
NOTES: * denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.
       Italicized entries indicate means that are significantly different from those for the “In Need of Basic Education” subsample, at significance levels at or lower than 10% level.




                                                                                          57
                                              Table A2: Experimental Estimates of Annual Impacts of GAIN,
                                                          Cases Enrolled in GAIN as AFDC-U
                                                        Panel A: “In Need of Basic Education” Subsample
                         Alameda                                  Los Angeles                                   Riverside                                  San Diego
 Yrs. Experi-                            Experi-                           Experi-                           Experi-
                                 % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-
 after mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference
                                 ference                           ference                           ference                           ference
Enroll.
Ever Employed in Year (%)
 1-3   26.3    20.2     6.1                  30%       37.9      29.0       8.9***      31%       50.5      42.3        8.2***      20%       49.4      42.6       6.9***      16%
 4-6   23.9    19.2     4.8                  25%       36.7      28.2       8.5***      30%       39.5      35.0        4.6**       13%       40.8      37.7       3.1          8%
 7-9   29.1    31.3    -2.2                  -7%       38.1      37.6       0.4          1%       35.7      36.6       -0.9         -2%       41.2      41.0       0.3          1%
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
 1-3    0.69   0.64   0.04       7%                     1.17      0.93      0.25***     27%         1.33      1.12      0.21***     19%        1.40      1.23      0.17**      14%
 4-6    0.79   0.57   0.22     38%                      1.19      0.89      0.30***     34%         1.12      1.01      0.12        12%        1.26      1.14      0.12        11%
 7-9    0.92   1.01 -0.09       -9%                     1.28      1.24      0.04         4%         1.07      1.13     -0.06        -5%        1.31      1.29      0.01         1%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
 1-3    $992 $1,607     -$615               -38%     $1,870 $1,570          $300        19% $4,073 $3,478               $595        17% $3,748 $3,643              $106          3%
 4-6 $2,377 $2,276       $101                 4%     $2,239 $1,789          $450*       25% $3,862 $3,486               $376        11% $4,053 $3,509              $544         15%
 7-9 $3,273 $3,410      -$137                -4%     $2,925 $2,848           $77         3% $3,887 $4,080              -$193        -5% $4,667 $4,440              $226          5%
Earnings above Full-Time Min. Wage (%)
 1-3     1.4    5.1    -3.6    -72%    2.7                        2.4       0.3         12%       11.8      10.1        1.6         16%       10.3      10.0       0.3           3%
 4-6     7.0    8.1    -1.0    -13%    4.5                        3.5       0.9         26%       12.6      10.8        1.9         17%       12.2       9.7       2.5*         26%
 7-9     8.5    9.6    -1.1    -12%    6.8                        6.3       0.5          8%       13.4      13.9       -0.4         -3%       14.3      13.4       0.9           7%
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
 1-3    82.2   87.4  -5.2     -6%     86.5   89.0                          -2.5*        -3%       65.7      69.2       -3.5*        -5%       73.6      78.9      -5.3***       -7%
 4-6    50.2   64.1 -13.9*  -22%      59.0   65.1                          -6.1**       -9%       38.3      40.2       -1.9         -5%       45.2      52.0      -6.7***      -13%
 7-9    33.3   42.9  -9.6   -22%      42.4   47.7                          -5.3**      -11%       26.7      26.8       -0.1          0%       30.9      34.6      -3.7*        -11%
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
 1-3    3.09   3.34 -0.24       -7%   3.23                        3.38     -0.15**   -4%            2.12      2.32     -0.21***     -9%        2.52      2.77     -0.25*** -9%
 4-6    1.83   2.43 -0.60*     -25%   2.22                        2.48     -0.27*** -11%            1.29      1.39     -0.10        -8%        1.59      1.89     -0.29*** -15%
 7-9    1.25   1.57 -0.32      -20%   1.59                        1.78     -0.19*   -11%            0.89      0.91     -0.01        -1%        1.09      1.24     -0.15*   -12%
NOTES: * denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.
       Italicized entries indicate means that are significantly different from those for the “Not In Need of Basic Education” subsample, at significance levels at or lower than 10%
       level.




                                                                                         58
                                                                            Table A2: (Continued)
                                                     Panel B: “Not In Need of Basic Education” Subsample
                         Alameda                                   Los Angeles                                  Riverside                                   San Diego
 Yrs. Experi-                            Experi-                           Experi-                           Experi-
                                 % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-                            % Dif-
 after mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference         mental Control Difference
                                 ference                           ference                           ference                           ference
Enroll.
Ever Employed in Year (%)
 1-3   50.0    16.7   33.3*** 200%                     47.9      26.2      21.8***       83%       58.5      49.5       9.0***       18%       55.4      51.4       4.0           8%
 4-6   48.1    29.2   19.0     65%                     41.7      35.9       5.8          16%       43.0      38.9       4.1          11%       44.5      45.8      -1.3          -3%
 7-9   61.1    35.4   25.7*    73%                     41.0      44.1      -3.1          -7%       38.0      36.1       1.9           5%       40.8      44.2      -3.4          -8%
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
 1-3    1.26   0.54   0.72*   132%                       1.38      0.76      0.61**      80%        1.61      1.27      0.33***      26%        1.57      1.40      0.16*        12%
 4-6    1.46   0.92   0.55     60%                       1.35      0.99      0.35        35%        1.27      1.12      0.15         13%        1.34      1.46     -0.12         -8%
 7-9    1.72   0.98   0.74     76%                       1.19      1.39     -0.20       -15%        1.19      1.10      0.09          8%        1.32      1.39     -0.08         -6%
Annual Earnings (1999$)
 1-3 $3,487 $765 $2,722** 356%                        $2,820 $2,335   $485               21%      $5,860 $4,248 $1,612*** 38%                $6,238 $5,264          $974*        19%
 4-6 $4,649 $1,798 $2,851  159%                       $3,423 $3,800 -$377               -10%      $5,459 $4,593   $866    19%                $6,084 $6,735         -$651        -10%
 7-9 $7,555 $2,357 $5,199* 221%                       $3,301 $6,004 -$2,703             -45%      $5,314 $4,802   $512    11%                $6,737 $7,289         -$553         -8%
Earnings above Full-Time Min. Wage (%)
 1-3    13.0    0.0    13.0**  NA       6.3                       7.7       -1.4        -19%       18.5      12.1       6.4***       53%       20.5      16.5       3.9*         24%
 4-6    14.8    4.2    10.6    256%     9.0                       9.7       -0.7         -7%       18.4      15.8       2.7          17%       19.6      22.8      -3.2         -14%
 7-9    25.9    6.3    19.7*   315%    10.4                      15.9       -5.5        -34%       18.4      17.0       1.4           8%       20.6      22.5      -1.9          -9%
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
 1-3    77.8   91.7 -13.9*   -15%     80.6   86.7                          -6.1          -7%       61.2      65.3      -4.1          -6%       61.6      66.5      -4.8**        -7%
 4-6    44.4   75.0 -30.6**  -41%     52.1   47.7                           4.4           9%       31.4      34.0      -2.6          -8%       30.9      31.1      -0.1           0%
 7-9    16.7   47.9 -31.3**  -65%     43.1   26.2                          16.9**        65%       19.5      22.3      -2.8         -13%       19.4      20.6      -1.3          -6%
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
 1-3    2.78   3.27 -0.49      -15%   2.85                         3.20     -0.35       -11%        1.81      2.12     -0.30*** -14%            1.92      2.19     -0.27*** -12%
 4-6    1.44   2.65 -1.20** -45%      1.99                         1.77      0.21        12%        1.01      1.15     -0.15    -13%            1.02      1.02      0.00      0%
 7-9    0.46   1.52 -1.06** -70%      1.58                         0.95      0.63**      67%        0.61      0.73     -0.11    -16%            0.63      0.69     -0.07    -10%
NOTES: * denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.
       Italicized entries indicate means that are significantly different from those for the “In Need of Basic Education” subsample, at significance levels at or lower than 10% level.




                                                                                          59
                             Table A3: Differences Between Riverside and Other Counties in Annual Impacts of GAIN
                                                          Cases Enrolled as AFDC-FG

                                                  Panel A: “In Need of Basic Education” Subsample

                                    Riverside – Alameda                Riverside - Los Angeles                          Riverside - San Diego
                         Yrs. Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference
                        Since in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in
                        Enroll   Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences
Ever Employed in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    17.0***       8.6***    8.4***   19.6***                             10.1***          9.5***          4.9***         -3.1            8.0***
       4-6      3.9*       -0.8       4.7        7.8***                             5.1***          2.7             0.4            -5.0**          5.4**
       7-9     -5.4**      -8.2***    2.8       -0.4                                1.6            -1.9            -1.9*           -4.1*           2.2
Regression




       1-3    16.3***       2.7      13.6***   14.1***                              4.6*            9.4***          7.6***          2.1            5.5**
 Adjusted




       4-6      3.3        -4.9       8.2*       3.6***                             1.6             2.0             2.1*           -7.5***         9.6***
       7-9     -4.6*       -8.2**     3.5       -4.9***                            -1.9            -3.0            -2.3***         -6.3**          4.0
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
           Unadjusted




       1-3      0.49***     0.19**    0.31***    0.50***                             0.19***        0.32***         0.11           -0.14**         0.25***
       4-6      0.11       -0.07      0.17       0.22***                             0.07           0.16**          0.00           -0.22***        0.22**
       7-9     -0.23***    -0.31***   0.08      -0.04                               -0.01          -0.03           -0.08           -0.15*          0.07
Regression




       1-3      0.44***    -0.01      0.45***    0.34***                             0.04           0.30***         0.20           -0.01           0.21**
 Adjusted




       4-6      0.10       -0.27**    0.37**     0.11**                             -0.05           0.16            0.05           -0.29***        0.34***
       7-9     -0.19**     -0.33**    0.13      -0.18***                            -0.12          -0.06           -0.08           -0.23**         0.14
Annual Earnings (1999$)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 $1,087***       $179       $908** $1,284***                               $75         $1,210***         $230*    -$703**   $933***
       4-6     $355       -$336       $690      $928***                            -$161         $1,089***          $47   -$1,007*** $1,054***
       7-9    -$970*** -$996**         $26        $36                               -$68           $104           -$323**   -$512      $189
Regression




       1-3 $1,000*** -$392          $1,392***   $793***                            -$302         $1,095***         $634*** -$460     $1,093***
 Adjusted




       4-6     $315     -$1,085** $1,401**      $299                               -$718*        $1,018**          $343* -$1,170*** $1,513***
       7-9    -$985** -$1,219**       $234     -$751***                            -$762*           $11           -$278     -$892**    $614
Annual Earnings above FT-Min Wage Earnings (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3      3.2***     -0.6       3.9**      3.0***                             -1.1            4.0***          0.2            -2.8**          2.9**
       4-6      2.3*       -2.2       4.4**      3.0***                             -1.8            4.8***          0.2            -4.2***         4.3***
       7-9     -3.9***     -4.6***    0.7        0.4                                -1.2            1.6            -1.5**          -1.6            0.1
Regression




       1-3      2.7**      -2.0       4.6**      1.2**                              -2.1*           3.2**           1.3**          -2.7**          4.0***
 Adjusted




       4-6      3.1**      -4.7**     7.7***     1.2                                -3.7**          5.0***          1.4*           -4.2**          5.6***
       7-9     -3.3*       -5.5**     2.2       -1.8*                               -3.3*           1.5            -1.4*           -2.5            1.0
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 -14.6***        -9.9***   -4.6*    -13.2***                              -9.6***        -3.6**          -3.5***         -0.9           -2.5
       4-6 -16.4***      -15.7***    -0.7     -12.5***                              -9.7***        -2.8            -4.1***         -2.3           -1.8
       7-9 -11.4***      -11.1***    -0.3       -6.7***                             -5.3**         -1.4            -3.0***         -2.4           -0.6
Regression




       1-3     -6.1***     -0.7      -5.4*      -4.9***                             -0.4           -4.6**          -6.7***         -2.7           -3.9*
 Adjusted




       4-6     -6.7**      -4.1      -2.5       -7.6***                             -2.1           -5.5            -7.9***         -3.5           -4.4
       7-9     -3.9        -6.0       2.1       -4.0***                             -4.5            0.6            -6.4***         -4.6           -1.9
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
           Unadjusted




       1-3     -0.74***    -0.62*** -0.12       -0.72***                            -0.57***       -0.15**         -0.21***        -0.11          -0.10
       4-6     -0.70***    -0.74***   0.04      -0.53***                            -0.47***       -0.06           -0.21***        -0.11          -0.09
       7-9     -0.48***    -0.42*** -0.06       -0.30***                            -0.24***       -0.06           -0.15***        -0.10          -0.06
       1-3     -0.38***    -0.18     -0.20      -0.33***                            -0.11          -0.22**         -0.33***        -0.19**        -0.14
Regression
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.35***    -0.31**   -0.04      -0.34***                            -0.19*         -0.15           -0.36***        -0.19*         -0.17
       7-9     -0.21**     -0.21      0.00      -0.19***                            -0.20*          0.00           -0.26***        -0.14          -0.12
* denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.

                                                                             60
                                                                Table A3: (Continued)
                                                Panel B: “Not In Need of Basic Education” Subsample

                                    Riverside – Alameda                Riverside - Los Angeles                          Riverside - San Diego
                         Yrs. Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference
                        Since in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in
                        Enroll   Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences
Ever Employed in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    18.4***       3.5       14.9***    21.6***    6.6**   15.0***       3.7***     -7.7***   11.4***
       4-6      0.3        -4.2         4.6      10.6***    5.0       5.6        -0.4        -3.4        3.0
       7-9     -8.8***     -8.1**      -0.7       0.7       4.5      -3.8        -0.4        -0.7        0.3
Regression




       1-3    16.0***       3.2**     12.8**     19.0***    3.5     15.5***       6.8***     -3.0        9.8***
 Adjusted




       4-6      1.3        -2.5         3.8       9.8***    0.8       9.0         2.1        -3.7        5.8
       7-9     -7.1*       -2.4        -4.7       0.6       6.7      -6.1         0.1        -2.4        2.5
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
           Unadjusted




       1-3      0.52***     0.02        0.50***   0.59***   0.10      0.49***     0.09**     -0.24***    0.33***
       4-6      0.03       -0.09        0.12      0.36***   0.22*     0.14       -0.03       -0.10       0.07
       7-9     -0.31**     -0.29**     -0.02      0.04      0.13     -0.09       -0.06       -0.06       0.01
Regression




       1-3      0.42***    -0.06        0.48**    0.55***  -0.05      0.60***     0.22***    -0.15       0.36***
 Adjusted




       4-6      0.09       -0.06        0.15      0.36***   0.10      0.26        0.09       -0.17       0.26*
       7-9     -0.22       -0.08       -0.15      0.07      0.16     -0.08       -0.02       -0.19       0.17
Annual Earnings (1999$)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 $1,475***       $535        $940     $1,656***   -$38   $1,693*** -$350        -$1,002**     $652
       4-6    -$274       -$330          $56    $1,752***  $889      $862       -$885*** -$932            $47
       7-9 -$2,390*** -$1,700*        -$691       $619      $666      -$47    -$1,108*** -$758         -$351
Regression




       1-3     $878*       $419        $459     $1,170*** -$545    $1,715**      $501*      -$839     $1,340**
 Adjusted




       4-6    -$186     $1,079      -$1,265     $1,371** $1,263      $108        $275     -$1,340     $1,615*
       7-9 -$1,833*        $641     -$2,474       $435    $1,321    -$886       -$235     -$1,514     $1,279
Annual Earnings above FT-Min Wage Earnings (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3      3.6*        2.1         1.5       4.3***   -0.1       4.4*       -1.9**      -3.6*       1.8
       4-6     -0.8        -0.3        -0.5       4.4***    2.8       1.6        -2.9***     -3.1        0.2
       7-9     -7.0**      -3.6        -3.5       2.3       3.6      -1.3        -3.3***     -1.9       -1.4
Regression




       1-3      2.5         1.8         0.6       3.0*     -1.6       4.5         1.4        -1.9        3.3
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.5         2.1        -2.5       4.2*      2.7       1.4         0.8        -4.0        4.8
       7-9     -6.1*        0.4        -6.6       2.1       2.5      -0.4        -0.7        -3.9        3.2
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 -13.5***      -10.2***      -3.3     -11.7***   -9.8***   -1.9        -1.0         3.1       -4.1*
       4-6 -15.7***      -22.3***       6.7     -12.8*** -14.8***     2.0         1.4         2.1       -0.7
       7-9 -12.3***      -10.7***      -1.6      -9.1***   -8.0***   -1.0         1.4         1.4        0.0
Regression




       1-3     -5.9**      -2.8        -3.1      -4.5**     1.1      -5.6        -5.2***      2.7       -7.9***
 Adjusted




       4-6     -8.5**    -14.0***       5.5      -4.8*     -4.1      -0.7        -4.5***      5.6     -10.1***
       7-9     -5.9*       -3.4        -2.6      -1.8       3.1      -4.9        -2.1         5.8*      -7.9**
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
           Unadjusted




       1-3     -0.76***    -0.60*** -0.17        -0.64*** -0.57*** -0.07         -0.08*       0.17**    -0.25***
       4-6     -0.68***    -0.91***     0.23     -0.53*** -0.58***    0.05        0.02        0.08      -0.06
       7-9     -0.48***    -0.34*** -0.14        -0.36*** -0.33*** -0.04          0.03        0.04      -0.02
       1-3
Regression




               -0.42***    -0.24       -0.18     -0.31*** -0.02      -0.29*      -0.27***     0.20*     -0.46***
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.42***    -0.57***     0.15     -0.26*** -0.10      -0.16       -0.20***     0.22*     -0.42***
       7-9     -0.24**     -0.11       -0.13     -0.10      0.05     -0.15       -0.09*       0.18*     -0.27**
* denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.

                                                                             61
                              Table A4: Differences Between Riverside and Other Counties in Annual Impacts of GAIN
                                                            Cases Enrolled as AFDC-U
                                                   Panel A: “In Need of Basic Education” Subsample
                                     Riverside – Alameda               Riverside - Los Angeles                          Riverside - San Diego
                          Yrs. Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference
                         Since in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in
                         Enroll   Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences
Ever Employed in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    24.2***     22.1***      2.2     12.6***                             13.2***         -0.7             1.1            -0.3            1.4
       4-6    15.6***     15.8***     -0.2       2.8                                6.7***         -3.9            -1.3            -2.7            1.4
       7-9      6.6        5.3         1.3      -2.4                               -1.1            -1.3            -5.5***         -4.4           -1.1
Regression




       1-3      1.4        3.0        -1.6      -0.2                                3.9            -4.1             5.3***          3.8            1.5
 Adjusted




       4-6     -3.1        6.0        -9.0      -8.5***                             3.1           -11.7**           1.6             0.2            1.3
       7-9     -8.0       -7.8        -0.2    -14.6***                             -2.7           -11.9**          -6.8***         -8.1**          1.3
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
           Unadjusted




       1-3      0.65***    0.48***     0.16      0.16**                              0.20**        -0.04           -0.07           -0.10           0.04
       4-6      0.34**     0.44**     -0.10     -0.06                                0.12          -0.18           -0.14**         -0.13          -0.01
       7-9      0.16       0.12        0.03     -0.21***                            -0.11          -0.10           -0.23***        -0.16*         -0.07
Regression




       1-3     -0.01       0.08       -0.09     -0.15*                               0.11          -0.26            0.10*           0.09           0.01
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.23       0.14       -0.37     -0.38***                             0.04          -0.41**         -0.03           -0.01          -0.02
       7-9     -0.29      -0.28       -0.01     -0.58***                            -0.12          -0.46**         -0.27***        -0.31**         0.03
Annual Earnings (1999$)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 $3,081*** $1,871** $1,210          $2,203***                           $1,908***    $295                $325      -$165                 $490
       4-6 $1,484*       $1,210       $274    $1,623***                           $1,697***    -$74               -$192       -$24                -$168
       7-9     $613        $669        -$56     $961***                           $1,232*** -$270                 -$780**    -$361                -$420
Regression




       1-3     $545        $173       $372       -$68                               $239      -$307                $906***    $201                 $704
 Adjusted




       4-6 -$1,135         $312    -$1,447     -$745                                $366    -$1,111                $353       $174                 $179
       7-9 -$1,595      -$1,426      -$169   -$1,459***                            -$276    -$1,184             -$1,178*** -$1,033                -$145
Annual Earnings above FT-Min Wage Earnings (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3    10.4***      5.1         5.3       9.1***                              7.7***         1.4             1.5             0.2            1.3
       4-6      5.6        2.7         2.9       8.2***                              7.2***         1.0             0.4             1.1           -0.6
       7-9      5.0        4.3         0.7       6.6***                              7.5***        -0.9            -0.9             0.4           -1.3
Regression




       1-3      1.4       -0.1         1.4       1.0                                 1.1           -0.1             2.7**           0.2            2.5
 Adjusted




       4-6     -4.3       -0.9        -3.4      -0.2                                 1.1           -1.3             1.8            -0.2            2.0
       7-9     -1.7       -5.0         3.3      -2.4                                -0.5           -1.9            -2.6*           -3.1            0.5
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 -16.5***      -18.2***      1.7    -20.8***                            -19.8***         -1.0            -7.9***        -9.7***          1.8
       4-6 -11.9**       -23.9***    12.0     -20.7***                            -24.9***          4.2            -6.9***       -11.7***          4.8
       7-9     -6.6      -16.1***      9.5    -15.7***                            -20.9***          5.2            -4.2**         -7.8***          3.7
Regression




       1-3     -3.2       -2.0        -1.2      -7.3***                            -0.6            -6.7*           -8.9***       -10.4***          1.5
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.1      -10.3       10.2       -8.7***                            -8.1*           -0.6            -7.0***       -10.6***          3.6
       7-9      3.2       -6.0         9.3      -7.2**                             -9.0*            1.8            -2.2           -4.1             2.0
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
       1-3     -0.97***   -1.01***     0.04     -1.11***                            -1.05***       -0.06           -0.40***        -0.44***        0.04
            Unadjusted




       4-6     -0.54***   -1.04***     0.50*    -0.93***                            -1.09***        0.16           -0.31***        -0.49***        0.19
       7-9     -0.36**    -0.67***     0.30     -0.70***                            -0.88***        0.18           -0.20***        -0.34***        0.13
       1-3     -0.23      -0.16       -0.07     -0.38***                            -0.05          -0.33**         -0.40***        -0.40***        0.00
 Regression
  Adjusted




       4-6     -0.01      -0.50*       0.49     -0.39***                            -0.43**         0.04           -0.29***        -0.45***        0.17
       7-9      0.06      -0.29        0.35     -0.33***                            -0.41**         0.08           -0.10           -0.18           0.07
* denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.

                                                                             62
                                                                Table A4: (Continued)
                                                Panel B: “Not In Need of Basic Education” Subsample

                                    Riverside – Alameda                Riverside - Los Angeles                            Riverside - San Diego
                         Yrs. Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference Differences Differences Difference
                        Since in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in     in Means, in Means,         in
                        Enroll   Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences     Exp.      Controls Differences
Ever Employed in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3      8.5***    32.8***   -24.4*     10.6*                                23.4***       -12.8             3.1           -1.9             4.9
       4-6     -5.1        9.7      -14.9       1.4                                  3.0           -1.7            -1.5           -6.9*            5.4
       7-9 -23.1**         0.7      -23.8      -2.9                                 -8.0            5.0            -2.8           -8.0**           5.3
Regression




       1-3      1.8       16.0      -14.2       4.4                                  6.8           -2.4             6.4**         -4.1            10.5**
 Adjusted




       4-6 -10.1          -5.7        -4.4     -1.4                                -17.1*          15.7            -0.8          -12.5**          11.7**
       7-9 -19.6*         -1.9      -17.7      -6.4                                -10.3            3.9            -2.2          -13.6***         11.4**
Number of Quarters Employed in Year
           Unadjusted




       1-3      0.35       0.73**     -0.39     0.23                                 0.51***       -0.28            0.04           -0.13           0.17
       4-6     -0.19       0.20       -0.40    -0.08                                 0.13          -0.20           -0.07           -0.34***        0.27*
       7-9     -0.54       0.12       -0.66     0.00                                -0.29           0.29           -0.13           -0.30**         0.16
Regression




       1-3      0.15       0.19       -0.04     0.03                                 0.03          -0.01            0.14           -0.21           0.35**
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.37      -0.20       -0.16    -0.20                                -0.41           0.21           -0.05           -0.53***        0.48**
       7-9     -0.41       0.17       -0.58    -0.10                                -0.31           0.21           -0.12           -0.53***        0.41**
Annual Earnings (1999$)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 $2,373       $3,483* -$1,110       $3,040***                            $1,913*       $1,127           -$378         -$1,016           $638
       4-6     $811     $2,796     -$1,985    $2,037                                 $793        $1,243           -$624         -$2,142**       $1,517
       7-9 -$2,241      $2,446     -$4,687    $2,013                              -$1,202        $3,215*        -$1,423**       -$2,487***      $1,064
Regression




       1-3 $1,605          $980       $625    $1,670                              -$1,021        $2,691             $19         -$1,276         $1,296
 Adjusted




       4-6     $172        $582      -$410      $404                              -$1,553        $1,957           -$572         -$2,816**       $2,244*
       7-9 -$2,485      $1,174     -$3,658      $400                              -$2,012        $2,412         -$1,282*        -$3,527***      $2,245
Annual Earnings above FT-Min Wage Earnings (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3      5.5       12.1*       -6.6     12.3***                               4.4            7.8            -2.0           -4.4*            2.4
       4-6      3.6       11.6        -8.0      9.4*                                 6.0            3.4            -1.2           -7.0**           5.9*
       7-9     -7.5       10.8      -18.3       8.0                                  1.1            6.9            -2.1           -5.5*            3.4
Regression




       1-3      0.9        6.7        -5.8      7.0                                 -6.3           13.3*           -0.8           -5.9*            5.1
 Adjusted




       4-6      1.6        2.3        -0.7      4.4                                 -5.1            9.5            -1.1          -10.2***          9.1**
       7-9     -8.7        6.8      -15.4       4.0                                 -4.1            8.0            -3.0           -9.3**           6.3
Ever Received AFDC/TANF Benefits in Year (%)
           Unadjusted




       1-3 -16.6**       -26.4***      9.8    -19.3***                             -21.4***         2.1            -0.4            -1.2            0.8
       4-6 -13.0         -41.0***    28.0*    -20.7***                             -13.7**         -7.0             0.5             3.0           -2.5
       7-9      2.9      -25.6***    28.5**   -23.5***                              -3.8          -19.7***          0.2             1.7           -1.5
Regression




       1-3 -11.7         -12.5         0.8     -9.9*                                -1.8           -8.1            -1.3            -1.7            0.3
 Adjusted




       4-6     -6.9      -28.7**     21.8      -9.5                                  8.2          -17.6             1.0             4.8           -3.8
       7-9      6.6      -17.2       23.9     -15.5**                                4.1          -19.6*           -0.1             7.3*          -7.4
Number of Quarters in Year on AFDC/TANF
           Unadjusted




       1-3     -0.96***   -1.15***     0.19    -1.04***                             -1.08***        0.04           -0.11           -0.07          -0.03
       4-6     -0.43      -1.49***     1.06**  -0.98***                             -0.62***       -0.36           -0.01            0.13          -0.14
       7-9      0.15      -0.80**      0.94**  -0.97***                             -0.22          -0.75***        -0.01            0.03          -0.05
       1-3
Regression




               -0.64*     -0.45       -0.19    -0.52**                              -0.09          -0.43           -0.12           -0.02          -0.10
 Adjusted




       4-6     -0.22      -1.09**      0.86    -0.55**                               0.15          -0.70*           0.01            0.19          -0.18
       7-9      0.30      -0.44        0.74    -0.68***                              0.08          -0.75**         -0.04            0.23          -0.26
* denotes statistically significant at 10% level; ** denotes statistically significant at 5% level; *** denotes statistically significant at 1% level.


                                                                             63
